111Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata,
Methods, and Challenges
ROB ASHMORE†,Defence Science andTechnology Laboratory,UK
RADU CALINESCU and COLIN PATERSON, Universityof YorkandAssuringAutonomy
InternationalProgramme, UK
Machinelearninghasevolvedintoanenablingtechnologyforawiderangeofhighlysuccessfulapplications.
The potential for this success to continue and accelerate has placed machine learning (ML) at the top of re-
search,economic,andpoliticalagendas.SuchunprecedentedinterestisfuelledbyavisionofMLapplicability
extending to healthcare, transportation, defence, and other domains of great societal importance. Achieving
thisvisionrequirestheuseofMLinsafety-criticalapplicationsthatdemandlevelsofassurancebeyondthose
neededforcurrentMLapplications.Ourarticleprovidesacomprehensivesurveyofthestateoftheartinthe
assuranceofML ,i.e.,inthegenerationofevidencethatMLissufficientlysafeforitsintendeduse.Thesurvey
covers the methods capable of providing such evidence at different stages of the machine learning lifecycle ,
i.e.,ofthecomplex,iterativeprocessthatstartswiththecollectionofthedatausedtotrainanMLcomponent
for a system, and ends with the deployment of that component within the system. The article begins with
a systematic presentation of the ML lifecycle and its stages. We then define assurance desiderata for each
stage, review existing methods that contribute to achieving these desiderata, and identify open challenges
that requirefurtherresearch.
CCSConcepts:• Computingmethodologies →Machinelearning ;Modelverificationandvalidation ;
•General and reference →Surveys and overviews ;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Machine learning lifecycle, machine learning workflow, safety-critical
systems,assurance,assuranceevidence
ACM Reference format:
RobAshmore,RaduCalinescu,andColinPaterson.2021.AssuringtheMachineLearningLifecycle:Desider-
ata, Methods,andChallenges. ACM Comput.Surv. 54, 5, Article 111 (May 2021), 39 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3453444
1 INTRODUCTION
Therecentsuccessof machinelearning(ML) hastakentheworldbystorm.Whilefarfromdeliv-
eringthehumanlikeintelligencepostulatedbyArtificialIntelligencepioneers[ 39],MLtechniques
Rob Ashmore, RaduCalinescu, andColinPaterson are contributedequally to thearticle.
†Research carried outwhilethe author wasaVisiting Fellow of the Assuring Autonomy InternationalProgramme.
This work was partly funded by the Assuring Autonomy International Programme and the UKRI project EP/V026747/1
‘Trustworthy Autonomous Systems Node inResilience’.
Authors’addresses:R.Ashmore,EastCourt-CGrenvilleBuilding,DSTL,PortsdownWest,HillRoad,Fareham,Hants,PO17
6AD,England;email:rdashmore@dstl.gov.uk;R.Calinescuand,C.Paterson,DepartmentofComputerScience,University
of York, DeramoreLane,York, YO105GH, England;emails:{radu.calinescu, colin.paterson}@york.ac.uk.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee.Request permissions from permissions@acm.org .
© 2021Association forComputingMachinery.
0360-0300/2021/05-ART111$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3453444
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.

111:2 R. Ashmore et al.
such as deep learning have remarkable applications. The use of these techniques in products
ranging from smart phones [ 8,137] and household appliances [ 79] to recommender systems [ 36,
139] and automated translation services [ 186] has become commonplace. There is a widespread
belief that this is just the beginning of an ML-enabled technological revolution [ 55,107]. Stake-
holdersasdiverseasresearchers,industrialists,policymakersandthegeneralpublicenvisagethat
ML will soon be at the core of novel applications and services used in healthcare, transportation,
defence andotherkeyareasof economy andsociety[ 11,41,74,90,111].
AchievingthisvisionrequiresastepchangeinthelevelofassuranceprovidedforML.Theoc-
casional out-of-focus photo taken by an ML-enabled smart camera can easily be deleted, and the
selectionofanoddwordbyanautomatedtranslationserviceisbarelynoticed.Althoughincreas-
inglyrare,similarMLerrorsmaybeunacceptableinmedicaldiagnosisapplicationsorself-driving
cars.Forsuchsafety-criticalsystems,MLerrorscanleadtofailuresthatcannotberevertedorig-
nored,andultimatelycauseharmtotheirusersoroperators.Therefore,theuseofMLtosynthesise
components of safety-critical systems must be assured by evidence that these ML components are
fit for purpose andadequately integrated into their systems. This evidence must be sufficiently
thorough. Where required by the domain, it must enable the creation of compelling assurance
cases[21,122] that explain why the systems can be trusted for their intended applications. Given
this need, within this article, we use the term assurance to refer to evidence that supports safety
arguments,ratherthaninamoregeneralquality-relatedmanner.Althoughwefocusonevidence,
we notethattheargument structureneedsto becredible[ 92].
Ourarticlerepresentsthefirstsurveyofthemethodsavailableforobtainingevidenceconcern-
ing ML components for use in assurance cases, with a focus on ML techniques that synthesise
systemcomponents(e.g.,classifiers)fromincompletetrainingdata.Aswithanyengineeringarte-
fact,assurancecanonlybeprovidedbyunderstandingthecomplex,iterativeprocessemployedto
produce and use ML components, i.e., the machine learning lifecycle . We therefore start by defin-
ing this lifecycle, which consists of four interrelated stages carried out following a spiral process
model[22].Anumberofactivitiesareassociatedwitheachstage.TheMLlifecyclestagesandac-
tivities presented in the article are derived from our study of the existing research literature, and
our practical experience from over 15 Assuring Autonomy International Programme projects on
theassuranceand regulation ofroboticsand autonomoussystems.1
T h efi r s ts t a g e , Data Management (DM) , focuses on obtaining the datasets required for the
training and for the verification of the ML components. This stage includes activities ranging
from data collection to data preprocessing [ 94] (e.g., labelling) and augmentation [ 140]. The sec-
ondstage, ModelLearning ,comprisestheactivitiesassociatedwithsynthesisoftheMLcomponent
starting from the training dataset. The actual machine learning happens in this stage, which also
includesactivitiessuchasselectionoftheMLalgorithmandhyperparameters[ 17,166].Thethird
stage,Model Verification (MV) , is responsible for providing evidence to demonstrate that the
synthesisedMLcomponentcomplieswithitsrequirements.ThisstageisessentialfortheMLcom-
ponents of safety-critical systems. Finally, the last stage of the ML lifecycle is Model Deployment .
This stage focuses on the integration and operation of the ML component within a fully fledged
system.
To ensure a systematic coverage of ML assurance methods, we structure our survey based on
the assurance considerations that apply at the four stages of the ML lifecycle. For each stage, we
identify the assurance-related desiderata (i.e., the key assurance requirements, derived from the
body of research covered in our survey) for the artefacts produced by that stage. The relative im-
portanceofthesedesideratawillbelargelycontextdependent.Indeed,itmaybenecessaryforthe
1https://www.york.ac.uk/assuring-autonomy/projects/ .
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:3
engineertoagreewhereitisappropriatetofindtradeoffsbetweendesideratawithin,andbetween,
ML lifecycle stages. By considering all of the proposed desiderata, with respect to the operating
context,amorecompellingassuranceargumentmaybeconstructed.Wethenpresentthemethods
availableforachievingthesedesiderata,withtheirassumptions,advantagesandlimitations.This
represents an analysis of over two decades of sustained research on ML methods for data man-
agement,modellearning,verification,anddeployment.Finally,wedeterminetheopenchallenges
thatmustbeaddressedthroughfurtherresearchtofullysatisfythestagedesiderataandtoenable
theuseofMLcomponentsinsafety-criticalsystems.Muchlikethedesiderata,therelativeimpor-
tance of these challenges will be dependent on the operating context, and hence ranking them is
outsideof scopeof thiswork.
Our survey and the machine learning lifecycle underpinning its organisation are relevant to a
broad range of ML types, including supervised,unsupervisedand reinforcement learning. Neces-
sarily,someofthemethodspresentedinthesurveyareonlyapplicabletospecifictypesofML;we
clearly indicate where this is the case. As such, the survey supports a broad range of ML stake-
holders,rangingfrompractitionersdevelopingconvolutionalneuralnetworksfortheclassification
of road signs in self-driving cars, to researchers devising new ensemble learning techniques for
safety-critical applications, and to regulators managing the introduction of systems that use ML
componentsinto everydayuse.
The rest of the article is structured as follows. In Section 2, we present the machine learning
lifecycle,describingtheactivitiesencounteredwithineachofitsstagesandintroducingMLtermi-
nologyusedthroughoutthearticle.InSection 3,weoverviewthefewexistingsurveysthatdiscuss
verification, safety or assurance aspects of machine learning. We explain that each of these sur-
veysfocusesonaspecificMLlifecyclestageorsubsetofactivities,and/oraddressesonlyanarrow
aspect of ML assurance. The ML assurance desiderata, methods and open challenges for the four
stages of the ML lifecycle are then detailed in Sections 4to7. Together, these sections provide
a comprehensive set of guidelines for the developers of safety-critical systems with ML compo-
nents, and inform researchers about areas where additional ML assurance methods are needed.
We concludethearticlewithabrief summaryin Section 8.
2 THE MACHINE LEARNING LIFECYCLE
Machinelearningprovidesmechanismsfortheextractionof models(orpatterns)fromdata[ 20,60,
120]. In this article, we are concerned with the use of such ML models in safety-critical systems,
e.g., to enable these systems to understand the environment they operate in, and to decide their
response to changes in the environment. Assuring this use of ML models requires an in-depth
understanding of the machine learning lifecycle , i.e., of the process used for their development
and integration into a fully fledged system. Like traditional system development, this process is
underpinned by a set of system-level requirements, from which the requirements and operating
constraints for the ML models are derived. As an example, the requirements for a ML model for
the classification of British road signs can be derived from the high-level requirements for a self-
drivingcarintendedtobeusedintheUK.However,unliketraditionaldevelopmentprocesses,the
development of ML models involves the acquisition of datasets, and experimentation [114,189],
i.e., the manipulation of these datasets and the use of ML trainingtechniques to produce models
of the data that optimise error functions derived from requirements. This experimentation yields
a processing pipeline capable of taking data as input and of producing ML models that, when
integratedintothesystemandappliedtodataunseenduringtraining,achievetheirrequirements
in thedeployedcontext.
As shown in Figure 1, the machine learning lifecycle consists of four stages. The first three
stages—Data Management ,Model Learning ,a n dModel Verification —comprise the activities by
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:4 R. Ashmore et al.
Fig. 1. The machine learning lifecycle comprises four stages performed using a spiral process model.
whichmachinelearnedmodelsareproduced.Accordingly,weusetheterm machinelearningwork-
flowto refer to these stages taken together. The fourth stage, Model Deployment , comprises the
activities concerned with the deployment of ML models within an operational system, alongside
components obtained using traditional software and system engineering methods. We provide
brief descriptionsof eachof thesestagesbelow.
Dataareatthecoreofanyapplicationofmachinelearning.Assuch,theMLlifecyclestartswith
a Data Management stage. This stage is responsible for the acquisition of the data underpinning
thesynthesisofmachinelearnedmodelsthatcanthenbeused“topredictfuturedata,ortoperform
otherkindsofdecisionmakingunderuncertainty”[ 120].Thisstagecomprisesfourkeyactivities,
and produces the training dataset andverification dataset used for the training and verification of
theMLmodelsinlaterstagesoftheMLlifecycle,respectively.Thefirstdatamanagementactivity,
collection [59,174], is concerned with gathering data samples through observing and measuring
the real-world (or a representation of the real-world) system, process or phenomenon for which
an ML model needs to be built. When data samples are unavailable for certain scenarios, or their
collection would be too costly, time consuming or dangerous, augmentation methods [ 140,185]
areusedtoaddfurtherdatasamplestothecollecteddatasets.Additionally,thedatacollectedfrom
multiple sources may be heterogeneous in nature, and therefore preprocessing [93,191]m a yb e
requiredtoproduceconsistentdatasetsfortrainingandverificationpurposes.Preprocessingmay
also seek to reduce the complexity of collected data or to engineer features to aid in training [ 64,
86]. Furthermore, preprocessing may be required to label the data samples when they are used
in supervised ML tasks [ 59,60,120]. The need for additional data collection, augmentation and
preprocessingisestablishedthroughthe analysisofthedata[ 133].
In the Model Learning stage of the machine learning lifecycle, the ML engineer typically starts
by selecting the type of model to be produced. This model selection is undertaken with reference
to the problem type (e.g., classification or regression), the volume and structure of the training
data [113,152], and often in light of personal experience. A loss function is then constructed as a
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:5
measure of training error. The aim of the trainingactivity is to produce an ML model that min-
imisesthiserror.Thisrequiresthedevelopmentofasuitabledatausestrategy,soastodetermine
how much of the training dataset should be held for model validation,2and whether all the other
datasamplesshouldbeusedtogetherfortrainingor“minibatchmethods”thatusesubsetsofdata
samplesoversuccessivetrainingcyclesshouldbeemployed[ 60].TheMLengineerisalsorespon-
sible forhyperparameter selection , i.e., for the choosing the parameters of the training algorithm.
HyperparameterscontrolkeyMLmodelcharacteristicssuchasoverfitting,underfittingandmodel
complexity. Finally, when models or partial models that have proved successful within a related
contextareavailable, transferlearning enablestheirintegrationwithinthenewmodelarchitecture
ortheiruseasastartingpointfortraining[ 124,135,160].WhentheresultingMLmodelachieves
satisfactory levels of performance, the next stage of the ML workflow can commence. Otherwise,
the process needs to return to the Data Management stage, where additional data are collected,
augmented,preprocessedand analysedtoimprove thetrainingfurther.
The third stage of the ML lifecycle is Model Verification. The central challenge of this stage is
to ensure that the trained model performs well on new, previously unseen inputs (this is known
asgeneralization)[ 59,60,120].Assuch,thestagecomprisesactivitiesthatprovideevidenceofthe
model’s ability to generalise to data not seen during the model learning stage. A test-based verifi-
cationactivityassessestheperformanceofthelearnedmodelagainsttheverificationdatasetthat
the Data Management stage has produced independently from the training dataset. This dataset
will have commonalities with the training data, but it may also include elements that have been
deliberatelychosentodemonstrateaverificationaim,whichitwouldbeinappropriatetoinclude
in the training data. When the data samples from this set are presented to the model, a gener-
alization error is computed [ 121,159]. If this error violates performance criteria established by a
requirement encoding activity, then the process needs to return to either the Data Management
stage or the Model Learning stage of the ML lifecycle. Additionally, a formal verification activity
maybeusedtoverifywhetherthemodelcomplieswithasetofformalpropertiesthatencodekey
requirements for the ML component. Formal verification methods such as model checking and
mathematical proof allow for these properties to be rigorously established before the ML model
is deemed suitable for integration into the safety-critical system. As for failed testing-based ver-
ification, further Data Management and/or Model Learning activities are necessary when these
properties do not hold. The precise activities required from these earlier stages of the ML work-
flow are determined by the verification result , which summarises the outcome of all verification
activities.
Assuming that the verification result contains all the required assurance evidence, a system
that uses the now verified model is assembled in the Model Deployment stage of the ML lifecycle.
This stage comprises activities concerned with the integration of verified ML model(s) with sys-
temcomponentsdevelopedandverifiedusingtraditionalsoftwareengineeringmethods,withthe
monitoring ofitsoperation,andwithits updating thoroughofflinemaintenanceoronlinelearning.
Theoutcomeof theModelDeployment stageis afully fledged deployedand operatingsystem.
Moreoftenthannot,thesafety-criticalsystemsenvisagedtobenefitfromtheuseofMLmodels
are autonomous or self-adaptive systems that require ML components to cope with the dynamic
and uncertain nature of their operating environments [ 29,90,111]. As such, Figure 1depicts this
type of system as the outcome of the Model Deployment stage. Moreover, the diagram shows
two key roles that ML models may play within the established monitor-analyse-plan-execute
2Model validation represents the frequent evaluation of the ML model during training, and is carried out by the develop-
mentteamtocalibratethetrainingalgorithm.Thisdiffersessentiallyfromwhatvalidationmeansinsoftwareengineering
(i.e.,anindependentassessment performed toestablish whetherasystem satisfies theneeds of its intendedusers).
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:6 R. Ashmore et al.
(MAPE) control loop [ 72,84,110] of these systems. We end this section with a brief description
of theMAPEcontrolloopandof thesetypicalusesof MLmodels withinit.
In its four steps, the MAPE control loop senses the current state of the environment through
monitoring ,derivesanunderstandingoftheworldthroughthe analysisofthesenseddata,decides
suitableactionsthrough planning,andthenactsupontheseplansthrough executing theiractions.
Undertakingtheseactionsaltersthestateofthesystemandtheenvironmentinwhichitoperates.
The monitoring step employs hardware and software components that gather data as a set of
samplesfromtheenvironmentduringoperation.Thechoiceofsensorsrequiresanunderstanding
ofthesystemrequirements,theintendedoperationalconditions,andtheplatformintowhichthey
will be deployed. Data gathered from the environment will typically be partial and imperfect due
to physical,timingand financialconstraints.
The analysis step extracts features from data samples as encoded domain-specific knowledge.
This can be achieved through the use of ML models combined with traditional software compo-
nents. The features extracted may be numerical (e.g., blood sugar level in a healthcare system),
ordinal (e.g., position in queue in a traffic management system) or categorical (e.g., an element
from the set{car,bike,bus}in a self-driving car). The features extracted through analysing the
datasetsobtainedduringmonitoringunderpintheunderstandingofthecurrentstateoftheenvi-
ronment and thatof thesystemitself.
Theplanning(ordecision)stepcanemployacombinationofMLmodelsandtraditionalreason-
ing engines to select a course of action to be undertaken. The action(s) selected will aim to fulfil
thesystemrequirementssubjecttoanydefinedconstraints.Theactionsetavailableisdictatedby
thecapabilitiesofthesystem,andisrestrictedbyoperatingconditionsandconstraintsdefinedin
therequirementsspecification.
Finally,intheexecutionstep,thesystemenactstheselectedactionsthroughsoftwareandhard-
wareeffectorsand,indoingso,changestheenvironmentwithinwhichitisoperating.Thedynamic
andtemporalnatureofthesystemandtheenvironmentrequirestheMAPEcontrollooptobein-
vokedcontinuouslyuntilasetofsystem-levelobjectiveshasbeenachievedorastoppingcriterion
was reached.
New data samples gathered during operation can be exploited by the Data Management activ-
ities and, where appropriate, new models may be learned and deployed within the system. This
deployment of new ML models can be carried out either as an offline maintenance activity, or
throughtheonline updatingoftheoperatingsystem.
3 RELATED SURVEYS
The large and rapidly growing body of ML research is summarised by a plethora of surveys. The
vast majority of these surveys narrowly focus on a particular type of ML, and do not consider
assurance explicitly. Due to space constraints, we discuss these surveys in Appendix A from our
online supplementarymaterial.
4 DATA MANAGEMENT
Fundamentally, all ML approaches start with data. These data describe the desired relationship
between the ML model inputs and outputs, the latter of which may be implicit for unsupervised
approaches.Equivalently,thesedataencodetherequirementswewishtobeembodiedinourML
model. Consequently,anyassuranceargument needstoexplicitly considerdata.
4.1 Inputs and Outputs
The key input artefact to the Data Management stage is the set of requirements that the model is
requiredtosatisfy.Thesemaybeinformedbyverificationartefactsproducedbyearlieriterations
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:7
of the ML lifecycle. The key output artefacts from this stage are datasets: There is a combined
datasetthatisusedbythedevelopmentteamfortrainingandvalidatingthemodel;thereisalsoa
separateverificationdataset,whichcan beusedby anindependentverificationteam.
4.2 Activities
4.2.1 Collection. This activity is concerned with collecting data from an originating source.
ThesedatamaybesubsequentlyenhancedbyotheractivitieswithintheDataManagementstage.
New data may be collected, or a pre-existing dataset may be re-used (or extended). Data may
be obtained from a controlled process, or they may arise from observations of an uncontrolled
process:Thisprocessmay occurin therealworld,orit may occurina syntheticenvironment.
4.2.2 Preprocessing. For thepurposesof thisarticle weassume thatpreprocessingis a one-to-
onemapping:Itadjustseachcollected(raw)sampleinanappropriatemanner.Itisoftenconcerned
withstandardisingthedatainsomeway,e.g.,ensuringallimagesareofthesamesize[ 97].Manual
additionof labels tocollectedsamplesisanotherformof preprocessing.
4.2.3 Augmentation. Augmentation increases the number of samples in a dataset. Typically,
new samples are derived from existing samples, so augmentation is, generally, a one-to-many
mapping. Augmentation is often used due to the difficulty of collecting observational data (e.g.,
forreasonsofcostorethics[ 140]).Augmentationcanalsobeusedtohelpinstilcertainproperties
in thetrainedmodel, e.g.,robustnessto adversarialexamples [ 61].
4.2.4 Analysis. Analysismayberequiredtoguideaspectsofcollectionandaugmentation(e.g.,
to ensure there is an appropriate class balance within the dataset). Exploratory analysis is also
neededtoprovideassurancethatData Managementartefactsexhibit thedesideratabelow.
4.3 Desiderata
From an assurance perspective, the datasets produced during the Data Management stage should
exhibitthefollowing key properties:
(1)Relevant—This property considers the intersection between the dataset and the desired
behaviour in the intended operational domain. For example, a dataset that only included
German roadsigns would notbe Relevant for a systemintendedtooperateon UK roads.
(2)Complete —This property considers the way samples are distributed across the input do-
main and subspaces of it. In particular, it considers whether suitable distributions and
combinations of features are present. For example, an image dataset that displayed an
inappropriate correlation between image background and type of animal would not be
complete[ 138].
(3)Balanced —This property considers the distribution of features that are included in the
dataset.Forclassificationproblems,akeyconsiderationisthebalancebetweenthenumber
of samples in each class [ 63]. This property takes an internal perspective; it focuses on
the dataset as an abstract entity to which a generic learning algorithm will be applied.
Incontrast,the Complete propertytakesanexternalperspective;itconsidersthedataset
withintheintendedoperationaldomain.
(4)Accurate—This property considers how measurement (and measurement-like) issues can
affectthewaythatsamplesreflecttheintendedoperationaldomain.Itcoversaspectslike
sensor accuracy and labelling errors [ 26]. The correctness of data collection and prepro-
cessingsoftwareisalso relevantto thisproperty,asisconfigurationmanagement.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:8 R. Ashmore et al.
Conceptually, since it relates to real-world behaviour, the Relevant desideratum is concerned
withvalidation.Theotherthreedesiderataareconcernedwithaspectsof verification.
4.4 Methods
Thissectionconsiderseachofthefourdesideratainturn.Methodsthatcanbeappliedduringeach
Data Managementactivity(Table 1),to helpachieve thedesiredkey property,arediscussed.
4.4.1 Relevant. Bydefinition,adatasetcollectedduringtheoperationaluseoftheplannedsys-
temwillberelevant.However,thisisunlikelytobeapracticalwayofobtainingallrequireddata.
If the approach adopted for data collection involves re-use of a pre-existing dataset, then it
needs to be acquired from an appropriate source. Malicious entries in the dataset can introduce a
backdoor,whichcausesthemodeltobehaveinanattacker-definedwayonspecificinputs(orsmall
classes of inputs) [ 35]. Despite recent research into the detection of backdoors [ 100,148,178], it
remainsanopenchallenge(listedasDM01inTable 2).Itfollowsthatpre-existingdatasetsshould
beobtainedfromtrustworthysourcesviameansthatprovidestrongguaranteesonintegrityduring
transit.
If the data samples are being collected from controlled trials, then we would require an appro-
priate experimental plan that justifies the choice of feature values (inputs) included in the trial. If
thetrialinvolvesreal-worldobservations,thentraditionalexperimentaldesigntechniqueswillbe
appropriate [ 87]. Conversely, if the trial is conducted entirely in a simulated environment, then
techniquesforthedesign and analysisof computerexperimentswillbe beneficial[ 146].
Ifthedatasetcontainssyntheticsamples(eitherfromcollectionorasaresultofaugmentation),
thenwewouldexpectevidencethatthesynthesisprocessisappropriatelyrepresentativeofthereal
world.Often,synthesisinvolvessomeformofsimulation,whichoughttobesuitablyverifiedand
validated [ 149], as there are examples of ML-based approaches affected by simulation bugs [ 37].
Demonstrating that synthetic data is appropriate to the real-world intended operational domain,
ratherthanaparticularidiosyncrasyof a simulation,isan openchallenge (DM02inTable 2).
A dataset can be made irrelevant by data leakage. This occurs when the training data includes
information that will be unavailable to the system within which the ML model will be used [ 83].
Onewayofreducingthelikelihoodofleakageistoonlyincludeinthetrainingdatafeaturesthat
can “legitimately” be used to infer the required output. For example, patient identifiers are un-
likely to be legitimate features for any medical diagnosis system but may have distinctive values
for patients already diagnosed with the condition that the ML model is meant to identify [ 142].
Exploratorydataanalysis(EDA) [171]canhelpidentifypotentialsourcesofleakage:asurpris-
ingdegreeofcorrelationbetweenafeatureandanoutputmaybeindicativeofleakage.Thatsaid,
detectingand correctingfordata leakageis anopenchallenge (DM03in Table 2).
Althoughitappearscounterintuitive,augmentingadatasetbyincludingsamplesthatarehighly
unlikelytobeobservedduringoperationalusecanincreaserelevance.Forclassificationproblems,
adversarialinputs[ 162]arespeciallycraftedinputsthatahumanwouldclassifycorrectlybutare
confidently misclassified by a trained model. Including adversarial inputs with the correct class in
thetrainingdata[ 125]canhelpreducemis-classificationandhenceincreaserelevance.Introducing
an artificial unknown, or “dustbin,” class and augmenting the data with suitably placed samples
attributedto thisclass[ 1]can alsohelp.
Finally,unwanted bias (i.e., systematic error ultimately leading to unfair advantage for a
privileged class of system users) can significantly impact the relevance of a dataset. This
can be addressed using preprocessing techniques that remove the predictability of data fea-
tures such as ethnicity, age or gender [ 52] or augmentation techniques that involve data rela-
belling/reweighing/resampling[ 80].ItcanalsobeaddressedduringtheModelLearningandModel
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:9
Deploymentstages.Anindustry-readytoolkitthatimplementsarangeofmethodsforaddressing
unwantedbiasisavailable [ 16].
4.4.2 Complete. Recall that this property is about how the dataset is distributed across the
inputdomain.Forthepurposesofourdiscussion,wedefinefourdifferent,butoverlapping,spaces
relatedtothatdomain:
(1) Theinput domain space,I, which is the set of inputs that the model can accept. Equiv-
alently, this set is defined by the input parameters of the software implementation that
instantiatesthemodel.
(2) Theoperational domain space,O⊂I, which is the set of inputs that the model may be
expectedtoreceivewhenusedwithintheintendedoperationaldomain.
(3) Thefailuredomain space,F⊂I,whichisthesetofinputsthemodelmayreceiveifthere
are failures elsewhere in the system. The distinction between FandOis best conveyed
by noting thatFcovers system states, whilst Ocovers environmental effects: A cracked
cameralens shouldbecoveredin F;afly onthelens shouldbecovered in O.
(4) Theadversarial domain space,A⊂I, which is the set of inputs the model may receive
if it is being attacked by an adversary. This includes adversarial examples, where small
changes to an input cause mis-classification [ 162], as well as more general cyber-related
attacks.
Theconsiderationofwhetheradatasetiscompletewithregardstotheinputdomaincanbein-
formed by simple statistical analysis and EDA [ 171], supported by discussions with experts from
the intended operational domain. Simple plots showing the marginal distribution of each feature
canbesurprisinglyinformative.Similarly,theratioofsamplingdensitybetweendenselysampled
and sparsely sampled regions is informative [ 19] as is, for classification problems, identifying re-
gionsthatonlycontainasingleclass[ 12].Identifyinganylarge emptyhyper-rectangles(EHRs)
[98],whicharelargeregionswithoutanysamples,isalsoimportant.Ifanoperationalinputcomes
fromthecentralportionof alarge EHR,then,generally speaking,itis appropriatefor thesystem
toknow themodelisworkingfroman areafor whichno trainingdata wereprovided.
Shortfallsincompletenessacrosstheinputdomain canbeaddressedviacollectionoraugmen-
tation.Sinceashortfallwillrelatetoalackofsamplesinaspecificpartoftheinputdomain,further
collection is most appropriate in the case of controlled trials. The risk of too much data yielding
spuriouscorrelationsshouldalso beconsidered[ 30].
Understanding completeness from the perspective of the operational domain space is challeng-
ing. Typically, we would expect the input space Ito be high-dimensional, with Obeing a much
lower-dimensionalmanifoldwithinthatspace[ 150].Insightsintothescopeof Ocanbeobtained
byrequirementsdecomposition.Thenotionofsituationcoverage[ 5]generalisestheseconsidera-
tions.Listsoffactors,basedontheoperationaldesigndomain,aswellasobjectandeventdetection
and responsecanalsobe useful[ 91].
Ifanincreasedcoverageof Oisneeded,thenthiscouldbeachievedviatheuseofa generative
adversarialnetwork(GAN)3[10]thathasbeentrainedtomodelthedistributionsofeachclass.
Althoughtheprecedingparagraphshavesurveyedmultiplemethods,understandingcomplete-
nessacrosstheoperationaldomain remainsan openchallenge(DM04in Table 2).
Completeness across the Fspace can be understood by systematically examining the sys-
tem architecture to identify failures that could affect the model’s input. Note that the system
3A GAN is a network specifically designed to provide inputs for another network. A classification network tries to learn
theboundary betweenclasses, whereasa GANtries tolearn thedistribution of individual classes.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:10 R. Ashmore et al.
architecture may protect the model from the effects of some failures: For example, the system
may not present the model with images from a camera that has failed its built-in test. In some
cases it may be possible to collect samples that relate to particular failures. However, for reasons
of cost, practicality and safety, augmentation is likely to be needed to achieve suitable complete-
nessofthisspace[ 6].Findingverifiablewaysofachievingthisaugmentationisanopenchallenge
(DM05in Table 2).
Understanding completeness across the adversarial domain Ainvolves checking: the model’s
susceptibility to known ways of generating adversarial examples [ 61,117,162,188] and its be-
haviourwhenpresentedwithinputscraftedtoachievesomeotherformofbehaviour,forexample,
a not-a-number error. Whilst they are useful, both of these methods are subject to the “unknown
unknowns” problem. More generally, demonstrating completeness across the adversarial domain
is anopenchallenge (DM06in Table 2).
4.4.3 Balanced. This property is concerned with the distribution of the dataset, viewed from
aninternalperspective.Initially,itiseasiesttothinkaboutbalancesolelyfromtheperspectiveof
supervisedclassification,whereakeyconsiderationisthenumberofsamplesineachclass.Ifthis
is unbalanced, then simple measures of performance (e.g., classifier accuracy) may be insufficient
[101].
As it only involves counting the number of samples in each class, detecting class imbalance is
straightforward. Its effects can be countered in several ways; for example, in the Model Learn-
ing and Model Verification stages, performance measures can be class-specific, or weighted to
accountforclassimbalance[ 63].Importanceweightingcan,however,beineffectivefordeepnet-
workstrainedformanyepochs[ 28].Alternatively,oradditionally,intheDataManagementstage
augmentationcanbeusedtocorrect(orreduce)theclassimbalance,eitherbyoversamplingthemi-
norityclass,orbyundersamplingthemajorityclass,orusingacombinationoftheseapproaches4
[101].Ifdataarebeingcollectedfromacontrolledtrial,thenanotherapproachtoaddressingclass
imbalance isto performadditionalcollection,targetedtowardtheminority class.
Class imbalance can be viewed as being a special case of rarity [ 182]. Another way rarity can
manifestisthroughsmalldisjuncts,whicharesmall,isolatedregionsoftheinputdomainthatcon-
tainasingleclass.Analysisofsingle-classregions[ 12]caninformthesearchforsmalldisjuncts,as
can EDA and expertise in the intended operational domain. Nevertheless, finding small disjuncts
remains anopenchallenge (DM07in Table 2).
ClassimbalancecanalsobeviewedasaspecialcaseofaphenomenonthatappliestoallMLap-
proaches:featureimbalance.Supposewewishtocreateamodelthatappliestopeopleofallages.
If almost all of our data relate to people between the ages of 20 and 40, then we have an imbal-
ance in this feature. Situations like this are not atypical when data are collected from volunteers.
Detecting such imbalances is straightforward; understanding their influence on model behaviour
and correctingforthemarebothopenchallenges(DM08andDM09in Table 2).
4.4.4 Accurate. Recall that this property is concerned with measurement (and measurement-
like) issues. If sensors are used to record information as part of data collection, then both sensor
precisionandaccuracyneedtobeconsidered.Ifeitheroftheseishigh,thentheremaybebenefit
inaugmentingthecollecteddatawithsamplesdrawnfromadistributionthatreflectsprecisionor
accuracyerrors.
For supervised learning, accuracy of labels is an important issue. When labelling is being con-
ductedbyalargegroupofpeople,usingaformofcrowdsourcing,therearetwokeyissues:quality
4Note that the last two approaches involve removing samples (corresponding to the majority class) from the dataset; this
differs from the normalviewwherebyaugmentationincreases thenumberof samplesinthe dataset.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:11
control in task processing and postprocessing to improve data quality [ 155]. For some especially
sensitive applications, performing all labelling using a comparatively small number of in-house
staff may be preferable [ 164]. Regardless of who performs the labelling, the actual value of a fea-
ture is often unambiguously defined [ 157]. However, in some cases this may not be possible: for
example, is a person walking astride a bicycle a pedestrian or a cyclist? In some cases, ambigu-
ity may be unimportant; in others it might be critical. Consequently, labelling discrepancies are
likely,especiallywhenlabelsaregeneratedbyhumans.Preventing,detectingandresolvingthese
discrepanciesisan openchallenge (DM10inTable 2).
Thedatacollectionprocessshouldgenerallybedocumentedinawaythataccountsforpotential
weaknesses in the approach. If the process uses manual recording of information, then we would
expectstepstobetakentoensureattentiondoesnotwaverandrecordsareaccurate.Conversely,
ifthedatacollectionprocessusesloggingsoftware,thenconfidencethatthissoftwareisbehaving
asexpectedshouldbeobtained,e.g.,usingtraditionalapproachesforsoftwarequality[ 75,143].
ThisnotionofcorrectbehaviourappliesacrossallsoftwareusedintheDataManagementstage
(and to all software used in the ML lifecycle). Data collection software may be relatively simple,
merely consisting of an automatic recording of sensed values. Alternatively, it may be very com-
plex, involving a highly-realistic simulation of the intended operational domain. The amount of
evidence needed to demonstrate correct behaviour is related to the complexity of the software.
Providingsufficientevidencefor acomplexsimulation isan openchallenge(DM11in Table 2).
Given their importance, datasets should be protected against unintentional and unauthorised
changes. Methods used in traditional software development (e.g., References [ 75,143]) may be
appropriate for this task, but they may be challenged by the large volume and by the non-textual
natureof many of thedatasetsusedin ML.
4.5 Summary and Open Challenges
Table1summarisestheassurancemethodsthatcanbeappliedduringtheDataManagementstage.
Foreaseofreference,themethodsarepresentedintheordertheywereintroducedinthepreceding
discussion.Methodsarealso matchedtoactivitiesand desiderata.
Table1shows that there are relatively few methods associated with the preprocessing activ-
ity. This may be because preprocessing is, inevitably, problem-specific. Likewise, there are few
methods associated with the Accurate desideratum. This may reflect the widespread use of com-
monly available datasets (e.g., ImageNet [ 40] and MNIST) within the research literature, which
de-emphasisesissuesassociatedwithdata collectionandcuration,like Accuracy .
Open challenges associated with the Data Management stage are shown in Table 2.T h er e l -
evance and nature of these challenges have been established earlier in this section. For ease of
reference, each challenge is matched to the artefact desideratum that it is most closely related to.
It is apparent that, with the exception of understanding the effect of feature imbalance on model
performance,theseopenchallengesdo notrelatetothecoreprocessoflearningamodel.Assuch,
theyemphasiseimportantareasthatareinsufficientlycoveredintheresearchliterature.Examples
includebeingabletodemonstrate:thatthemodelissufficientlysecure—fromacyberperspective
(openchallengeDM01);thatthedataarefit-for-purpose(DM02,DM03);thatthedatacoveroper-
ational, failure and adversarial domains (DM04, DM05, DM06); that the data are balanced, across
and within classes (DM07, DM08, DM09); that manual data collection has not been compromised
(DM10);and thatsimulations aresuitablydetailedand representativeoftherealworld (DM11).
5 MODEL LEARNING
The Model Learning stage of the ML lifecycle is concerned with creating a model, or algorithm,
fromthedatapresentedtoit.Agoodmodelwillreplicatethedesiredrelationshipbetweeninputs
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:12 R. Ashmore et al.
Table 1. Assurance Methods for the Data Management Stage
Associatedactivities†Supported desiderata‡
Method Collection Preprocess. Augment. Analysis Relevant Complete Balanced Accurate
Usetrusted data sources,with
data-transit integrity guarantees✔ ⋆
Experimental design [ 87,146] ✔✔ ⋆⋆ ✩
Simulation verification and
validation [ 149]✔ ⋆ ✩ ✩
Exploratory data analysis [ 171] ✔ ⋆⋆
Useadversarial examples [ 125] ✔ ✩ ⋆
Include a “dustbin” class [ 1] ✔✩ ⋆
Remove unwanted bias [ 16] ✔ ✔ ⋆ ✩
Compare sampling density [ 19] /check ✔ ⋆ ✩
Identify emptyand single-class
regions [12,98]/check ✔ ⋆ ✩
Usesituation coverage [ 5] ✔ ⋆
Examine systemfailure cases ✔ ⋆
Oversampling & undersampling
[101]✔ ⋆⋆
Check for within-class [ 76]a nd
feature imbalance✔ ⋆
UseaGAN [ 10] ✔ ⋆ ✩
Augment data to account for
sensor errors/check ✔ ✩ ⋆
Confirm correct software
behaviour[ 75,143]/check ✔✔ /check ✩ ⋆ ✩✩
Usedocumented processes ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✩ ⋆
Apply configuration management
[75,143]✔✔✔ ✔ ✩ ⋆
†✔=activitythatthemethod is typicallyused in; /check=activitythatmayuse the method.
‡⋆=desideratum supported bythe method; ✩=desideratum partlysupported bythemethod.
Table 2. Open Challenges for the Assurance Concerns Associated with the
Data Management (DM) Stage
ID Open Challenge Desideratum (Section)
DM01 Detectingbackdoors indata
DM02 Demonstratingsynthetic dataappropriatenesstothe operationaldomain Relevant(Section 4.4.1)
DM03 Detectingandcorrecting for dataleakage
DM04 Measuring completenesswithrespect tothe operationaldomain
DM05 Deriving waysof drawingsamplesfrom thefailuredomain Complete(Section 4.4.2)
DM06 Measuring completenesswithrespect tothe adversarialdomain
DM07 Finding smalldisjuncts, especiallyforwithin-class imbalances
DM08 Understanding the effectof featureimbalanceon modelperformance Balanced(Section 4.4.3)
DM09 Correcting forfeatureimbalance
DM10 Maintainingconsistency across multiplehumancollectors/preprocessorsAccurate (Section 4.4.4)
DM11 Verifying the accuracyof acomplexsimulation
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:13
and outputs present in the training set, and will satisfy non-functional requirements such as pro-
vidinganoutputwithinagiventimeandusinganacceptableamountofcomputationalresources.
5.1 Inputs and Outputs
ThekeyinputartefacttothisstageisthetrainingdatasetproducedbytheDataManagementstage.
Thekeyoutputartefactsarea machinelearnedmodelfor verificationin thenext stageof theML
lifecycleand a performancedeficitreportusedto informremedialdatamanagement activities.
5.2 Activities
5.2.1 Model Selection. Thisactivitydecidesthemodeltype,variantand,whereapplicable,the
structureofthemodeltobeproducedintheModelLearningstage.NumeroustypesofMLmodels
are available [ 113,152], including multiple types of classification models (which identify the cat-
egory that the input belongs to), regression models (which predict a continuous-valued attribute),
clustering models(whichgroupsimilaritemsintosets),and reinforcementlearning models(which
provide an optimal set of actions, i.e., a policy, for solving, for instance, a navigation or planning
problem).
5.2.2 Training. ThisactivityoptimisestheperformanceoftheMLmodelwithrespecttoanob-
jective function that reflects the requirements for the model. To this end, a subset of the training
dataisusedtofindinternalmodelparameters(e.g.,theweightsofaneuralnetwork,orthecoeffi-
cientsofapolynomial)thatminimiseanerrormetricforthegivendataset.Theremainingdata(i.e,
the validation set) are then used to assess the ability of the model to generalise. These two steps
aretypicallyiteratedmanytimes,withthetraininghyperparameterstunedbetweeniterationsso
asto furtherimprove theperformanceof themodel.
5.2.3 Hyperparameter Selection. Thisactivityisconcernedwithselectingtheparametersasso-
ciatedwiththetrainingactivity,i.e.,thehyperparameters.Hyperparameterscontroltheeffective-
nessofthetrainingprocess,andultimatelytheperformanceoftheresultingmodel[ 130].Theyare
socriticaltothesuccessoftheMLmodelthattheyareoftendeemedconfidentialformodelsused
in proprietary systems [ 177]. There is no clear consensus on how the hyperparameters should be
tuned[102].Typicaloptionsinclude:initialisationwithvaluesofferedbyMLframeworks,manual
configuration based on recommendations from literature or experience, or trial and error [ 130].
Alternatively,thetuningofthehyperparameterscanitselfbeseenasamachinelearningtask[ 71,
187].
5.2.4 Transfer Learning. Thetrainingofcomplexmodelsmayrequireweeksofcomputationon
manyGPUs[ 62].Assuch,thereareclearbenefitsinreusingMLmodelsacrossmultipledomains.
Even when a model cannot be transferred between domains directly, one model may provide a
starting point for training a second model, significantly reducing the training time. The activity
concernedwithreusingmodels inthisway istermedtransferlearning[ 60].
5.3 Desiderata
From an assurance viewpoint, the models generated by the Model Learning stage should exhibit
some orallof thekey propertiesdescribedbelow:
(1)Performant —This property considers quantitative performance metrics applied to the
model when deployed within a system. These metrics include traditional ML metrics
such as classification accuracy, the receiver operator characteristic (ROC) and mean
squarederror,aswellasmetricsthatconsiderthesystemandenvironmentintowhichthe
models aredeployed.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:14 R. Ashmore et al.
(2)Robust—This property considers the model’s ability to perform well in circumstances
wheretheinputsencounteredatruntimearedifferenttothosepresentinthetrainingdata.
Robustness may be considered with respect to environmental uncertainty, e.g., flooded
roads, and system-level variability, e.g., sensor failure, i.e., from the general perspective
used in formal verification rather than its ML interpretation as the ability of a model to
generaliseto datanot encounteredintraining[ 20,192].
(3)Reusable—Thispropertyconsiderstheabilityofamodel,orofcomponentsofamodel,to
be reused in systems for which they were not originally intended. For example, a neural
networktrainedforfacialrecognitioninanauthenticationsystemmayhavefeaturesthat
can be reused to identify operator fatigue. More generally, the reuse of pre-trained or
commodityoff-the-shelfMLmodelsintransferlearningcansignificantlyspeedupmodel
learning[ 108].
(4)Interpretable —This property considers the extent to which the model can produce arte-
facts that support the analysis of its output, and thus of any decisions based on it. For
example, a decision tree may support the production of a narrative explaining the deci-
sionto handover controlto ahuman operator.
5.4 Methods
This section considers each of the four desiderata in turn. Methods applicable during each of the
ModelLearningactivities(Table 3),to helpachieveeachofthedesiredproperties,arediscussed.
5.4.1 Performant. AnMLmodelisperformantifitoperatesasexpectedaccordingtoameasure
(or set of measures) that captures relevant characteristics of the model output. Many machine
learningproblemsarephrasedintermsofobjectivefunctionstobeoptimized[ 174],andmeasures
constructedwithrespecttotheseobjectivefunctionsallowmodelstobecompared.Suchmeasures
have underpinning assumptions and limitations that should be fully understood before they are
usedto selecta modelfor deploymentin a safety-criticalsystem.
The prediction error of a model has three components: irreducible error , which cannot be elim-
inated regardless of the algorithm or training methods employed; bias error , due to simplifying
assumptions intended to make learning the model easier; and variance error ,a ne s t i m a t eo fh o w
muchthemodeloutputwouldvaryifdifferentdatawereusedinthetrainingprocess.Theaimof
training is to minimise the bias and variance errors, and therefore the objective functions reflect
these errors. The objective functions may also contain simplifying assumptions to aid optimiza-
tion,and theseassumptionsmustnot bepresentwhenassessingmodelperformance[ 59].
Performancemeasuresforclassifiers,includingaccuracy,precision,recall(sensitivity)andspeci-
ficity,areoftenderivedfromtheirconfusionmatrix[ 59,120,158].Comparingmodelsisnotalways
straightforward,withdifferentmodelsshowingsuperiorperformanceagainstdifferentmeasures.
Compositemetrics[ 59,158]allowforatradeoffbetweenmeasuresduringthetrainingprocess.The
understandingofevaluationmeasureshasimprovedoverthepasttwodecadesbutareaswhereun-
derstandingislackingstillexist[ 54].Whileusingasingle,scalarmeasuresimplifiestheselection
ofa“best”modelandisacommonpractice[ 46],theeasewithwhichsuchperformancemeasures
canbeproducedhasledtoover-reportingofsimplemetricswithoutanexplicitstatementoftheir
relevancetotheoperatingdomain.Ensuringthatreportedmeasuresconveysufficientcontextually
relevant informationremains an openchallenge (challengeML01 fromTable 4).
Aggregated measures cannot evaluate models effectively except in the simplest scenarios, and
the operating environment influences the required tradeoff between performance metrics. The
ROCcurve[ 132]allowsforPareto-optimalmodelselectionusingatradeoffbetweenthetrueand
false positive rates, while the area under the ROC curve [ 24] assesses the sensitivity of models
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:15
to changes in operating conditions. Cost curves [ 46] allow weights to be associated with true
and false positives to reflect their importance in the operating domain. Where a single classifier
cannot provide an acceptable tradeoff, models identified using the ROC curve may be combined
toproduceaclassifierwithbetterperformancethananysinglemodel,underreal-worldoperating
conditions [ 131]. This requires tradeoffs to be decided at training time, which is unfeasible for
dynamic environments and multi-objective optimisation problems. Developing methods to defer
thisdecisionuntilruntimeis anopenchallenge (ML02in Table 4).
Whilst the measures presented thus far give an indication of the performance of the model
against datasets, they do not encapsulate the users’ trust in a model for a specific, possibly rare,
operating point. The intuitive certainty measure (ICM) [172] is a mechanism to produce an
estimate of how certain an ML model is for a specific output based on errors made in the past.
ICM compares current and previous sensor data to assess similarity, using previous outcomes
for similar environmental conditions to inform trust measures. Due to the probabilistic nature of
machine learning [ 120], models may also be evaluated using classical statistical methods. These
methodscananswerseveralkeyquestions[ 114]:(i)Giventheobservedaccuracyofamodel,how
well is it likely to estimate unseen samples?, (ii) If a model outperforms another for a specific
dataset, how likely is it to be more accurate in general?, and (iii) What is the best way to learn a
hypothesisfromlimited data?
Methods are also available to improve the performance of the ML models. Ensemble learn-
ing [147] combines multiple models to produce a model whose performance is superior to that
of any of its constituent models. The aggregation of models leads to lower overall bias and to a
reductioninvarianceerrors[ 59].Baggingandboosting[ 145]canimprovetheperformanceofen-
semblemodelsfurther.Baggingincreasesmodeldiversitybyselectingdatasubsetsforthetraining
of each model in the ensemble. After an individual model is created, boosting identifies the sam-
ples for which the model performance is deficient, and increases the likelihood of these samples
being selected for subsequent model training. AdaBoost [ 57], short for Adaptive Boosting, is a
widely used boosting algorithm reported to have solved many problems of earlier boosting algo-
rithms[56].Wherethetrainingdataareimbalanced,theSMOTEboostingalgorithm[ 33]maybe
employed.
The selection and optimization of hyperparameters [ 59] has a significant impact on the per-
formance of models [ 177]. Given the large number of hyperparameters, tuning them manually is
typicallyunfeasible.Automatedoptimizationstrategiesareemployedinstead[ 71],usingmethods
that include grid search, random search and latin hypercube sampling [ 89]. Evolutionary algo-
rithms may also be employed for high-dimensional hyperparameter spaces [ 187]. Selecting the
most appropriate method for hyperparameter tuning in a given context and understanding the
interaction between hyperparameters and model performance [ 102] represent open challenges
(ML03 and ML04 in Table 4, respectively). Furthermore, there are no guarantees that a tuning
strategywillcontinuetobe optimalas themodel anddata onwhichitis trainedevolve.
We have highlighted multiple metrics for the assessment of model performance, as well as
methods that promise improved model performance with respect to these metrics. The selection
of appropriate metrics and methods remains a complex task, however, and will depend greatly
on the context into which the ML component is to be deployed. Given this complexity and the
importance of model performance, the rationale that underpins this selection process should be
clearly justifiedin theresultingassurancecase.
5.4.2 Robust. Training optimizes models with respect to an objective function using the data
in the training set. The aim of the model learning process, however, is to produce a model that
generalisestodata notpresentin thetrainingsetbutthatmay beencounteredin operation.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:16 R. Ashmore et al.
Increasing model complexity generally reduces training errors, but noise in the training data
may result in overfitting and in a failure of the model to generalise to real-world data. When
choosing between competing models one method is then to prefer simple models (Ockham’s ra-
zor)[145].Anestimateofthemodel’sabilitytogeneralisemaybeobtainedbyusing k-foldcross-
validation[ 60].Thismethodpartitionsthetrainingdatainto knon-overlappingsubsets,with k−1
subsets used for training and the remaining subset used for validation. The process is repeated k
times, with a different validation subset used each time, and an overall error is calculated as the
mean error over the ktrials. Methods to avoid overfitting include gathering more training data,
reducingthenoisepresentin thetrainingset,andsimplifying themodel[ 59].
Dataaugmentation(Section 4.2.3)canimprovethequalityoftrainingdataandimproverobust-
ness of models [ 88]. Applying transformations to images in the input space may produce models
thatarerobusttochangesinthepositionandorientationofobjectsintheinputspace[ 59]whilst
photometricaugmentationmayincreaserobustnesswithrespecttolightingandcolour[ 165].For
models of speech, altering the speed of playback for the training set can increase model robust-
ness [88]. Identifying the best augmentation methods for a given context can be difficult, and
Antoniouetal.[ 10]proposeanautomatedaugmentationmethodthatusesgenerativeadversarial
networks to augment datasets without reference to a contextual setting. These methods require
the identification of all possible deviations from the training dataset, so that deficiencies can be
compensated through augmentation. Assuring the completeness of (augmented) datasets has al-
ready been identified as an open challenge (DM02 in Table 2). Even when a dataset is complete,
thepracticeofreportingaggregatedgeneralisationerrorsmeansthatassessingtheimpactofeach
type of deviation on model performance is challenging. Indeed, the complexity of the open en-
vironments in which many critical systems operate, and for which assurance cases are required,
means that decoupling the effects of different perturbations on model performance remains an
openchallenge(ML05 inTable 4).
Regularizationmethodsareintendedtoreduceamodel’sgeneralizationerrorbutnotitstraining
error [60,145], e.g., by augmenting the objective function with a term that penalises model com-
plexity.The/lscript0,/lscript1,or/lscript2normarecommonlyused[ 120],withthetermchosenbasedonthelearning
context and model type. The ridge regression [ 59] method may be used for models with low bias
and high variance. This method adds a weighted term to the objective function that aims to keep
theweightsinternaltothemodelaslowaspossible.Earlystopping[ 129]isasimplemethodthat
avoids overfitting by stopping the training if the validation error begins to rise. For deep neural
networks, dropout [ 67,159] is the most popular regularization method. Dropout selects different
subsets of neurons to be ignored at each training step. This makes the model less reliant on any
oneneuron,andhenceincreasesitsrobustness.Dropconnect[ 176]employsasimilartechniqueto
improve the robustness of large networks by setting subsets of weights in fully connected layers
tozero.Forimageclassificationtasks,randomlyerasingportionsofinputimagescanincreasethe
robustness of the generated models [ 193] by ensuring that the model is not overly reliant on any
particularsubsetof thetrainingdata.
Robustness with respect to adversarial perturbations for image classification is problematic
for deep neural networks, even when the perturbations are imperceptible to humans [ 162]o r
the model is robust to random noise [ 51]. Whilst initially deemed a consequence of the high
non-linearity of neural networks, recent results suggest that the “success” of adversarial exam-
ples is due to the low flexibility of classifies, and affects classification models more widely [ 50].
Adversarial robustness may therefore be considered as a measure of the distinguishability of a
classifier.
Ross and Doshi-Velez [ 141] introduced a batch normalization method that penalises parameter
sensitivity to increase robustness to adversarial examples. This method adds noise to the hidden
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:17
units of a deep neural network at training time, can have a regularization effect, and sometimes
makes dropout unnecessary [ 60]. Although regularization can improve model robustness with-
out knowledge of the possible deviations from the training dataset, understanding the nature of
robustnessina contextually meaningful manner remains anopenchallenge(ML06 inTable 4).
5.4.3 Reusable. Machine learning is typically computationally expensive, and repurposing
modelsfromrelateddomainscanreducethecostoftrainingnewmodels.Transferlearning[ 183]
allows for a model learned in one domain to be exploited in a second domain, as long as the do-
mainsaresimilarenoughsothatfeatureslearnedinthesourcedomainareapplicabletothetarget
domain. Where this is the case, all or part of a model may be transferred to reduce the training
cost.
Convolutionalneuralnetworks(CNN) areparticularlysuitedforpartialmodeltransfer[ 59]
sincetheconvolutionallayersencodefeaturesintheinputspace,whilstthefullyconnectedlayers
encode reasoning based on those features. Thus, a CNN trained on human faces is likely to have
feature extraction capabilities to recognise eyes, noses, and so on. To train a CNN from scratch
for a classifier that considers human faces is wasteful if a CNN for similar tasks already exists.
By taking the convolutional layers from a source model and learning a new set of weights for
the fully connected set of layers, training times may be significantly reduced [ 69,124]. Similarly,
transfer learning has been shown to be effective for random forests [ 153,160], where subsets of
treescanbereused.Moregenerally,theidentificationof“similar”operationalcontextsisdifficult,
and defining a meaningful similarity measure in high-dimensional spaces is an open challenge
(ML07in Table 4).
Evenwithsignificantdifferencesbetweenthesourceandtargetdomains,anexistingmodelmay
bevaluable.Initialisingtheparametersofamodeltobelearnedusingvaluesobtainedinasimilar
domain may greatly reduce training times, as shown by the successful use of transfer learning in
theclassificationofsentiments,humanactivities,softwaredefects,andmulti-languagetexts[ 183].
Using pre-existing models as the starting point for a new problem can be effective. As such, it
maybedesirabletomakeuseofmodelspreviouslyusedtotackleproblemsinrelateddomains.A
growingnumberof modelzoos [59]containingsuchmodelsarebeingsetupbymanycorelearning
technologyplatforms[ 116],aswellas byresearchersandengineers[ 115].
Transfer learning resembles software component reuse, and may allow the reuse of assurance
evidenceaboutMLmodelsacrossdomains,aslongastheassumptionssurroundingtheassurance
are also transferable between the source and target domains. However, a key aspect in the assur-
anceofcomponentsisthattheyshouldbereproducibleand,atleastforcomplex(deep)MLmodels,
reproducing the learning process is rarely straightforward [ 174]. Indeed, reproducing ML results
requiressignificantconfigurationmanagement, whichisoften overlookedbyMLteams[ 189].
Anotherreasonforcautionwhenadoptingthird-partymodelstructures,weightsandprocesses
is that transfer learning can also transfer failures and faults from the source to the target do-
main [62]. Indeed, ensuring that existing models are free from faults is an open challenge (ML08
in Table4).
5.4.4 Interpretable. For many critical domains where assurance is required, it is essential that
ML models are interpretable. “Interpretable” and “explainable” are closely related concepts, with
“interpretable” used in the ML community and “explainable” preferred in the AI community [ 2].
We use the term “interpretable” when referring to properties of machine learned models, and
“explainable” whensystemsfeaturesandcontexts ofuseare considered.
Interpretable models aid assurance by providing evidence that allows for [ 2,96,99]: justifying
the results provided by a model, supporting the identification and correction of errors, aiding
modelimprovement, andprovidinginsight withrespectto theoperationaldomain.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:18 R. Ashmore et al.
The difficulty of providing interpretable models stems from the frequent use of complex ML
models whose structure and size makes it impossible for a human to construct a mental model
that can explain the features and parameters of the model in a contextually meaningful manner.
Assuch,oneapproachtoproducinginterpretablemodelsistoreducemodelcomplexitytoalevel
wherethenumberoffeaturesandparametersarenolongerabarriertounderstanding.However,
this is likely to also reduce model accuracy, and therefore a better approach is to use inherently
interpretable models , i.e., models that satisfy domain-specific constraints that may include mono-
tonicity,additivityor causality[ 144].
Methodsthataidintheproductionofinterpretablemodelscanbeclassifiedbythescopeofthe
explanations they generate. Global methods generate evidence that apply to a whole model, and
support design and assurance activities by allowing reasoning about all possible future outcomes
for the model. Local methods generate explanations for an individual decision, and may be used
to analyse why a particular problem occurred, and to improve the model so future events of this
typeareavoided.Methodscanalsobeclassifiedasmodel-agnosticandmodel-specific[ 2].Model-
agnostic methods are mostly applicable post-hoc (after training), and include providing natural
language explanations [ 95], using model visualisations to support understanding [ 106], and ex-
plaining by example [ 3]. Much less common, model-specific methods [ 2] typically provide more
detailed explanations, but restrict the users’ choice of model, and therefore are only suited if the
limitations of themodel(s)theycanwork withareacceptable.
Despite significant research into interpretable models, there are no global methods provid-
ing contextually relevant insights to aid human understanding for complex ML models (ML09
in Table4). In addition, although several post-hoc local methods exist, there is no systematic ap-
proach to infer global properties of the model from local cases. Without such methods, inter-
pretable models cannot aid structural model improvements and error correction at a global level
(ML10 inTable 4).
5.5 Summary and Open Challenges
Table3summariestheassurancemethodsapplicableduringtheModelLearningstage.Themeth-
ods are presented in the order that they are introduced in the preceding discussion, and are
matched to the activities with which they are associated and to the desiderata that they sup-
port. The majority of these methods focus on the performance and robustness of ML models.
Model reusability and interpretability are only supported by a few methods that typically re-
strict the types of model that can be used. This imbalance reflects the different maturity of
the research on the four desiderata, with the need for reuse and interpretability arising more
prominently after the recent advances in deep learning and increases in the complexity of ML
models.
OpenchallengesfortheassuranceoftheModelLearningstagearepresentedinTable 4,organ-
ised into categories based on the most relevant desideratum for each challenge. The importance
and nature of these challenges have been established earlier in this section. A common theme
acrossmanyofthesechallengesistheneedforintegratingconcernsassociatedwiththeoperating
contextintotheMachineLearningstage(openchallengesML01,ML03,ML05,ML06,ML07).Open
challenges also exist in the evaluation of performance of models with respect to multi-objective
evaluationcriteria(ML02);understandingthelinkbetweenmodelperformanceandhyperparam-
eter selection (ML04) and ensuring that where transfer learning is adopted that existing mod-
els are free from errors (ML08). While there has been a great deal of research focused on inter-
pretable models, methods that apply globally to complex models (ML09) are still lacking. Where
localexplanationsareprovided,methodsareneededtoextractglobalmodelpropertiesfromthem
(ML10).
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:19
Table 3. Assurance Methods for the Model Learning Stage
Associatedactivities†Supported desiderata‡
Model Training Hyperparam. Transfer
Method Selection Selection Learning Performant Robust Reusable Interpretable
Useappropriate performance
measures [ 54,174]/check ✔ ⋆ ⋆
Statistical tests[ 114,120] /check ✔ ⋆
Ensemble Learning [ 147] ✔ ✔ ✔ ⋆ ⋆
Optimise hyperparameters[ 71,
187]✔✔ ⋆⋆
Batch Normalization [ 73] ✔ ✔ ⋆ ⋆
Prefer simpler models [ 3,145] ✔ /check ✩ ⋆ ✩
Augment training data ✔ ⋆ ⋆
Regularization methods[ 59] ✔✔ ⋆
Useearly stopping ✔ ✔ ⋆
Usemodels that intrinsically
support reuse[ 2]✔✔ ⋆ ✩
Transfer Learning [ 183] ✔ /check ✔ ⋆ ✩
Usemodel zoos [ 59] ✔ /check ✔ ⋆
Post-hoc interpretability
methods [ 3,95,106]✔ ⋆
†✔=activitythatthe methodis typicallyused in; /check=activitythat mayuse the method.
‡⋆=desideratum supported bythe method; ✩=desideratum partlysupported bythemethod.
Table 4. Open Challenges for the Assurance Concerns Associated with the
Model Learning (ML) Stage
ID Open Challenge Desideratum (Section)
ML01 Selectingmeasures thatrepresent operationalcontext
ML02 Multi-objectiveperformanceevaluationatruntime Performant(Section 5.4.1)
ML03 Using operationalcontextto inform hyperparameter-tuningstrategies
ML04 Understanding theimpactof hyperparameterson modelperformance
ML05 Decouplingtheeffects of perturbationsin theinputspaceRobust (Section 5.4.2)ML06 Inferringcontextualrobustness from evaluationmetrics
ML07 Identifyingsimilarity inoperationalcontextsReusable(Section 5.4.3)ML08 Ensuring existingmodels arefreefrom faults
ML09 Globalmethods for interpretabilityincomplexmodelsInterpretable(Section 5.4.4)ML10 Inferringglobalmodelproperties fromlocalcases
6 MODEL VERIFICATION
The Model Verification stage of the ML lifecycle is concerned with the provision of auditable ev-
idence that a model will continue to satisfy its requirements when exposed to inputs that are not
presentin thetrainingdata.
6.1 Inputs and Outputs
ThekeyinputartefacttothisstageisthetrainedmodelproducedbytheModelLearningstage.The
keyoutputartefactsareaverifiedmodel,andaverificationresultthatprovidessufficientinforma-
tionto allow potentialuserstodetermine if themodel issuitableforitsintended application(s).
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:20 R. Ashmore et al.
6.2 Activities
6.2.1 Requirement Encoding. This activity involves transforming requirements into both tests
and mathematical properties, where the latter can be verified using formal techniques. Require-
ments encoding requires a knowledge of the application domain, such that the intent that is im-
plicit in the requirements may be encoded as explicit tests and properties. A knowledge of the
technologythatunderpinsthemodelisalsorequired,suchthattechnology-specificissuesmaybe
assessedthroughthecreationofappropriatetestsandproperties.
6.2.2 Test-based Verification. This activity involves providing test cases (i.e., specially formed
inputs or sequences of inputs) to the trained model and checking the outputs against predefined
expected results. A large part of this activity involves an independent examination of properties
considered during the Model Learning stage (cf. Section 5), especially those related to the Perfor-
mantandRobustdesiderata.Inaddition,thisactivityalsoconsiderstestcompleteness,i.e.,whether
the set of tests exercised the model and covered its input domain sufficiently. The latter objective
is directly related to the Complete desideratum from the Data Management stage (cf. Section 4).
Finally,testsshouldberepeatable,allowingforthesystematiceliminationoferrorsandtheiden-
tificationof improvement betweendevelopment cycles.
6.2.3 Formal Verification. Thisactivityinvolvestheuseofmathematicaltechniquestoprovide
irrefutableevidencethatthemodelsatisfiesformallyspecifiedpropertiesderivedfromitsrequire-
ments. Counterexamples are typically provided for properties that are violated, and can be used
to informfurtheriterationsofactivitiesfromtheDataManagement and ModelLearningstages.
6.3 Desiderata
To be compelling, the verification results (i.e., the evidence) generated by the Model Verification
stage shouldexhibitthefollowing keyproperties:
(1)Comprehensive —This property is concerned with the ability of Model Verification to
cover: (i) all the requirements and operating conditions associated with the intended use
of the model; and (ii) all the desiderata from the previous stages of the ML lifecycle (e.g.,
thecompletenessof thetrainingdata,andtherobustnessof themodel).
(2)Contextually Relevant —Thisdesideratumconsiderstheextenttowhichtestcasesandfor-
mallyverifiedpropertiescanbemappedtocontextuallymeaningfulaspectsofthesystem
that will use the model. For example, for a model used in an autonomous car, robustness
withrespecttoimagecontrastislessmeaningfulthanrobustnesstovariationinweather
conditions.
(3)Comprehensible —This property considers the extent to which verification results can be
understood by those using them in activities ranging from data preparation and model
development to system development and regulatory approval. A clear link should exist
betweentheaimoftheModelVerificationandtheguaranteesitprovides.Limitationsand
assumptions should be clearly identified, and results that show requirement violations
should convey sufficient information to allow the underlying cause(s) for the violations
to befixed.
6.4 Methods
6.4.1 Comprehensive. Comparedtotraditionalsoftwarethedimensionandtestingspaceofan
ML model is potentially much larger [ 25]. Ensuring that model verification is comprehensive re-
quires a systematic approach to identify faults due to conceptual misunderstandings and faults
introducedduringtheDataManagementand ModelLearning activities(Table 5).
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:21
Conceptual misunderstandings may occur during the construction of requirements. They im-
pactbothDataManagementandModelLearning,andmayleadtoerrorsthatinclude:datathatare
notrepresentativeoftheintendedoperationalenvironment;lossfunctionsthatdonotcapturethe
original intent; and design tradeoffs that detrimentally affect performance and robustness when
deployed in real-world contexts. Independent consideration of requirements is important in tra-
ditionalsoftwarebut,itcouldbeargued,itisevenmoreimportantforMLbecausetheassociated
workflowincludesno formal, traceablehierarchicalrequirementsdecomposition[ 13].
Traditionalapproachestosafety-criticalsoftwaredevelopmentdistinguishbetweennormaltest-
ingandrobustnesstesting[ 143].Theformerisconcernedwithtypicalbehaviour,whilstthelatter
tries to induce undesirable behaviour on the part of the software. Stress testing, especially that
specifically designed for autonomy software, is a valuable approach [ 70]. In terms of the spaces
discussed in Section 4, normal testing tends to focus on the operational domain, O; it can also
include aspects of the failure domain, F, and the adversarial domain, A. Conversely, robustness
testing utilises the entire input domain, I, including, but not limited to, elements of FandA.
Robustness testing for traditional software is informed by decades of accumulated knowledge on
typical errors (e.g., numeric overflow and buffer overruns). Whilst a few typical errors have also
been identified for ML (e.g., overfitting and backdoors [ 35]), the knowledge about such errors is
limited and rarely accompanied by an understanding of how these errors may be detected and
corrected.Developingthisknowledge isan openchallenge(challenge MV01in Table 6).
Coverageisanimportantmeasureforassessingthecomprehensivenessofsoftwaretesting.For
traditional software, coverage focuses on the structure of the software. For example, statement
coverageorbranchcoveragecanbeusedasasurrogateformeasuringhowmuchofthesoftware’s
behaviourhasbeentested.However,measuringMLmodelcoverageinthesamewayisnotinfor-
mative:achievinghighbranchcoverageforthecodethatimplementsaneuronactivationfunction
tells little, if anything, about the behaviour of the trained network. For ML, test coverage needs
tobeconsideredfromtheperspectivesof bothdataandmodelstructure.Themethodsassociated
withthe Complete desideratafromtheDataManagementstagecaninformdatacoverage.Inaddi-
tion,model-relatedcoveragemethodshavebeenproposedinrecentyears[ 104,126,161],although
achievinghighcoverageisgenerallyunfeasibleforlargemodelsduetothehighdimensionalityof
theirinputandfeaturespaces.Traditionalsoftwaretestingemployscombinatorialtestingtomit-
igate thisproblem,and DeepCT[ 103]providescombinatorialtestingfor deep-learningmodels.
However,whilstthesemethodsprovideameansof measuring coverage,thebenefitsofachieving
aparticularlevelofcoveragearenotclear.Putanotherway,weunderstandthetheoreticalvalueof
increased data coverage, but its empirical utility has not been demonstrated. As such, it is impos-
sibletodefinecoveragethresholdsthatshouldbeachieved.Indeed,itisunclearwhetherageneric
thresholdisappropriate,or whethercoverage thresholdsareinevitably applicationspecific.Con-
sequently, deriving a set of coverage measures that address both data and model structure, and
demonstratingtheirpracticalutility remainsan openchallenge(MV02inTable 6).
The susceptibility of neural networks to adversarial examples is well known, and can be mit-
igated using formal verification methods. These methods ensure local adversarial robustness by
providing mathematical guarantees that, for a suitably-sized region around an input-space point,
the same decision will always be returned [ 68]. This is an active research area in which tools
have been developed using satisfiability and satisfiability modulo theory (SMT) techniques,
mixed-integer linear programming and geometric reachability [ 47,48,58,81]. While scalability
was initially an issue, more recent work has provided tool sets and frameworks that can handle
largernetworks,aswellasnetworksthatmakeuseofmorediversestructures,suchasmaxpool-
ing [43,82,169,170]. Formal verification methods are all reliant on the assumptions of proximity
andsmoothness.Proximityconcernsthenotionthattwosimilarinputswillhavesimilaroutputs,
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:22 R. Ashmore et al.
while smoothness assumes that the model smoothly transitions between values [ 173]. However,
without an understanding of the model’s context, it is difficult to ascertain whether two inputs
aresimilar(e.g.,basedonameaningfuldistancemetric),ortochallengesmoothnessassumptions
whendiscontinuitiesare presentin themodelled domain.
WhilemanyMLformalverificationmethodsfocusonneuralnetworks,severaltechniqueshave
been proposed for different ML paradigms, including random forests [ 7,168,181], nearest neigh-
bours [180], Bayesian networks classifiers [ 156], and support vector machines [ 136]. Test-based
verification may include use of a simulation to generate test cases. In this case, appropriate con-
fidence needs to be placed in the simulation. For normal testing, the simulation-related concepts
discussedinSection 4(e.g.,verificationandvalidation)arerelevant.Iftheterm“simulation”isin-
terpreted widely, then robustness testing could include simulations that produce pseudo-random
inputs (i.e., fuzzing), or simulations that try to invoke certain paths within the model (i.e., guided
fuzzing [123]). In these cases, we need confidence that the “simulation” is working as intended
(verification),butwedo notneedit tobe representativeoftherealworld (validation).
Last,themodelverificationmayalsoneedtobeappliedtoanyMLlibrariesorplatformsusedin
theModelLearningstageforanumberofsafety-criticalsystems.Errorsinthissoftwarearediffi-
culttoidentify,astheiterativenatureofmodeltrainingandparametertuningcanmasksoftware
implementation errors. Proving the correctness of ML libraries and platforms requires program
verificationtechniquestobeapplied[ 154].
6.4.2 Contextually Relevant. Requirement encoding should consider how the tests and for-
mal properties constructed for verification map to context. This is particularly difficult for high-
dimensionalproblemssuchasthosetackledusingdeepneuralnetworks.Verificationmethodsthat
assessmodelperformancewithrespecttoproximityandsmoothnessaremathematicallyprovable,
but defining regions around a point in space does little to indicate the types of real-world pertur-
bation that can, or cannot, be tolerated by the system (and those that are likely, or unlikely, to
occurinreality).Assuch,mappingrequirementstomodelfeaturesisanopenchallenge(MV04in
Table6).
Dependingontheintendedapplication,ModelVerificationmayneedtoexplicitlyconsiderun-
wanted bias. In particular, if the context of model use includes a legally protected characteristic
(e.g., age, race or gender) then considering bias is a necessity. As discussed in Section 4.4.1,t h e r e
are severalways thiscan beachieved,andan industry-readytoolkitis available[ 16].
Contextually relevant verification methods such as DeepTest [ 167] and DeepRoad [ 190]h a v e
been developed for autonomous driving. DeepTest employs neuron coverage to guide the gener-
ation of tests cases for ML models used in this application domain. Test cases are constructed as
contextuallyrelevanttransformationsofthedataset,e.g.,byaddingsyntheticbutrealisticfogand
camera lens distortion to images. DeepTest leverages principles of metamorphic testing, so that
even when the valid output for a set of inputs is unknown it can be inferred from similar cases
(e.g.,animagewithandwithoutcameralensdistortionshouldreturnthesameresult).DeepRoad
worksinasimilarway,butgeneratesitscontextuallyrelevantimagesusingagenerativeadversar-
ialnetwork.Thesemethodsworkforneuralnetworksusedinautonomousdriving,butdeveloping
a general framework for synthesizing test data for other contexts is an open challenge (MV05 in
Table6).
Although adversarial examples are widely used to verify the robustness of neural networks,
theytypicallydisregardthesemanticsandcontextofthesystemintowhichtheMLmodelwillbe
deployed.Semanticadversarialdeeplearning[ 45]isamethodthatavoidsthislimitationthrough
consideringthemodelcontextexplicitly,firstbyusinginputmodificationsinformedbycontextual
semantics(muchlikeDeepTestandDeepRoad),andsecondbyusingsystemspecificationstoassess
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:23
thesystem-levelimpactofinvalidmodeloutputs.Byidentifyingmodelerrorsthatleadtosystem
failures,thelattertechniqueaids themodelrepairand re-design.
The verification of reinforcement learning [ 173] requires a number of different features to be
considered. When Markov decision process (MDP) models of the environment are devised by
domain experts, the MDP states are nominally associated with contextually-relevant operating
states.Assuch,systemsrequirementscanbeencodedaspropertiesintemporallogicsandproba-
bilisticmodelcheckersmaybeusedtoprovideprobabilisticperformanceguarantees[ 109].When
these models are learned from data, it is difficult to map model states to real-world contexts, and
constructingmeaningful propertiesis anopenchallenge(MV06in Table 6).
6.4.3 Comprehensible. The utility of Model Verification is enhanced if its results provide in-
formation that aids the fixing of any errors identified by the test-based and formal verification
of ML models. One method that supports the generation of comprehensible verification results is
to use contextually relevant testing criteria, as previously discussed. Another method is to use
counterexample-guided data augmentation [ 44]. For traditional software, the counterexamples
providedbyformalverificationguidetheeradicationoferrorsbypointingtoaparticularblockof
code or execution sequence. For ML models, counterexamples are more difficult to leverage since
the link between input values, parameter values and intended outcome is typically more opaque.
To solve this problem, the method from Reference [ 44] synthesizes inputs with ground-truth la-
belsbyusingsystematictechniquestocoverthemodificationspace.Errortablesarethencreated
for all counterexamples, with table columns associated to input features (e.g., car model, envi-
ronment or brightness for an image classifier used in autonomous driving). The analysis of this
tablecanthenprovideacomprehensibleexplanationoffailures,e.g.,“Themodeldoesnotidentify
white cars driving away from us on forest roads” [ 44]. These explanations support further data
collection or augmentation in the next iteration of the ML workflow. In contrast, providing com-
prehensible results is much harder for formal verification methods that identify counterexamples
based on proximity and smoothness; mapping such counterexamples to guide remedial actions
theseverificationmethodsto remedialactionremains anopenchallenge (MV07in Table 6).
WhileaddingcontexttotrainingdatahelpsinformhowDataManagementactivitiesshouldbe
modifiedtoimprovemodelperformance,noanalogousmethodsexistforadjustingModelLearning
activities (e.g., model and hyperparameter selection) in light of verification results. In general,
defining a general method for performance improvement based on verification results is an open
challenge(MV08in Table 6).
Theneedforinterpretablemodelsiswidelyaccepted;itisalsoanimportantpartofverification
evidence, being comprehensible to people not involved in the ML workflow. However, verifying
that a model is interpretable is non-trivial, and a rigorous evaluation of interpretability is neces-
sary. Doshi-Velez and Kim [ 42] suggest three possible approaches to achieving this verification:
Application grounded , which involves placing the explanations into a real application and letting
the end user test it; Human grounded , which uses lay humans rather than domain experts to test
more general forms of explanation; and Functionally grounded , which uses formal definitions to
evaluatethequality ofexplanationswithouthumaninvolvement.
6.5 Summary and Open Challenges
Table5summarisestheassurancemethodsthatcanbeappliedduringtheModelVerificationstage,
listedintheorderinwhichtheywereintroducedearlierinthissection.Wenotethatthetest-based
verification methods outnumber the methods that use formal verification. Furthermore, the test-
basedmethodsaremodelagnostic,whilethefewformalverificationmethodsthatexistarelargely
restricted to neural networks and, due to their abstract nature, do little to support context or
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:24 R. Ashmore et al.
Table 5. Assurance Methods for the Model Verification Stage
Associated activities†Supporteddesiderata‡
Requirement Test-based Formal Compre- Contextually Compre-
Method Encoding Verification Verification hensive Relevant hensible
Independentderivationof
testcases✔ /check /check ⋆
Normalandrobustness
tests [143]/check ✔ ⋆
Measure datacoverage ✔ ⋆ ✩
Measure model
coverage[ 104,126,161]✔ ⋆ ✩
Guided fuzzing[ 123] ✔ ⋆
Combinatorial
Testing[103]✔ ⋆
SMT solvers [ 68] ✔ ⋆
Abstract
Interpretation[ 58]✔ ⋆
Generatetestsvia
simulation✔ ⋆ ✩ ✩
Verifier of Random
Forests [168]✔ ⋆
Verification of ML
Libraries[ 154]✔ ⋆
Checkforunwantedbias
[16]✔ ⋆
Use synthetic test
data[167]✔ ✔ ⋆ ⋆ ✩
Use GANto inform test
generation[ 190]✔ ⋆⋆
Incorporate system level
semantics[ 45]✔ ✔ ⋆ ⋆ ✩
Counterexample-guided
dataaugmentation[ 44]✔ ⋆ ✩ ⋆
Probabilistic
verification [ 173]✔ ⋆
Use confidencelevels[ 45] ✔ /check ✩ ⋆
Evaluate
interpretability[ 42]✔ ✔ ⋆ ⋆
†✔=activitythatthemethod is typicallyused in; /check=activitythatmayuse the method.
‡⋆=desideratum supported bythe method; ✩=desideratum partlysupported bythemethod.
comprehension. Finally, the majority of the methods are concerned with the Comprehensive
desideratum, while the Contextually Relevant and Comprehensible desiderata are poorly
supported.
TheopenchallengesfortheassuranceoftheModelVerificationstagearepresentedinTable 6.
MuchoftheexistingresearchforthetestingandverificationofMLmodelshasfocusedonneural
networks. Providing methods for other ML models remains an underexplored open challenge
(MV03). A small number of typical errors have been identified but more work is required to
develop methods for the detection and prevention of such errors (MV01). Measures of testing
coveragearepossibleforMLmodels,however,understandingthebenefitsofaparticularcoverage
remains an open challenge (MV02). Mapping model features to context presents challenges
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:25
Table 6. Open Challenges for the Assurance Concerns Associated with the
Model Verification (MV) Stage
ID Open Challenge Desideratum (Section)
MV01 Understanding how to detectandprotect againsttypicalerrors
Comprehensive
(Section6.4.1)MV02 Testcoverage measureswith theoreticalandempiricaljustification
MV03 Formal verificationfor ML models other thanneural networks
MV04 Mappingrequirements to modelfeatures
ContextuallyRelevant
(Section6.4.2)MV05 Generalframeworkforsynthetic testgeneration
MV06 Mappingof model-free reinforcementlearningstatestoreal-world contexts
MV07 Using proximityandsmoothness violations to improvemodels Comprehensible
MV08 Generalmethods toinform trainingbasedon performancefailures (Section6.4.3)
(MV04, MV06) both in the specification of requirements that maintain original intent and in the
analysis of complex models. Furthermore, where context is incorporated into synthetic testing,
this is achieved on a case by case basis and no general framework for such testing yet exists
(MV05). Finally, although formal methods started to appear for the verification of ML models,
they return counterexamples that are difficult to comprehend and cannot inform the actions that
shouldbeundertakentoimprove modelperformance(MV07,MV08).
7 MODEL DEPLOYMENT
The aim of the ML workflow is to produce a model to be used as part of a system. The range of
potential system types is vast. For example, it includes autonomous vehicles, personal healthcare
applications,financialsystemsanddeepspaceexploration.Howthemodelisdeployedwithinthe
system is a key consideration for an assurance argument. The last part of our survey focuses on
the assurance of this deployment: We do not cover the complete assurance of the overall system,
whichrepresentsavastscope,wellbeyondwhatcanbeaccomplishedwithinthisarticle.However,
thecloselinkbetweenthemodelandthesystemmeansthatthissectioninevitablyincludessome
system-levelconsiderations.
7.1 Inputs and Outputs
ThekeyinputartefactstothisstageoftheMLlifecycleareaverifiedmodelandassociatedverifi-
cation evidence. An understanding of the intended system use and an appreciation of the system
architectureare alsoneeded.Thekey outputis themodel,suitablydeployed withinasystem.
7.2 Activities
7.2.1 Integration. ThisactivityinvolvesintegratingtheMLmodelintothewidersystemarchi-
tecture. This requires linking system sensors to the model inputs. Likewise, model outputs need
to be provided to the wider system. Shared or concurrent processing of data, alongside non-ML
components, should be considered. A significant integration-related consideration is protecting
the wider system against the effects of the occasional incorrect output from the ML model. This
would beexpectedto bepartof system-levelsafetyanalysis.
7.2.2 Monitoring. Thisactivityconsidersthefollowingtypesofmonitoringassociatedwiththe
deployment of anML-developed modelwithinasafety-criticalsystem:
(1) Monitoring the inputsprovided to the model. This could, for example, involve checking
whetherinputsare withinacceptableboundsbefore theyareprovidedto theMLmodel.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:26 R. Ashmore et al.
(2) Monitoring the environment in which the system is used. This type of monitoring can
employ runtime verification techniques [ 53] and can be used, for example, to check that
theobservedenvironment matchesanyassumptionsmade duringtheMLworkflow[ 9].
(3) Monitoringthe internalsofthemodel.Thisisuseful,forexample,toprotectagainsttheef-
fectsofsingle-eventupsets,whereenvironmentaleffectsresultinachangeofstatewithin
amicro-electronicdevice[ 163].Protectionagainstsingle-eventupsetsmaybedatasetand
MLapproachdependent[ 175].
(4) Monitoring the outputof the model. This replicates a traditional system safety approach
in whicha high-integritymonitor isusedalongside alower-integrity item.
7.2.3 Updating. Updates are an important part of any software intensive system [ 127]. Simi-
larly, deployed ML models are expected to require updating during a system’s life. This activity
relates to managing and implementing these updates. Conceptually it also includes, as a special
case,updatesthatoccuraspartofonlinelearning(e.g.,withintheimplementationofanRL-based
model). However, since they are intimately linked to the model, these considerations are best ad-
dressedwithintheModelLearningstage.
7.3 Desiderata
From an assurance perspective, the deployed ML model should exhibit the following key
properties:
(1)Fit-for-Purpose —This property recognises that the ML model needs to be fit for the in-
tended purpose within the specific system context. In particular, it is possible for exactly
the same model to be fit-for-purpose within one system, but not fit-for-purpose within
another.Essentially,thispropertyadoptsa model-centricfocus.
(2)Tolerable—This property acknowledges that it is typically unreasonable to expect ML
modelstoachievethesamelevelsofreliabilityastraditional(hardwareorsoftware)com-
ponents. Consequently, if ML models are to be used within safety-critical systems, then
the wider system must be able to tolerate the occasional incorrect output from the ML
model. Equivalently,froma systemperspective,theMLmodelmust betolerable.
(3)Adaptable —This property is concerned with the ease with which modifications can be
madetothedeployedMLmodel.Thesemodificationsmaybemotivatedbyavarietyofrea-
sons,includingchangesintheoperating,orlegislative,environment.Moregenerally,this
propertyrecognisestheinevitabilityofchangewithinasoftwaresystem;consequently,it
is closelylinkedto theupdatingactivitydescribedin Section 7.2.3.
7.4 Methods
This section considers each of the three desiderata in turn. Methods that can be applied during
eachModelDeployment activity,to helpachievethedesiredproperty,arediscussed(Table 7).
7.4.1 Fit-for-Purpose. In order for an ML model to be fit-for-purpose within a given system
deployment, there must be confidence that the performance observed during the Model Verifi-
cation stage is representative of the deployed performance. This confidence could be negatively
impacted by changes in computational hardware between the various stages of the ML lifecy-
cle, e.g., different numerical representations can affect accuracy and energy use [ 66]. Issues as-
sociated with specialised hardware (e.g., custom processors designed for AI applications) may
partly be addressed by suitable on-target testing (i.e., testing on the hardware used in the system
deployment).
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:27
Differencesbetweentheinputsreceivedduringoperationaluseandthoseprovidedduringtrain-
ing and verification can result in levels of deployed performance that are very different to those
observedduringverification.Thereare severalwaysthesedifferencescanarise:
(1) Because the training (and verification) data were not sufficiently representative of the
operational domain [ 38]. This could be a result of inadequate training data (specifically,
theOsubset referred to in Section 4), or it could be a natural consequence of a system
beingusedin a widerdomain thanoriginally intended.
(2) As a consequence of failures in the subsystems that provide inputs to the deployed ML
model (this relates to the Fsubset). Collecting, and responding appropriately to, health
managementinformationforrelevantsubsystemscanhelpprotectagainstthispossibility.
(3) Asaresultofdeliberateactionsbyanadversary(whichrelatestothe Asubset)[61,162].
(4) Followingchangesintheunderlyingprocesstowhichthedataarerelated.Thiscouldbea
consequenceofchangesintheenvironment[ 4].Itcouldalsobeaconsequenceofchanges
inthewaythatpeople,orothersystems,behave;thisisespeciallyperniciouswhenthose
changeshavearisenasa resultof peoplereactingtothemodel’s behaviour.
The notion of the operational input distribution being different from that represented by the
trainingdataisreferredtoasdistributionshift[ 118].Mostmeasuresfordetectingthisrelyonmany
operationalinputsbeingavailable(e.g.,Reference[ 179]).Abox-basedanalysisoftrainingdatamay
allow detection on an input-by-input basis [ 12]. Learning-based approaches that compensate for
distribution shift have been proposed [ 15,18]. Nevertheless,especially for high-dimensional data
[134],timely detectionof distributionshiftis anopenchallenge(MD01in Table 8).
To demonstrate that a deployed model continues to remain fit-for-purpose, there needs to be a
way of confirming that the model’s internal behaviour is as designed. Equivalently, the provision
ofsomeformof built-intest(BIT) ishelpful.Apartialsolutioninvolvesre-purposingtraditional
BITtechniques,including:watchdogtimers[ 128],toprovideconfidencesoftwareisstillexecuting,
and behavioural monitors [ 85], to provide confidence software is behaving as expected (e.g., it is
not claiming an excessive amount of system resources). However, these general techniques need
tobe supplementedbyapproachesspecificallytailoredforMLmodels [ 151].
ForanMLmodeltobeusablewithinasafety-criticalsystem,itmaybenecessaryforitsoutput
to be explainable (e.g., to support post-incident investigation). As discussed earlier, this is closely
related to the Interpretable desideratum, discussed in Section 5. We also note that the open chal-
lenge relating to the global behaviour of a complex model (ML09 in Table 4)i sr e l e v a n tt ot h e
ModelDeployment stage.
To support post-accident, or post-incident, investigations, sufficient information needs to be
recordedtoallowtheMLmodel’sbehaviourtobesubsequentlyexplained.Asaminimum,model
inputs should be recorded; if the model’s internal state is dynamic, then this should also be
recorded. Furthermore, it is very likely that accident, or incident, investigation data will have
to be recorded on a continual basis, and in such a way that it will usable after a crash and is
protectedagainstinadvertent(ordeliberate)alteration.Understandingwhatinformationneedsto
be recorded, at what frequency and for how long it needs to be maintained is an open challenge
(MD02inTable 8).
7.4.2 Tolerable. TotolerateoccasionalincorrectoutputsfromadeployedMLmodel,thesystem
needstodotwothings.Firstly,itneedstodetectwhenanoutputisincorrect.Secondly,itneedsto
replacetheincorrectoutputwithasuitablevaluetoallowsystemprocessingactivitiestocontinue.
An ML model may produce an incorrect output when used outside the intended operational
environment. This could be detected by monitoring for distribution shift, as indicated in the
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:28 R. Ashmore et al.
preceding section, possibly alongside monitoring the environment. An incorrect output may also
be produced if the model is provided with inappropriate inputs. Again, this could be detected
by monitoring for distribution shift or by monitoring the health of the system components that
provide inputs to the model. In critical applications, it may be appropriate to define a minimum
equipment list. This list should describe the equipment that must be present and functioning
correctly to allow safe use of the system [ 119]. This approach can also protect the deployed ML
model against system-level changesthatwouldinadvertently affectitsperformance.
It may also be possible for the ML model to calculate its own “measure of confidence,” which
could be used to support the detection of an incorrect output. The ICM has been proposed [ 172],
butthisrequiresadistancemetrictobedefinedontheinputdomain,whichcanbedifficult.More
generally,derivingan appropriatemeasureof confidenceisan openchallenge (MD03in Table 8).
Anotherwayofdetectingincorrectoutputsinvolvescomparingthemwith“reasonable”values.
This could, for example, take the form of introducing a simple monitor, acting directly on the
outputprovidedbytheMLmodel[ 23].Ifthemonitordetectsaninvalidoutput,thenthemodelis
re-run(withthesameinput,ifthemodelisnon-deterministic,orwithadifferentinput).Defininga
monitorthatprotectssafetyispossible[ 105],butprovidingsufficientprotectionyetstillallowing
theMLmodelsufficientfreedominbehaviour,sothatthebenefitsofusinganML-basedapproach
can berealised,isan openchallenge (MD04inTable 8).
The difficulty with defining a monitor may be overcome by using multiple, ‘independent’ ML
models, along with an “aggregator” that combines their multiple outputs into a single output.
This can be viewed as an ML-based implementation of the concept of n-version programming
[34].Theapproachhassomesimilaritytoensemblelearning[ 147],butitsmotivationisdifferent:
ensemble learning aims to improve performance in a general sense, while using multiple, inde-
pendent models as part of a system architecture aims to protect against the consequences of a
singlemodeloccasionallyproducinganincorrectoutput.Whilstthisapproachmayhavevalue,it
is not clear how much independence can be achieved, especially if models are trained from data
that have a common generative model [ 49]. Consequently, understanding the level of indepen-
dencethatcanbeintroducedintomodelstrainedonthesamedataisanopenchallenge(MD05in
Table8).
If an incorrect output is detected, then, as noted above, a replacement value needs to be pro-
vided totherestof thesystem.Runtimeverificationmethodshavebeenintroducedinwhichthis
is achieved using software components developed and verified using traditional techniques [ 32,
65,78].IntheSimplexarchitecture[ 78],averifiedsupervisorycontrollerswitchescontrolfroman
unverifiable ‘smart’ controller to a verified safety controller when the former misbehaves. Alter-
natively, a fixed “safe” value or the “last-good” output provided by the ML model could be used.
In this approach, a safety switch monitors the output from the ML model. If this is invalid, then
theswitchisthrownandtheoutputfromthe‘alternative’approachisusedinstead.Thisassumes
thataninvalidoutputcanbedetectedand,furthermore,thatasubstitute,potentiallysuboptimal,
outputcanbeprovidedinsuchcases.
The monitor, aggregator and switch model-deployment architectures could readily accommo-
date human interaction. For example, a human could play the role of a monitor, or that allocated
to traditionalsoftware(e.g.,whenan autonomousvehiclehandscontrolbackto ahuman driver).
7.4.3 Adaptable. Like all software, a deployed ML model would be expected to change during
the lifetime of the system in which it is deployed [ 127]. Indeed, the nature of ML, especially the
possibility of operational systems capturing data that can be used to train subsequent versions
of a model, suggests that ML models may change more rapidly than is the case for traditional
software.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:29
AkeyconsiderationwhenallowingMLmodelstobeupdatedisthemanagementofthechange
fromanoldversionofamodeltoanewversion.Severalapproachescanbeusedforthispurpose:
(1) Placingthesystemina“safestate”forthedurationoftheupdateprocess.Inthecaseofan
autonomous vehicle, this state could be stationary, with the parking brake applied, with
nooccupantsandwithalldoorslocked.Inaddition,updatescouldberestrictedtocertain
geographic locations (e.g., the owner’s driveway or the supplier’s service area). The safe
statecouldbedeterminedbyatechnicalprocess,oritcouldbespecifiedbytheuser[ 127].
(2) Ifitisnotfeasible,ordesirable,forthesystemtobeputintoasafestate,thenanalternative
is for the system to run two identical channels, one of which is “live” and the other of
which is a “backup.” The live model can be used whilst the backup is updated. Once the
update is complete, the backup can become live and the other channel can be updated.
Thisisa specificimplementation of theA/B swapdiscussedin Reference[ 27].
(3) Another alternative is to use an approach deliberately designed to enable runtime code
replacement (or “hot code loading”). This functionality is available, e.g., within Erlang
[31].
MLmodelupdatingresemblestheuseoffield-loadablesoftwareintheaerospacedomain[ 143].
As such, several considerations are common to both activities: detecting corrupted or partially
loaded software; checking compatibility; and preventing inadvertent triggering of the loading
function. Approaches for protecting against corrupted updates should cover inadvertent data
changesand deliberateattacksaimingto circumventthisprotection[ 112].
In the common scenario where multiple instances of the same system have be deployed (e.g.,
when a manufacturer sells many units of an autonomous vehicle or medical diagnosis system)
updates need to be managed at the “fleet” level. There may, for example, be a desire to gradually
rolloutanupdatesothatitseffectscanbemeasured,takingdueconsiderationofanyethicalissues
associatedwithsuchanapproach.Moregenerally,thereisaneedtomonitorandcontrolfleet-wide
diversity[ 14].Understandinghow bestto do thisis anopenchallenge (MD06in Table 8).
7.5 Summary and Open Challenges
Table7summarises assurance methods associated with the Model Deployment stage, matched
to the associated activities and desiderata. The table shows that only two methods support the
activityofupdatinganMLmodel.Thismayreflectthecurrentstateofthemarketforautonomous
systems: There are few, if any, cases where a manufacturer has a large number of such systems
in operational use. Given the link between the updating activity and the Adaptable desideratum,
similar reasonsmay explainthelack of methodsto supportan adaptablesystemdeployment.
The open challenges associated with the System Deployment stage (Table 8) include the fol-
lowing: concerns that extend to the Model Learning and Model Verification stages, e.g., provid-
ing measures of confidence (MD03); concerns that relate to system architectures, e.g., detecting
distribution shift (MD01), supporting incident investigations (MD02), providing suitably flexible
monitors (MD04) and understanding independence (MD05); and concerns that apply to system
“fleets”(MD06).
8 CONCLUSION
Recent advances in machine learning underpin the development of many successful systems. ML
technology is increasingly at the core of sophisticated functionality provided by smart devices,
householdappliancesandonlineservices,oftenunbeknownsttotheirusers.Despitethediversity
of these ML applications, they share a common characteristic: none is safety critical. Extending
the success of machine learning to safety-critical systems holds great potential for application
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:30 R. Ashmore et al.
Table 7. Assurance Methods for the Model Deployment Stage
Associated activities†Supporteddesiderata‡
Method Integration Monitoring Updating Fit-for-Purpose Tolerable Adaptable
U s eth es amenu mer ical
precision fortrainingand
operation✔ ⋆
EstablishWCET [ 184] ✔ ⋆ ✩
Monitor for distribution
shift[118], [12]/check ✔ ⋆ ⋆
ImplementgeneralBIT
[128], [85], [151]✔✔ ⋆⋆
Explainanindividual
output[138]/check ✔ ⋆
Record informationfor
post-accident(or
post-incident)investigation✔ ⋆
Monitor theenvironment
[9]✔ ⋆ ⋆
Monitor healthof
input-providing
subsystems✔ ⋆⋆
Provide aconfidence
measure[ 172]✔ ✔ ⋆
Use anarchitecture that
toleratesincorrect outputs
[23], [32], [34]✔ ⋆
Managethe updateprocess
[143]/check ✔ ⋆
Control fleet-wide
diversity [ 14]✔ ⋆
†✔=activitythatthe method istypicallyused in; /check=activitythatmayuse the method.
‡⋆=desideratum supported bythemethod; ✩=desideratum partlysupported bythe method.
Table 8. Open Challenges for the Assurance Concerns Associated with the
Model Deployment (MD) Stage
ID Open Challenge Desideratum (Section)
MD01Timelydetectionof distribution shift,especiallyfor high-dimensional
datasets Fit-for-Purpose (Section 7.4.1)
MD02 Informationrecording to support accidentor incidentinvestigation
MD03 Providing asuitablemeasure of confidencein ML modeloutput
Tolerable(Section 7.4.2) MD04 Definingsuitablyflexiblesafetymonitors
MD05Understanding thelevelof independencethatcanbeintroduced into
modelstrained onthe samedata
MD06 Monitoring andcontrollingfleet-wide diversity Adaptable(Section 7.4.3)
domainsrangingfromhealthcareandtransportationtomanufacturing,butrequirestheassurance
of the ML models deployed within such systems. Our article explained that this assurance must
cover all stages of the ML lifecycle, defined assurance desiderata for each such stage, surveyed
themethodsavailable toachievethesedesiderata,andhighlightedremaining openchallenges.
For the Data Management stage, our survey shows that a wide range of data collection,
preprocessing, augmentation and analysis methods can help ensure that ML training and
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:31
verification datasets are Relevant,Complete ,Balanced ,a n d Accurate. Nevertheless, further
researchisrequiredtodevisemethodscapableofdemonstratingthatthesedataaresufficientlyse-
cure,fit-for-purposeand,whensimulationisusedtosynthesisedata,thatsimulationsaresuitably
realistic.
The Model Learning stage has been the focus of tremendous research effort, and a vast ar-
ray of model selection and learning methods are available to support the development of Per-
formantandRobustML models. In contrast, there is a significant need for additional hyperpa-
rameter selection and transfer learning methods, and for research into ensuring that ML models
areReusable andInterpretable , in particular through providing context-relevant explanations of
behaviour.
Assurance concerns associated with the Model Verification stage are addressed by numerous
test-based verification methods and by a small repertoire of recently introduced formal verifica-
tion methods. The verification results provided by these methods are often Comprehensive (for
the ML model aspects being verified) and, in some cases, Contextually Relevant .H o w e v e r ,t h e r e
are currently insufficient methods capable of encoding the requirements of the model being veri-
fied into suitable tests and formally verifiable properties. Furthermore, ensuring that verification
results are Comprehensible isstill verychallenging.
The integration and monitoring activities from the Model Deployment stage are supported
by a sizeable set of methods that can help address the Fit-for-Purpose andTolerable desiderata
of deployed ML models. These methods are often inspired by analogous methods for the in-
tegration and monitoring of software components developed using traditional engineering ap-
proaches.Incontrast,MLmodelupdatingusingdatacollectedduringoperationhasnoclearsoft-
ware engineering counterpart. As such, model updating methods are scarce and typically unable
to provide the assurance needed to deploy ML models that are Adaptable within safety-critical
systems.
A further open challenge for assuring the ML lifecycle is the determination of effective trade-
offs between the desiderata over the four stages. In many applications, the desiderata are closely
related, either reinforcing each other or placing competing demands on the ML lifecycle activi-
ties.Asanexample,ahighlyReusableMLmodelwilllikelybeeasilyAdaptable,butmightbeless
ContextuallyRelevant.Furthertradeoffsariseintheassurancedomain,e.g.,anExplainablemodel
might introducevulnerabilitiesexploitable ina cyberattack[ 77].
This brief summary shows that considerable research is still needed to address outstanding as-
suranceconcernsassociatedwitheverystageoftheMLlifecycle.Ingeneral,usingMLcomponents
withinsafety-criticalsystemsposesnumerousopenchallenges.Atthesametime,theresearchre-
quired to address these challenges can build on a promising combination of rigorous methods
developedbyseveraldecadesofsustainedadvancesinmachinelearning,insoftwareandsystems
engineering,and inassurancedevelopment.
REFERENCES
[1] Mahdieh Abbasi, Arezoo Rajabi, Azadeh Sadat Mozafari, Rakesh B. Bobba, and Christian Gagne. 2018. Controlling
over-generalization and its effect on adversarial examples generation and detection. arXiv:1808.08282. Retrieved
fromhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1808.08282 .
[2] Amina Adadi and Mohammed Berrada. 2018. Peeking inside the black-box: A survey on Explainable Artificial In-
telligence(XAI). IEEEAccess 6(2018),52138–52160.
[3] Ajaya Adhikari, D. M. Tax, Riccardo Satta, and Matthias Fath. 2018. Example and Feature importance-based Expla-
nationsforBlack-boxMachineLearningModels.arXiv:1812.09044.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.09044 .
[4] Rocío Alaiz-Rodríguez and Nathalie Japkowicz. 2008. Assessing the impact of changing environments on classi-
fier performance. In Proceedings of the Conference of the Canadian Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence .
Springer, 13–24.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:32 R. Ashmore et al.
[5] RobAlexander,HeatherRebeccaHawkins,andAndrewJohnRae.2015. SituationCoverage—ACoverageCriterionfor
TestingAutonomousRobots .TechnicalReport YCS-2015-496.Departmentof Computer Science,University of York.
[6] Hassan Abu Alhaija, Siva Karthik Mustikovela, Lars Mescheder, Andreas Geiger, and Carsten Rother. 2018. Aug-
mentedrealitymeetscomputervision:Efficientdatagenerationforurbandrivingscenes. Int.J.Comput.Vis. 126,9
(2018),961–972.
[7] Maksym Andriushchenko and Matthias Hein. 2019. Provably robust boosted decision stumps and trees against
adversarialattacks.In Advances in Neural Information ProcessingSystems . 13017–13028.
[8] D.Anguita,A.Ghio,L.Oneto,X.Parra,andJ.L.Reyes-Ortiz.2012.Humanactivityrecognitiononsmartphonesusing
a multiclass hardware-friendly support vector machine. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Ambient
AssistedLiving .216–223.
[9] Adina Aniculaesei, Daniel Arnsberger, Falk Howar, and Andreas Rausch. 2016. Towards the verification of safety-
criticalautonomoussystemsindynamicenvironments.In ProceedingsoftheWorkshoponVerificationandValidation
ofCyber-Physical Systems (V2CPS@IFM’16) .79–90.
[10] AntreasAntoniou,AmosStorkey,andHarrisonEdwards.2017.Dataaugmentationgenerativeadversarialnetworks.
arXiv:1711.04340.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.04340 .
[11] Maziar Arjomandi, Shane Agostino, Matthew Mammone, Matthieu Nelson, and Tong Zhou. 2006. Classification
of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. Report for Mechanical Engineering Class . Technical Report. University of Adelaide,
Australia.
[12] Rob Ashmore and Matthew Hill. 2018. Boxing clever: Practical techniques for gaining insights into training data
and monitoring distribution shift. In Proceedings of theInternational Conference on Computer Safety, Reliability, and
Security. Springer, 393–405.
[13] Rob Ashmore and Elizabeth Lennon. 2017. Progress towards the assurance of non-traditional software. In Develop-
ments in System Safety Engineering, Proceedings ofthe25th Safety-Critical Systems Symposium . 33–48.
[14] Rob Ashmore and Bhopinder Madahar. 2019. Rethinking diversity in the context of autonomous systems. In Engi-
neering Safe Autonomy,Proceedings ofthe27th Safety-Critical Systems Symposium . 175–192.
[15] Kamyar Azizzadenesheli, Anqi Liu, Fanny Yang, and Animashree Anandkumar. 2019. Regularized learning for do-
mainadaptationunder labelshifts.arXiv:1903.09734.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.09734 .
[16] R.K.E.Bellamy,K.Dey,M.Hind,S.C.Hoffman,S.Houde,K.Kannan,P.Lohia,J.Martino,S.Mehta,A.Mojsilović,S.
Nagar,K.N.Ramamurthy,J.Richards,D.Saha,P.Sattigeri,M.Singh,K.R.Varshney,andY.Zhang.2019.AIfairness
360:An extensibletoolkit fordetectingandmitigatingalgorithmic bias. IB MJ.R e s.De v . 63,4/5(2019),4:1–4:15.
[17] James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. 2012. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. J .M a c h .L e a r n .R e s .
13(Feb.2012),281–305.
[18] SteffenBickel,MichaelBrückner,andTobiasScheffer.2009.Discriminativelearningundercovariateshift. J.Mach.
Learn.Res. 10,9 (2009),2137–2155.
[19] Arijit Bishnu, Sameer Desai,Arijit Ghosh, Mayank Goswami,andPaul Subhabrata. 2015.Uniformity of point sam-
ples in metric spaces using gap ratio. In Proceedings of the 12th Annual Conference on Theory and Applications of
Modelsof Computation .347–358.
[20] Christopher M.Bishop. 2006. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning . Springer.
[21] RobinBloomfieldandPeterBishop.2010.Safetyandassurancecases:Past,presentandpossiblefuture—AnAdelard
perspective.In Making Systems Safer . Springer,51–67.
[22] Barry Boehm and Wilfred J. Hansen. 2000. Spiral Development: Experience, Principles, and Refinements . Technical
ReportCMU/SEI-2000-SR-008. Carnegie MellonUniversity.
[23] ChrisBogdiukiewicz,MichaelButler,ThaiSonHoang,MartinPaxton,JamesSnook,XanthippeWaldron,andToby
Wilkinson. 2017. Formal development of policing functions for intelligent systems. In Proceedings of the 28th Inter-
national Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering . IEEE, 194–204.
[24] AndrewP.Bradley.1997.TheuseoftheareaundertheROCcurveintheevaluationofmachinelearningalgorithms.
Pattern Recogn. 30,7(1997),1145–1159.
[25] HoussemBenBraiekandFoutseKhomh.2018.OnTestingMachineLearningPrograms.arXiv:1812.02257.Retrieved
fromhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02257 .
[26] CarlaE.BrodleyandMarkA.Friedl.1999.Identifyingmislabeledtrainingdata. J.Artif.Intell.Res. 11(1999),131–167.
[27] Atilla Bulmus, Axel Freiwald, and Chris Wunderlich. 2017. Over the Air Software Update Realization within Generic
Modules with Microcontrollers Using ExternalSerial FLASH .TechnicalReport.SAE TechnicalPaper.
[28] Jonathod Byrd and Zachary Lipton. 2019. What is the effect of importance weighting in deep learning?
arXiv:1812.03372.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.03372 .
[29] RaduCalinescu,DannyWeyns,SimosGerasimou,MuhammadUsmanIftikhar,IbrahimHabli,andTimKelly.2018.
Engineeringtrustworthyself-adaptivesoftwarewithdynamicassurancecases. IEEETrans.Softw.Eng. 44,11(2018),
1039–1069.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:33
[30] CristianS.CaludeandGiuseppeLongo.2017.Thedelugeofspuriouscorrelationsinbigdata. Found.Sci. 22,3(2017),
595–612.
[31] RichardCarlsson,BjörnGustavsson,ErikJohansson,ThomasLindgren,Sven-OlofNyström,MikaelPettersson,and
RobertVirding.2000. CoreErlang1.0LanguageSpecification .TechnicalReport.InformationTechnologyDepartment,
UppsalaUniversity.
[32] PaulCaseley.2016.Claimsandarchitecturestorationateonautomaticandautonomousfunctions.In Proceedingsof
the11th International ConferenceonSystem Safety and Cyber-Security . IET, 1–6.
[33] Nitesh V. Chawla, Aleksandar Lazarevic, Lawrence O. Hall, and Kevin W. Bowyer. 2003. SMOTEBoost: Improving
prediction of the minority class in boosting. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Principles of Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery .107–119.
[34] Liming Chen and Algirdas Avizienis. 1978. N-version programming: A fault-tolerance approach to reliability of
softwareoperation.In Proceedingsofthe8thIEEEInternationalSymposiumonFault-TolerantComputing ,V ol.1.3–9.
[35] XinyunChen,ChangLiu,BoLi,KimberleyLu,andDawnSong.2017.TargetedBackdoorAttacksonDeepLearning
Systems Using DataPoisoning. arXiv:1712.05526.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.05526 .
[36] Heng-Tze Cheng, Levent Koc, Jeremiah Harmsen, Tal Shaked, Tushar Chandra, Hrishi Aradhye, Glen Anderson,
Greg Corrado, Wei Chai, Mustafa Ispir, Zakaria Anil, Rohan an Haque, Lichan Hong, Vihan Jain, Xiabing Liu, and
Hemal Shah. 2016. Wide & deep learning for recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Deep
Learning for Recommender Systems . ACM,7–10.
[37] Patryk Chrabaszcz, Ilya Loshchilov, and Frank Hutter. 2018. Back to basics: Benchmarking canonical evolution
strategies forplayingAtari.arXiv:1802.08842.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.08842 .
[38] DavidA.CieslakandNiteshV.Chawla.2009.Aframeworkformonitoringclassifiersperformance:Whenandwhy
failureoccurs? Knowl.Inf.Syst. 18,1(2009),83–108.
[39] Adnan Darwiche. 2018.Human-levelintelligenceor animal-likeabilities? Comm. ACM 61,10(2018),56–67.
[40] JiaDeng,WeiDong,RichardSocher,Li-JiaLi,KaiLi,andLiFei-Fei.2009.Imagenet:Alarge-scalehierarchicalimage
database.In Proceedings oftheIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionand PatternRecognition . 248–255.
[41] YueDeng,FengBao,YouyongKong,ZhiquanRen,andQionghaiDai.2017.Deepdirectreinforcementlearningfor
financialsignalrepresentationandtrading. IEEETrans.Neural Netw.Learn. Syst. 28,3(2017),653–664.
[42] Finale Doshi-Velez and Been Kim. 2017. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine learning.
arXiv:1702.08608.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.08608 .
[43] Tommaso Dreossi, Daniel J. Fremont, Shromona Ghosh, Edward Kim, Hadi Ravanbakhsh, Marcell Vazquez-
Chanlatte, and Sanjit A Seshia. 2019. VERIFAI: A toolkit for the design and analysis of artificial intelligence-based
systems. arXiv:1902.04245.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.04245 .
[44] Tommaso Dreossi, Shromona Ghosh, Xiangyu Yue, Kurt Keutzer, Alberto Sangiovanni-Vincentelli, and Sanjit A
Seshia. 2018. Counterexample-guided data augmentation. arXiv:1805.06962. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/
1805.06962 .
[45] Tommaso Dreossi, Somesh Jha, and Sanjit A. Seshia. 2018. Semantic adversarial deep learning. arXiv:1804.07045.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.07045 .
[46] Chris Drummond and Robert C. Holte. 2006. Cost curves: An improved method for visualizing classifier perfor-
mance.Mach. Learn. 65,1(2006),95–130.
[47] Souradeep Dutta, Xin Chen, Susmit Jha, Sriram Sankaranarayanan, and Ashish Tiwari. 2019. Sherlock-A tool for
verificationofneuralnetworkfeedbacksystems:Demoabstract.In Proceedingsofthe22ndACMInternationalCon-
ference onHybrid Systems: Computationand Control .262–263.
[48] Ruediger Ehlers. 2017. Formal verification of piece-wise linear feed-forward neural networks. In Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Automated Technologyfor Verification andAnalysis .Springer,269–286.
[49] AlhusseinFawzi,HamzaFawzi,andOmarFawzi.2018.Adversarialvulnerabilityforanyclassifier.arXiv:1802.08686.
Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.08686 .
[50] AlhusseinFawzi,OmarFawzi,andPascalFrossard.2015.Fundamentallimitsonadversarialrobustness.In Proceed-
ings oftheICML WorkshoponDeepLearning .
[51] AlhusseinFawzi,Seyed-MohsenMoosavi-Dezfooli,andPascalFrossard.2016.Robustnessofclassifiers:Fromadver-
sarialtorandom noise.In Proceedings oftheAnnualConferenceonNeural InformationProcessingSystems (NIPS’16).
Curran Associates Inc.,RedHook, NY, 1632–1640.
[52] MichaelFeldman,SorelleA.Friedler,JohnMoeller,CarlosScheidegger,andSureshVenkatasubramanian.2015.Cer-
tifying and removing disparate impact. In Proceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery andData Mining . ACM, 259–268.
[53] Angelo Ferrando, Louise A. Dennis, Davide Ancona, Michael Fisher, and Viviana Mascardi. 2018. Verifying and
validating autonomous systems: Towards an integrated approach. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Runtime Verification . Springer,263–281.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:34 R. Ashmore et al.
[54] Peter Flach. 2019. Performance evaluation in machine learning: The good, the bad, the ugly and the way forward.
InProceedings ofthe33rd AAAIConference onArtificial Intelligence .9808–9814.
[55] MichaelForsting. 2017.Machinelearningwillchange medicine. J.Nucl. Med. 58,3 (2017),357–358.
[56] Yoav Freund, Robert Schapire, and Naoki Abe. 1999. A short introduction to boosting. J. Jpn. Soc. Artif. Intell. 14,
771–780(1999),1612.
[57] YoavFreundandRobertE.Schapire.1997.Adecision-theoreticgeneralizationofon-linelearningandanapplication
toboosting. J.Comput.Syst.Sci. 55,1 (1997),119–139.
[58] TimonGehr,MatthewMirman,DanaDrachsler-Cohen,PetarTsankov,SwaratChaudhuri,andMartinVechev.2018.
AI2: Safety and robustness certification of neural networks with abstract interpretation. In Proceedings of the 2018
IEEESymposium on Security and Privacy . IEEE, 3–18.
[59] AurélienGéron.2017. Hands-onMachineLearningwithScikit-LearnandTensorFlow:Concepts,Tools,andTechniques
toBuild IntelligentSystems .O’ReillyMedia,Inc.
[60] IanGoodfellow,Yoshua Bengio,Aaron Courville, andYoshua Bengio.2016. DeepLearning . Vol. 1. MIT Press.
[61] Ian J. Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. 2014. Explaining and harnessing adversarial examples.
arXiv:1412.6572.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6572 .
[62] Tianyu Gu, Brendan Dolan-Gavitt, and Siddharth Garg. 2017. BadNets: Identifying vulnerabilities in the machine
learningmodelsupplychain.arXiv:1708.06733.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.06733 .
[63] Guo Haixiang, Li Yijing, Jennifer Shang, Gu Mingyun, Huang Yuanyue, and Gong Bing. 2017. Learning from class-
imbalanceddata:Review of methods andapplications. ExpertSyst. Appl. 73(2017),220–239.
[64] JeffHeaton.2016.Anempiricalanalysisoffeatureengineeringforpredictivemodeling.In ProceedingsofSoutheast-
Con’16.IEEE, 1–6.
[65] Constance L. Heitmeyer,Ralph D. Jeffords, and Bruce G. Labaw.1996.Automated consistency checking of require-
mentsspecifications. A CMT r a ns.S of tw .Eng .Me thodol. 5,3(1996),231–261.
[66] Parker Hill, Babak Zamirai, Shengshuo Lu, Yu-Wei Chao, Michael Laurenzano, Mehrzad Samadi, Marios C.
Papaefthymiou, Scott A. Mahlke, Thomas F. Wenisch, Jia Deng, Lingjia Tang, and Jason Mars. [n.d.]. Rethinking
NumericalRepresentationsforDeepNeuralNetworks.arXiv:1808.02513.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.
02513.
[67] GeoffreyE.Hinton,NitishSrivastava,AlexKrizhevsky,IlyaSutskever,andRuslanSalakhutdinov.[n.d.].Improving
neuralnetworksbypreventingco-adaptationoffeaturedetectors.arXiv:1207.0580.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/
abs/1207.0580 .
[68] XiaoweiHuang,MartaKwiatkowska,SenWang,andMinWu.2017.Safetyverificationofdeepneuralnetworks.In
Proceedingsofthe29thInternationalConferenceonComputerAidedVerification ,RupakMajumdarandViktorKuncak
(Eds.),Lecture Notesin ComputerScience, Vol. 10426.Springer, 3–29.
[69] Zhongling Huang, Zongxu Pan, and Bin Lei. 2017. Transfer learning with deep convolutional neural network for
SAR targetclassificationwithlimitedlabeleddata. Remote Sens. 9,9(2017),907.
[70] Casidhe Hutchison, Milda Zizyte, Patrick E. Lanigan, David Guttendorf, Michael Wagner, Claire Le Goues, and
PhilipKoopman.2018.Robustnesstestingofautonomysoftware.In Proceedingsofthe40thIEEE/ACMInternational
Conferenceon Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice . 276–285.
[71] FrankHutter,JörgLücke,andLarsSchmidt-Thieme.2015.Beyondmanualtuningofhyperparameters. Künstl.Intell.
29,4(2015),329–337.
[72] DidacGilDeLaIglesiaandDannyWeyns.2015.MAPE-Kformaltemplatestorigorouslydesignbehaviorsforself-
adaptivesystems. A CMT ra ns.A u ton.A da pt.Sy st. 10,3(2015),15.
[73] Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. 2015. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
internalcovariateshift.arXiv:1502.03167.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1502.03167 .
[74] Bandar Seri Iskandar. 2017. Terrorism detection based on sentiment analysis using machine learning. J. Eng. Appl.
Sci.12,3(2017),691–698.
[75] ISO.2018. Road Vehicles—Functional Safety: Part 6 .TechnicalReport BS ISO26262-6:2018.ISO.
[76] Nathalie Japkowicz. 2001. Concept-learning in the presence of between-class and within-class imbalances. In Pro-
ceedings of theConferenceoftheCanadian Society forComputational Studies ofIntelligence .Springer, 67–77.
[77] NikitaJohnsonandTimKelly.2019.Devil’sinthedetail:Through-lifesafetyandsecurityco-assuranceusingSSAF.
InProceedings ofthe38th International Conference on ComputerSafety, Reliability, and Security . Springer, 299–314.
[78] Taylor T. Johnson, Stanley Bak, Marco Caccamo, and Lui Sha. 2016. Real-time reachability for verified Simplex
design.A CMT r a ns.Em bed .Com p u t.S y st. 15,2(2016),1–27.
[79] M. H. Kabir, M. R. Hoque, H. Seo, and S. H. Yang. 2015. Machine learning based adaptive context-aware system for
smarthome environment. Int.J.Smart Home 9,11(2015),55–62.
[80] Faisal Kamiran and Toon Calders. 2012. Data preprocessing techniques for classification without discrimination.
Knowl.Inf.Syst. 33,1(2012),1–33.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:35
[81] GuyKatz,ClarkBarrett,DavidL.Dill,KyleJulian,andMykelJ.Kochenderfer.2017.Reluplex:AnefficientSMTsolver
for verifying deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Aided Verification .
Springer, 97–117.
[82] Guy Katz, Derek A. Huang, Duligur Ibeling, Kyle Julian, Christopher Lazarus, Rachel Lim, Parth Shah, Shantanu
Thakoor, Haoze Wu, Aleksandar Zeljić, et al. 2019. The marabou framework for verification and analysis of deep
neural networks. In Proceedings oftheInternational ConferenceonComputer Aided Verification . Springer,443–452.
[83] Shachar Kaufman, Saharon Rosset, Claudia Perlich, and Ori Stitelman. 2012. Leakage in data mining: Formulation,
detection, andavoidance. ACMTrans.Knowl.Discov.Data 6,4(2012),15.
[84] Jeffrey O.Kephart andDavidM. Chess. 2003.The vision of autonomiccomputing. Computer 36,1(2003),41–50.
[85] MuhammadTaimoorKhan,DimitriosSerpanos,andHowardShrobe.2016.Arigorousandefficientrun-timesecurity
monitor for real-time critical embedded system applications. In Proceedings of the 3rd World Forum on Internet of
Things.IEEE, 100–105.
[86] Udayan Khurana, Horst Samulowitz, and Deepak Turaga. 2018. Feature engineering for predictive modeling using
reinforcementlearning.In Proceedings ofthe32nd AAAIConferenceonArtificial Intelligence .3407–3414.
[87] Roger E.Kirk. 2007.Experimentaldesign. WileyOnlineLibrary.
[88] Tom Ko, Vijayaditya Peddinti, Daniel Povey, and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2015. Audio augmentation for speech recog-
nition. In Proceedings ofthe16th Annual ConferenceoftheInternational Speech Communication Association .
[89] PatrickKoch,BrettWujek,OlegGolovidov,andStevenGardner.2017.Automatedhyperparametertuningforeffec-
tivemachinelearning.In Proceedings of theSASGlobal Forum Conference .
[90] Matthieu Komorowski, Leo A. Celi, Omar Badawi, Anthony C. Gordon, and A. Aldo Faisal. 2018. The artificial
intelligence clinician learns optimal treatment strategies for sepsis in intensive care. Nat. Med. 24, 11 (2018), 1716–
1720.
[91] PhilipKoopmanandFrankFratrik.2019.Howmanyoperationaldesigndomains,objects,andevents?In Proceedings
of theAAAIWorkshoponArtificial Intelligence Safety .
[92] Philip Koopman, Aaron Kane, and Jen Black. 2019. Credible autonomy safety argumentation. In Proceedings of the
27th Safety-Critical Systems Symposium .
[93] S. B. Kotsiantis, Dimitris Kanellopoulos, and P. E. Pintelas. 2006. Data preprocessing for supervised leaning. Int. J.
Comput. Sci. 1,2(2006),111–117.
[94] S.B.Kotsiantis,D.Kanellopoulos,andP.E.Pintelas.2007.Datapreprocessingforsupervisedleaning. Int.J.Comput.
Electr. Autom.Contr.Inf.Eng. 1,12(2007),4104–4109.
[95] Samantha Krening, Brent Harrison, Karen M. Feigh, Charles Lee Isbell, Mark Riedl, and Andrea Thomaz. 2017.
Learningfromexplanationsusingsentimentandadvicein RL. IEEET ra ns.Cog n.De v .Sy st. 9,1(2017),44–55.
[96] Isaac Lage, Andrew Ross, Kim Been, Samuel Gershman, and Finale Doshi-Velez. 2018. Human-in-the-loop inter-
pretabilityprior. In Proceedings of theConferenceonNeural InformationProcessing Systems .10180–10189.
[97] YannLeCun,LéonBottou,YoshuaBengio,andPatrickHaffner.1998.Gradient-basedlearningappliedtodocument
recognition. Proc. IEEE 86,11(1998),2278–2323.
[98] Joseph Lemley, Filip Jagodzinski, and Razvan Andonie. 2016. Big holes in big data: A Monte Carlo algorithm for
detectinglargehyper-rectanglesinhighdimensionaldata.In Proceedings oftheIEEEComputerSoftwareandAppli-
cations Conference .563–571.
[99] Zachary C. Lipton. 2016. The mythos of model interpretability. arXiv:1606.03490. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/
abs/1606.03490 .
[100] Yingqi Liu, Wen-Chuan Lee, Guanhong Tao, Shiqing Ma, Yousra Aafer, and Xiangyu Zhang. 2019. ABS: Scanning
neural networks for back-doors by artificial brain stimulation. In Proceedings of the 2019 ACM SIGSAC Conference
on Computer and Communications Security . 1265–1282.
[101] Victoria López, Alberto Fernández, Salvador García, Vasile Palade, and Francisco Herrera. 2013. An insight into
classificationwithimbalanceddata:Empiricalresultsandcurrenttrendsonusingdataintrinsiccharacteristics. Inf.
Sci.250(2013),113–141.
[102] Gustavo A. Lujan-Moreno, Phillip R. Howard, Omar G. Rojas, and Douglas C. Montgomery. 2018. Design of ex-
periments and response surface methodology to tune machine learning hyperparameters, with a random forest
case-study. Expert Syst.Appl. 109(2018),195–205.
[103] LeiMa,FelixJuefei-Xu,MinhuiXue,BoLi,LiLi,YangLiu,andJianjunZhao.2019.DeepCT:Tomographiccombina-
torialtestingfordeeplearningsystems.In Proceedingsofthe26thIEEEInternationalConferenceonSoftwareAnalysis,
Evolutionand Reengineering . IEEE, 614–618.
[104] Lei Ma, Felix Juefei-Xu, Fuyuan Zhang, Jiyuan Sun, Minhui Xue, Bo Li, Chunyang Chen, Ting Su, Li Li, Yang
Liu, Jianjun Zhao, and Yadong Wang. 2018. DeepGauge: Multi-granularity testing criteria for deep learning sys-
tems. InProceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering . ACM, 120–
131.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:36 R. Ashmore et al.
[105] MathildeMachin,JérémieGuiochet,HélèneWaeselynck,Jean-PaulBlanquart,MatthieuRoy,andLolaMasson.2018.
SMOF: A safety monitoring framework for autonomous systems. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybernet. Syst. 48, 5 (2018),
702–715.
[106] Aravindh Mahendran and Andrea Vedaldi. 2015. Understanding deep image representations by inverting them. In
Proceedings of theIEEEConferenceonComputerVisionand PatternRecognition . 5188–5196.
[107] Spyros Makridakis. 2017. The forthcoming Artificial Intelligence (AI) revolution: Its impact on society and firms.
Futures90(2017),46–60.
[108] Pedro Marcelino.2018.Transferlearningfrompre-trained models.In Towards Data Science (2018).
[109] George Mason, Radu Calinescu, Daniel Kudenko, and Alec Banks. 2017. Assured reinforcement learning with for-
mallyverifiedabstractpolicies.In Proceedingsofthe9thInternationalConferenceonAgentsandArtificialIntelligence .
105–117.
[110] MichaelMaurer,IvanBreskovic,VincentC.Emeakaroha,andIvonaBrandic.2011.RevealingtheMAPEloopforthe
autonomic management of cloud infrastructures. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Computers and Communica-
tions.IEEE, 147–152.
[111] Markus Maurer, J. Christian Gerdes, Barbara Lenz, and Hermann Winner. 2016. Autonomous Driving: Technical,
Legal and Social Aspects .Springer Nature.
[112] ChristopherMeyerandJörgSchwenk.2013.SoK:LessonslearnedfromSSL/TLSattacks.In ProceedingsoftheInter-
national Workshopon Information Security Applications .Springer, 189–209.
[113] Microsoft.2019.HowtochoosealgorithmsforAzureMachineLearningStudio.RetrievedFebruary2019from https:
//docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/machine-learning/studio/algorithm-choice .
[114] TomM.Mitchell.1997. Machine Learning .McGraw–Hill.
[115] Model Zoos Caffe 2019. Caffe Model Zoo. Retrieved March 2019 from http://caffe.berkeleyvision.org/model_zoo.
html.
[116] ModelZoosGithub2019.ModelZoosofmachineanddeeplearningtechnologies.RetrievedMarch2019from https:
//github.com/collections/ai-model-zoos .
[117] Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, Omar Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. 2017. Universal adversarial
perturbations.In Proceedings of theIEEEConference onComputerVisionand PatternRecognition . 1765–1773.
[118] JoseG.Moreno-Torres,TroyRaeder,RocíoAlaiz-Rodríguez,NiteshV.Chawla,andFranciscoHerrera.2012.Auni-
fyingview on datasetshiftin classification. Pattern Recogn. 45,1(2012),521–530.
[119] Pamela A. Munro and Barbara G. Kanki. 2003. An analysis of ASRS maintenance reports on the use of minimum
equipmentlists.In Proceedings of the12th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology .
[120] KevinP.Murphy. 2012. Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective . The MIT Press.
[121] Partha Niyogi and Federico Girosi. 1996. On the relationship between generalization error, hypothesis complexity,
andsamplecomplexityfor radialbasis functions. Neural Comput. 8,4(1996),819–842.
[122] ObjectManagementGroup.2018.Structured Assurance CaseMetamodel(SACM). Version 2.0.
[123] AugustusOdenaandIanGoodfellow.2018.TensorFuzz:Debuggingneuralnetworkswithcoverage-guidedfuzzing.
arXiv:1807.10875.Retrivedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.10875 .
[124] MaximeOquab,LeonBottou,IvanLaptev,andJosefSivic.2014.Learningandtransferringmid-levelimagerepresen-
tations using convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition . 1717–1724.
[125] Nicolas Papernot, Patrick McDaniel, Ian Goodfellow, Somesh Jha, Z. Berkay Celik, and Ananthram Swami. 2017.
Practicalblack-boxattacksagainstmachinelearning.In Proceedingsofthe2017ACMonAsiaConferenceonComputer
andCommunications Security . ACM, 506–519.
[126] Kexin Pei, Yinzhi Cao, Junfeng Yang, and Suman Jana. 2017. DeepXplore: Automated whitebox testing of deep
learningsystems.In Proceedings of the26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles .ACM, 1–18.
[127] Teresa Placho, Christoph Schmittner, Arndt Bonitz, and Oliver Wana. 2020. Management of automotive software
updates.Microprocess. Microsystems. 78(2020),103257.
[128] Michael J. Pont and Royan H. L. Ong. 2002. Using watchdog timers to improve the reliability of single-processor
embedded systems: Seven new patterns and a case study. In Proceedings of the 1st Nordic Conference on Pattern
Languages ofPrograms .
[129] LutzPrechelt. 1998.Early stopping-butwhen?In Neural Networks: Tricks oftheTrade . Springer, 55–69.
[130] Philipp Probst, Bernd Bischl, and Anne-Laure Boulesteix. 2018. Tunability: Importance of hyperparameters of ma-
chinelearningalgorithms. arXiv:1802.09596.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.09596 .
[131] Foster Provost and Tom Fawcett. 2001. Robust classification for imprecise environments. Mach. Learn. 42, 3 (2001),
203–231.
[132] J.ProvostFoster,FawcettTom,andKohaviRon.1998.Thecaseagainstaccuracyestimationforcomparinginduction
algorithms.In Proceedings of the15th International ConferenceonMachine Learning . 445–453.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:37
[133] R-Bloggers Data Analysis 2019. How to Use Data Analysis for Machine Learning. Retrieved February 2019 from
https://www.r-bloggers.com/how-to-use-data-analysis-for-machine-learning-example-part-1 .
[134] StephanRabanser,StephanGünnemann,andZacharyC.Lipton.2019.Failingloudly:Anempiricalstudyofmethods
for detectingdatasetshift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32(2019).
[135] Jan Ramon, Kurt Driessens, and Tom Croonenborghs. 2007. Transfer learning in reinforcement learning problems
throughpartialpolicyrecycling.In ProceedingsoftheEuropeanConferenceonMachineLearning .Springer,699–707.
[136] Francesco Ranzato and Marco Zanella. 2019. Robustness verification of support vector machines. In Proceedings of
theInternational Static AnalysisSymposium . Springer, 271–295.
[137] Jorge-L. Reyes-Ortiz, Luca Oneto, Albert Samà, Xavier Parra, and Davide Anguita. 2016. Transition-aware human
activityrecognition using smartphones. Neurocomputing 171(2016),754–767.
[138] MarcoTulioRibeiro,SameerSingh,andCarlosGuestrin.2016.WhyshouldItrustyou?:Explainingthepredictions
ofanyclassifier.In Proceedingsofthe22ndACMSIGKDDInternationalConferenceonKnowledgeDiscoveryandData
Mining. ACM, 1135–1144.
[139] F.Ricci,L.Rokach,andB.Shapira.2015.Recommendersystems:Introductionandchallenges. RecommenderSystems
Handbook (2015),1–34.
[140] GermanRos,LauraSellart,JoannaMaterzynska,DavidVazquez,andAntonioM.Lopez.2016.TheSYNTHIAdataset:
Alargecollectionofsyntheticimagesforsemanticsegmentationofurbanscenes.In ProceedingsoftheIEEEConfer-
ence on Computer Vision andPattern Recognition . 3234–3243.
[141] AndrewSlavinRossandFinaleDoshi-Velez.2018.Improvingtheadversarialrobustnessandinterpretabilityofdeep
neural networks by regularizing their input gradients. In Proceedings of the 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial In-
telligence. 1660–1669.
[142] SaharonRosset,ClaudiaPerlich,GrzergorzŚwirszcz,PremMelville,andYanLiu.2010.Medicaldatamining:Insights
from winningtwocompetitions. Data Min.Knowl.Discov. 20,3(2010),439–468.
[143] RTCA. 2011. Software Considerationsin AirborneSystems andEquipment Certification . TechnicalReport DO-178C.
[144] Cynthia Rudin. 2019. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions and use inter-
pretablemodels instead. Nat.Mach. Intell. 1,5(2019),206–215.
[145] Stuart J. RussellandPeter Norvig. 2016. Artificial Intelligence:A Modern Approach .Pearson Education Limited.
[146] Jerome Sacks, William J. Welch, Toby J. Mitchell, and Henry P. Wynn. 1989. Design and analysis of computer ex-
periments. Stat. Sci.(1989),409–423.
[147] OmerSagi andLior Rokach. 2018.Ensemblelearning:A survey. DataMin. Knowl.Discov. 8,4 (2018),e1249.
[148] Ahmed Salem, Michael Backes, and Yang Zhang. 2020. Don’t Trigger Me! A Triggerless Backdoor Attack Against
Deep NeuralNetworks. arXiv:2010.03282.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.03282 .
[149] Robert G. Sargent. 2009. Verification and validation of simulation models. In Proceedings of the Winter Simulation
Conference .162–176.
[150] Lawrence K. Saul and Sam T. Roweis. 2003. Think globally, fit locally: Unsupervised learning of low dimensional
manifolds. J.Mach. Learn.Res. 4(Jun.2003),119–155.
[151] Christoph Schorn, Andre Guntoro, and Gerd Ascheid. 2018. Efficient on-line error detection and mitigation for
deepneuralnetworkaccelerators.In ProceedingsoftheInternationalConferenceonComputerSafety,Reliability,and
Security. Springer,205–219.
[152] Scikit-Taxonomy2019.Scikit—Choosingtherightestimator.RetrievedFebruary2019from https://scikit-learn.org/
stable/tutorial/machine_learning_map/index.html .
[153] NoamSegev,MaayanHarel,ShieMannor,KobyCrammer,andRanEl-Yaniv.2017.Learnonsource,refineontarget:
Amodeltransferlearningframeworkwithrandomforests. IEEETrans.PatternAnal.Mach.Intell. 39,9(2017),1811–
1824.
[154] Daniel Selsam, Percy Liang, and David L. Dill. 2017. Developing bug-free machine learning systems with formal
mathematics. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70 . JMLR. org, 3047–
3056.
[155] VictorS.ShengandJingZhang.2019.Machinelearningwithcrowdsourcing:Abriefsummaryofthepastresearch
and futuredirections. In Proceedings of theAAAIConferenceonArtificial Intelligence ,Vol. 33.9837–9843.
[156] AndyShih,ArthurChoi,andAdnanDarwiche.2018.FormalverificationofBayesiannetworkclassifiers.In Proceed-
ings oftheInternational Conferenceon Probabilistic Graphical Models .427–438.
[157] Padhraic Smyth. 1996. Bounds on the mean classification error rate of multiple experts. Pattern Recogn. Lett. 17, 12
(1996),1253–1257.
[158] Marina Sokolova and Guy Lapalme. 2009. A systematic analysis of performance measures for classification tasks.
Inf.Process. Manage. 45,4(2009),427–437.
[159] Nitish Srivastava, Geoffrey Hinton, Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2014. Dropout: A
simplewaytopreventneuralnetworks from overfitting. J .M a c h .L e a r n .R e s . 15,1(2014),1929–1958.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
111:38 R. Ashmore et al.
[160] Sanatan Sukhija, Narayanan C. Krishnan, and Deepak Kumar. 2018. Supervised heterogeneous transfer learning
usingrandomforests.In ProceedingsoftheACMIndiaJointInternationalConferenceonDataScienceandManagement
ofData. ACM,157–166.
[161] Youcheng Sun, Min Wu, Wenjie Ruan, Xiaowei Huang, Marta Kwiatkowska, and Daniel Kroening. 2018. Concolic
testing for deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Soft-
ware Engineering . ACM, 109–119.
[162] ChristianSzegedy,WojciechZaremba,IlyaSutskever,JoanBruna,DumitruErhan,IanGoodfellow,andRobFergus.
2013.Intriguing propertiesof neuralnetworks. arXiv:1312.6199.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199 .
[163] A.TaberandE.Normand. 1993.Singleeventupsetin avionics. IEEETrans.Nucl. Sci. 40,2(1993),120–126.
[164] Mariarosaria Taddeo, Tom McCutcheon, and Luciano Floridi. 2019. Trusting artificial intelligence in cybersecurity
isa double-edgedsword. Nat.Mach. Intell. (2019),557–560.
[165] LukeTaylorandGeoffNitschke.2017.Improvingdeeplearningusinggenericdataaugmentation.arXiv:1708.06020.
Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.06020 .
[166] Chris Thornton, Frank Hutter, Holger H. Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. 2013. Auto-WEKA: Combined selection
andhyperparameteroptimizationofclassificationalgorithms.In Proceedingsofthe19thACMSIGKDDInternational
ConferenceonKnowledgeDiscovery andData Mining . ACM,847–855.
[167] YuchiTian,KexinPei,SumanJana,andBaishakhiRay.2018.DeepTest:Automatedtestingofdeep-neural-network-
drivenautonomouscars.In Proceedingsofthe40thInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineering .ACM,303–314.
[168] JohnTörnblomandSiminNadjm-Tehrani.2018.Formalverificationofrandomforestsinsafety-criticalapplications.
InProceedings oftheInternational Workshopon Formal Techniques for Safety-Critical Systems .Springer, 55–71.
[169] Hoang-Dung Tran, Stanley Bak, Weiming Xiang, and Taylor T. Johnson. 2020. Verification of deep convolutional
neuralnetworks using ImageStars.arXiv:2004.05511.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.05511 .
[170] Hoang-Dung Tran, Xiaodong Yang, Diego Manzanas Lopez, Patrick Musau, Luan Viet Nguyen, Weiming Xiang,
StanleyBak,andTaylorT.Johnson.2020.NNV:Theneuralnetworkverificationtoolfordeepneuralnetworksand
learning-enabledcyber-physical systems.arXiv:2004.05519.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.05519 .
[171] John W.Tukey. 1977. ExploratoryData Analysis .V ol.2.Reading,MA.
[172] Jasper van der Waa, Jurriaan van Diggelen, Mark A Neerincx, and Stephan Raaijmakers. 2018. ICM: An intuitive
model independent and accurate certainty measure for machine learning.. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Agents andArtificial Intelligence(ICAART’18) . 314–321.
[173] Perry VanWeselandAlwynE. Goodloe.2017.Challengesinthe verificationof reinforcementlearningalgorithms.
(2017).
[174] KiriWagstaff.2012.Machinelearningthatmatters.arXiv:1206.4656.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1206.4656 .
[175] KiriL.WagstaffandBenjaminBornstein.2009.K-meansinspace:Aradiationsensitivityevaluation.In Proceedings
ofthe26th Annual International ConferenceonMachine Learning . 1097–1104.
[176] LiWan,MatthewZeiler,SixinZhang,YannLeCun,andRobFergus.2013.Regularizationofneuralnetworksusing
dropconnect. In Proceedings oftheInternational ConferenceonMachine Learning . 1058–1066.
[177] BinghuiWangandNeilZhenqiangGong.2018.Stealinghyperparametersinmachinelearning.In Proceedingsofthe
2018 IEEESymposium on Security and Privacy . IEEE, 36–52.
[178] BolunWang,YuanshunYao,ShawnShan,HuiyingLi,BimalViswanath,HaitaoZheng,andBenYZhao.2019.Neural
cleanse:Identifyingandmitigatingbackdoorattacksinneuralnetworks.In Proceedingsofthe2019IEEESymposium
on Security and Privacy . IEEE, 707–723.
[179] KeWang,SenqiangZhou,CheeAdaFu,andJeffreyXuYu.2003.Miningchangesofclassificationbycorrespondence
tracing.In Proceedings ofthe2003 SIAMInternational Conference onDataMining . SIAM, 95–106.
[180] Lu Wang, Xuanqing Liu, Jinfeng Yi, Zhi-Hua Zhou, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. 2019. Evaluating the robustness of nearest
neighborclassifiers: Aprimal-dualperspective.arXiv:1906.03972.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.03972 .
[181] Yihan Wang, Huan Zhang, Hongge Chen, Duane Boning, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. 2020. On lp-norm robustness of en-
semblestumps andtrees.arXiv:2008.08755.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.08755 .
[182] GaryM.Weiss. 2004.Miningwithrarity: A unifyingframework. ACMSIGKDDExpl.Newslett. 6,1(2004),7–19.
[183] Karl Weiss, Taghi M. Khoshgoftaar, and DingDing Wang. 2016. A survey of transfer learning. J. Big Data 3, 1
(2016),9.
[184] Reinhard Wilhelm, Jakob Engblom, Andreas Ermedahl, Niklas Holsti, Stephan Thesing, David Whalley, Guillem
Bernat, Christian Ferdinand, Reinhold Heckmann, Tulika Mitra, Frank Mueller, Isabelle Puaut, Peter Puschner, Jan
Straschulat, and Per Strenström. 2008. The worst-case execution-time problem—Overview of methods and survey
of tools.A CMT r a ns.Em bed .Com p u t.S y st. 7,3 (2008),36.
[185] Sebastien C. Wong, Adam Gatt, Victor Stamatescu, and Mark D. McDonnell. 2016. Understanding data augmenta-
tion for classification: When to warp? In Proceedings of the International Conference on Digital Image Computing:
Techniques andApplications .IEEE, 1–6.
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No. 5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May2021.
Assuring the Machine Learning Lifecycle: Desiderata, Methods, and Challenges 111:39
[186] Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V., Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang Macherey, Maxim Krikun,
Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, Jeff Klingner, Apurva Shah, Melvin Johnson, Xiaobing Liu, Łukasz Kaiser,
Stephan Gouws, Yoshikiyo Kato, Taku Kudo, Hideto Kazawa, Keith Stevens, George Kurian, Nishant Patil, Wei
Wang, Cliff Young, Jason Smith, Jason Riesa, Alex Rudnick, Oriol Vinyals, Greg Corrado, Macduff Hughes, and
Jeffrey Dean. 2016. Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine
translation. arXiv:1609.0814.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.0814 .
[187] Steven R. Young, Derek C. Rose, Thomas P. Karnowski, Seung-Hwan Lim, and Robert M Patton. 2015. Optimizing
deep learning hyper-parameters through an evolutionary algorithm. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Machine
Learning in High-Performance Computing Environments .A CM,4.
[188] X. Yuan, Y. Chen, Y. Zhao, Y. Long, X. Liu, K. Chen, S. Zhang, H. Huang, X. Wang, and C. A. Gunter. 2018. Com-
manderSong: A systematic approach for practical adversarial voice recognition. arXiv:1801.08535. Retrieved from
https://arxix.org/abs/1801.08535 .
[189] MateiZaharia,AndrewChen,AaronDavidson,AliGhodsi,SueAnnHong,AndyKonwinski,SiddharthMurching,
Tomas Nykodym, Paul Ogilvie, Mani Parkhe, Fen Xie, and Corey Zumar. 2018. Accelerating the machine learning
lifecyclewithMLflow. DataEng. 41,4 (2018),39–45.
[190] Mengshi Zhang, Yuqun Zhang, Lingming Zhang, Cong Liu, and Sarfraz Khurshid. 2018. DeepRoad: GAN-based
metamorphic autonomous driving system testing. arXiv:1802.02295. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.
02295.
[191] ShichaoZhang,ChengqiZhang,andQiangYang.2003.Datapreparationfordatamining. Appl.Artif.Intell. 17,5–6
(2003),375–381.
[192] Stephan Zheng, Yang Song, Thomas Leung, and Ian Goodfellow. 2016. Improving the robustness of deep neural
networks via stability training. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .
4480–4488.
[193] Zhun Zhong, Liang Zheng, Guoliang Kang, Shaozi Li, and Yi Yang. 2017. Random erasing data augmentation.
arXiv:1708.04896.Retrievedfrom https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.04896 .
Received May 2019; revised December 2020; accepted February 2021
ACM ComputingSurveys, Vol. 54,No.5,Article 111.Publicationdate:May 2021.
