polymers 
Review
Collagen–Alginate Composite Hydrogel: Application in Tissue
Engineering and Biomedical Sciences
Tingyu Hu and Amy C. Y. Lo *
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Hu, T.; Lo, A.C.Y.
Collagen–Alginate Composite
Hydrogel: Application in Tissue
Engineering and Biomedical Sciences.
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852. https://
doi.org/10.3390/polym13111852
Academic Editors: Mikyung Shin and
Marco Sangermano
Received: 20 April 2021
Accepted: 27 May 2021
Published: 2 June 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).Department of Ophthalmology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China; tingyuhu@connect.hku.hk
*Correspondence: amylo@hku.hk; Tel.: +852-2831-5363
Abstract: Alginate (ALG), a polysaccharide derived from brown seaweed, has been extensively
investigated as a biomaterial not only in tissue engineering but also for numerous biomedical sciences
owing to its wide availability, good compatibility, weak cytotoxicity, low cost, and ease of gelation.
Nevertheless, alginate lacks cell-binding sites, limiting long-term cell survival and viability in 3D
culture. Collagen (Col), a major component protein found in the extracellular matrix (ECM), exhibits
excellent biocompatibility and weak immunogenicity. Furthermore, collagen contains cell-binding
motifs, which facilitate cell attachment, interaction, and spreading, consequently maintaining cell
viability and promoting cell proliferation. Recently, there has been a growing body of investigations
into collagen-based hydrogel trying to overcome the poor mechanical properties of collagen. In
particular, collagen–alginate composite (CAC) hydrogel has attracted much attention due to its
excellent biocompatibility, gelling under mild conditions, low cytotoxicity, controllable mechanic
properties, wider availability as well as ease of incorporation of other biomaterials and bioactive
agents. This review aims to provide an overview of the properties of alginate and collagen. Moreover,
the application of CAC hydrogel in tissue engineering and biomedical sciences is also discussed.
Keywords: collagen–alginate composite hydrogel; tissue regeneration; wound dressing; tissue
engineering; encapsulated cell therapy
1. Introduction
The vital role of biomaterials in tissue engineering and biomedical application has
attracted much attention in the past decades [ 1]. Research into biomaterials and their
application holds great promise in the future. Synthetic polymers had been extensively
studied in the early twentieth century due to their better performance and ease of manu-
facture compared to natural materials [ 2,3]. Recently, naturally derived biomaterials have
regained considerable interest in material science due to their extracellular matrix (ECM)-
like structure that highly recapitulates in vivo environment, inherent biocompatibility, and
a limited chance of immune response and immune rejection compared to human-made
materials [4,5].
Alginate is a natural polysaccharide derived from brown algae with favorable prop-
erties, including broader availability, cost-effectiveness, good biocompatibility, weak cy-
totoxicity as well as ease of gelation in the presence of divalent cations [ 6]. Moreover,
alginate has unique properties in comparison with other materials including, (1) ability to
provide an inert aqueous environment, (2) sol-gel transition under the mild condition that
enables excellent retention of bioactive molecules and cell encapsulation, (3) controllable
porosity allowing adjustable molecular diffusion, (4) biodegradability under physiological
environment, and (5) structural similarity to ECM [ 7–10]. These properties allow the wide
investigation of alginate in tissue engineering and biomedical sciences, including cell
encapsulation, wound dressing, tissue regeneration, and pharmaceutical application [ 11].
It is well known that anchorage-dependent cell death is activated in the absence of extra-
cellular matrix [ 12]. Nevertheless, alginate inherently lacks cell-binding sites, thus limiting
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13111852 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/polymers
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 2 of 26
its wider-range application. Alginate modiﬁed with Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) peptides or in
combination with other biomaterials has been the focus of research.
Collagen is the primary protein found in soft connective tissue and hard connective
tissue. Moreover, 33% of the protein found in the human body is collagen [ 13,14]. To
date, 29 types of collagen are identiﬁed in the animals [ 15].According to its structure,
physical location in the body, and chain binding, collagen can also be divided into eight
families [ 15]. Collagen-based hydrogel has been widely studied in tissue engineering and
biomedical sciences owing to its excellent biocompatibility and weak immunogenicity [ 15–19].
Moreover, collagen, which contains RGD peptides, highly recapitulates ECM in the human
body [ 20,21]. However, the insufﬁcient mechanical properties limit its extensive application.
It is ubiquitous to incorporate other biomaterials such as alginate, chitosan, and hyaluronic
acid into collagen to improve its mechanical properties.
CAC hydrogel can be cross-linked under mild conditions. Therefore, CAC hydrogel
is widely investigated for cell encapsulation and drug delivery [ 22–25]. What is more,
the combination of collagen and alginate provides cell-binding motifs and enhances the
mechanical properties [ 26]. There is a growing body of investigations into CAC hydro-
gel and its application in tissue engineering and biomedical sciences, including tissue
regeneration, wound dressing, encapsulated cell therapy (ECT), and tumor biology. The
composite hydrogel has been developed as a matrix scaffold to deliver a range of bioactive
agents, cell populations, or in the combination of cell and bioactive factor to the defect site
in tissue engineering. The composite hydrogel is also attracting much research attention
in biomedical sciences. Collagen–alginate wound dressings can provide and maintain
a moist environment to the wound site, promote cell migration, differentiation, thereby
accelerating wound healing. CAC hydrogel is also promising for tissue regeneration due
to its ease of gelling under mild conditions, which enables retention of bioactive agents
and cell encapsulation. Alginate can provide encapsulation power that limits the chance
of cell leakage from the ECT device. In addition, collagen can improve cell viability and
proliferation. Therefore, CAC hydrogel has been exploited as a potential platform in ECT.
Moreover, the composite hydrogels with tunning stiffness and higher similarity to ECM
can mimic in vivo tumor cell environment. Therefore, it also explores a new ﬁeld for the
study on tumor biology.
This review aims to provide a comprehensive review of CAC hydrogel and its applica-
tion (Figure 1). Firstly, the characteristics of alginate and collagen will be given respectively,
followed by presenting the properties of CAC and the techniques. Finally, the application of
CAC in tissue engineering and biomedical sciences, especially tissue regeneration, wound
dressing and encapsulated cell therapy, and tumor biology, will be described.
Figure 1. An overview of this review paper.
2. General Properties of Alginate and Collagen
2.1. Alginate
2.1.1. Alginate Sources
Alginate can be obtained from two major sources, including brown seaweed and
bacteria [ 27]. Three species of brown seaweeds, including Laminaria Hyperborea ,Ascophyl-
lum Nodosum , and Macrocystis Pyrifera , are the primary source for commercially available
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 3 of 26
alginate [ 28]. Alginate can also be isolated from other algae species, including Laminaria
Japonica ,Eclonia Maxima ,Lesonia Negrescens , and Sargassum [28]. The isolation of alginate
from brown seaweeds requires multiple steps and procedures. With the exception of
Macrocystis Pyrifera , which is processed in wet form, brown seaweeds are ﬁrst cropped
and dried for further extraction. In brief, the initial removal of unwanted materials and
impurities from algae is achieved by addition of dilute mineral acid [ 29]. The preparation
of sodium alginate is done by addition of alkali solution such as NaOH, followed by cen-
trifugation to remove sediments. The removal of homopolysaccharides is done by adding
mineral acid, ethanol, or CaCl 2. After these procedures, there are remaining impurities in
alginates, which require further puriﬁcation in order to be used in the pharmaceutic ﬁeld
and biomedical sciences.
Alginate can be secreted by some bacteria, including Azotobacter Vinerlandii andPseu-
domonas species. The synthesis of alginate by these two bacteria is highly similar. Alginate
synthesized by bacteria varies in mechanical properties and has been utilized for differ-
ent applications. Alginate isolated from bacteria possesses more chemical structure and
physical properties than brown algae sources. The biosynthesis of alginate by bacteria
has already been illustrated. In brief, precursor substrate was ﬁrstly synthesized, fol-
lowed by polymerization on the precursor. It was then transferred to the cytoplasmic
membrane and periplasmic membrane for further modiﬁcation, ﬁnally transported to the
surroundings [30].
2.1.2. Chemical Structure and Molecular Weight
Alginate is a naturally occurring polysaccharide consisting of varying amounts
of residues, including -D-mannuronic acid (M) and 1–4 linked -L-guluronic(G) [ 31].
Three different molecular structure patterns, including homogenous monomers (-GGGG-,
-MMMM- ) and alternating monomers (-MGMGMG-), are identiﬁed in alginates (Figure 2).
M/G ratio and block length vary depending on the alginate source [ 32]. Up to now, over
200 alginate products are available in the market [ 32]. The mechanical properties of alginate
are affected by the composition, length of the polymer chain, and molecular weight [ 33].
The molecular weight of alginate also varies with the sources. Increased proportion of G
content in alginate and higher molecular weight can form strong mechanical properties.
In the market, the molecular weight of alginate varies from 33,000 to 400,000 g/mol [ 11].
Alginate with higher molecular weight also results in greater viscosity, contributing to the
difﬁculty in processing [ 34]. Meanwhile, greater shear forces are generated, which can
cause undesirable damage to the encapsulated cells and proteins [35].
2.1.3. Biocompatibility and Biodegradability
Although many investigations on the biocompatibility of alginate had been under-
taken in vitro andin vivo , a much-debated question about the effect of alginate composition
on its biocompatibility had been discussed for many years. Until recently, it is widely
accepted that alginate’s immunogenicity is associated with the presence of existing impuri-
ties, including heavy metals, endotoxins, and polyphenol [ 36]. Orive et al. demonstrated
that poor biocompatibility, foreign body reaction, and inﬂammatory response of alginate
primarily lie in the remaining impurities as they observed no immunological response
when implanted highly puriﬁed alginate. Lee et al. further validated the importance
of using puriﬁed alginate to reduce the risk of potential immunologic response by the
host [37].
In human body, due to the lack of a speciﬁc enzyme named alginase to cleave alginate
polymer chains, alginate is theoretically considered as nondegradable biomaterials. How-
ever, alginate cross-linked by covalent ions can be gradually dissolved by the ion-exchange
reaction that continuous covalent ions release such as Ca2+from alginate exchanges mono-
valent cations such as Na+from the surroundings.
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 4 of 26
Figure 2. The chemical structure of 1,4 -L-guluronic acid and -D-mannuronic acid in alginate.
The chemical arrangement of three block patterns, including homogenous monomers (-GGGG-,
-MMMM-) and alternating monomers (-MGMGMG-) can be identiﬁed in alginate.
Mushollaeni et al. investigated the toxicity of alginate from two brown seaweed
sources, including Sargassum andPadina by feeding Wistar mice with varying alginate
concentrations. Alginate from Sargassum source ranging from 0.75% to 1% was regarded as
safety concentration since the lower level of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate
transaminase (AST) was observed in the alginate-feeding group compared to the control
group. However, alginate from Padina source could cause potential damage to the liver
with a concentration above 0.75% [38].
2.1.4. Ionic Cross-Linking
Alginate gelation can be achieved via physical and chemical methods. A 3D network
of alginate is formed in the presence of divalent cation such as Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+.
Divalent cation can exchange Na+from guluronate located in the separated ALG chains,
forming the ‘egg-box’ structure (Figure 3) [ 39]. The most commonly utilized ion for alginate
gelation is Ca2+owing to its lower cytotoxicity effect, while it is reported that both Sr2+
and Ba2+-induced alginate is mechanically stronger than Ca2+-induced alginate. Gelation
speed plays a critical role in controlling alginate gelation. Uniform hydrogel structure
and superior mechanical integrity are achieved by decreasing the gelation speed, which is
desirable for their application [ 40]. When directly using calcium chloride to initiate alginate
gelation, it gives rise to uncontrollable and quick alginate gelling [ 40]. The reaction can be
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 5 of 26
controlled by addition of carboxylate group and phosphate into calcium chloride solution
since these ions can compete with Ca2+to slow and delay the gelation reaction, ﬁnally
forming a uniform hydrogel with greater mechanic integrity. In addition, temperature is
considered another essential factor [ 40]. The cross-linking reaction can be slowed by low
temperature as it reduces the reactivity of Ca2+. Therefore, it generates a uniform structure
and greater mechanical integrity.
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of sodium alginate cross-linking by Ca2+. In the alginate containing
 COO group, Ca2+exchanges with Na+from guluronate block in ALG and interacts with separated
ALG chains, forming the “egg-box structure”. Reproduced from [ 41] with permission. Copyright
(2020) Springer Nature.
Gallium has been investigated as an ionic cross-linker for alginate gelation. Like
calcium ion, gallium binds with the guluronate block in the separated ALG chains, forming
a 3D structure [ 42]. It is worth noting that alginate-based hydrogel cross-linked by gallium
possesses antibacterial function against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria via the
interpretation of metabolic pathway mediated by iron [ 43,44]. Rastin et al. employed 3D
bioprinting technique with Gallium-induced ALG cross-linking together. Multilayered
cell-laden alginate-methylcellulose hydrogel was fabricated using 3D bioprinting followed
by gallium bath [ 45]. Moreover, there is no signiﬁcant difference in encapsulated cell
viability between Gallium and Ca2+-induced gelation group over a 7-day cell culture.
2.2. Collagen
Collagen is the major component protein found in the extracellular matrix in both hard
and soft connective tissues. Collagen also has a dominant role in maintaining the structural
and biological integrity of ECM [ 46]. Until now, 29 types of collagen have been identiﬁed
in which triple-helical tertiary structure is commonly present. Collagen consists of three
polypeptide chains, and each chain is comprised of repetitive Glycine-X-Y sequences where
X and Y are often occupied by proline and hydroxyproline [ 47,48]. Glycine located at every
third residue enables the tight packing of the three polypeptide chains into a tropocollagen
molecule. The most common types of collagen are summarized in Table 1. In addition
to its favorable properties, including excellent biocompatibility, weak immunogenicity,
porosity, and degradability, collagen also has a vital role in regulating cell morphology,
attachment, migration as well as differentiation [ 49,50]. Although various collagen types
have been identiﬁed, ﬁbril-forming collagens, including type I, II, III, V , and IV , have
achieved the most popularity in tissue engineering. It is worth noting that type I collagen is
considered a golden material in tissue engineering, which comprises up to 90% of protein
found in connective tissue [ 51]. The sol-gel transition of collagen happened under deﬁned
conditions, such as neutral pH and physiological temperature [52].
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 6 of 26
Table 1. Collagen types, molecular formula, and tissue distribution. Reproduced from [ 46] with permission. Copyright
(2010) MDPI AG.
Type Molecular Formula Polymerized Form Tissue Distribution
Fibril-Forming
(ﬁbrillar)I [1(I)]22(I) ﬁbrilbone, skin, tendons, ligaments,
cornea (represent 90% of total
collagen of the human body)
II [ 1(II)] ﬁbrilcartilage, intervertebral disc,
notochord, vitreous humor in
the eye
III [ 1(III)]3 ﬁbril skin, blood vessels
V[1(V)]22(V) and
1(V)2(V)3(V)ﬁbril
(assemble with type I)idem as type I
XI1(XI)2(XI)3(XI)ﬁbril
(assemble with type II)idem as type II
Fibril-associatedIX1(IX)2(IX)3(IX) lateral association with type II ﬁbril cartilage
XII [ 1(XII)]3 lateral association with type I ﬁbril tendons, ligaments
Network-formingIV [1(IV)]22(IV) sheet-like network basal lamina
VII [ 1(VII)]3 anchoringbeneath stratiﬁed squamous
epithelia
2.2.1. Collagen Source
Collagen can be obtained from various sources, including animal sources, synthetic
sources, and marine sources. Type I collagen is the most used biomaterial in tissue engi-
neering due to its widespread presence in animals and cost-effectiveness. Commercially
available collagen in the market is mainly extracted from animals, including bovine, porcine,
rat tail, and ﬁsh [ 53]. Yet, there is grave concern regarding the inﬂammation induced by
remaining impurities in collagen, possible pathogen transmission, and batch-to-batch vari-
ability [ 54,55]. Indeed, it is reported that 2–4% of the population are allergic to collagen
with a porcine and bovine source [ 56]. Recently, marine sources, including sponges and
jellyﬁsh, could be potential source candidates since there is no risk of pathogen transmis-
sion [ 55,57]. However, the poor thermal stability of marine-derived collagen may limit its
application [58].
2.2.2. Biodegradability and Immunogenicity
The majority of collagen degradation in vivo is digested by collagenase such as matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs). There are various collagenases in human body, and it is worth
noting that collagen degradation rate varies in different collagenases and cross-linking
methods. The collagen degradation via collagenase includes (1) matrix metalloproteinases
binding to collagen ﬁrst, (2) ability to unwind three polypeptides chain into a single chain
since three-helical structure blocks the enzyme active sites, and (3) MMPs acting on each
strand to cleave [ 59]. Different types of collagen can be digested by their corresponding
MMPs [ 60–62]. After the degradation by MMPs, the remaining collagen fragments can
be further degraded by gelatinase and other nonspeciﬁc enzymes. It is widely accepted
that collagen exhibits excellent biocompatibility since it has a limited possibility to induce
immunological response. Helical structure and telopeptide are regarded as the speciﬁc
regions that can cause immune rejection [ 54]. Since collagen has low antigenicity, collagen-
based material is widely used in tissue engineering and regeneration [63].
2.2.3. Physical Cross-Linking
To date, there are various cross-linking methods for collagen including chemical cross-
linking, physical cross-linking and enzyme-induced gelation. Although collagen cross-
linked by chemicals including glutaraldehyde, carbodiimides, and polyepoxy compounds
are more stable than other cross-linking methods, the cytotoxicity of the residuals and its
byproducts after degeneration is a grave concern [64–67].
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 7 of 26
Collagen can be cross-linked by physical methods including ultraviolet (UV) light,
gamma-ray radiation and dehydrothermal (DHT) [ 68]. Compared to chemical cross-linking,
physical cross-linking is considered a begin method since it does not require cytotoxic
chemicals; however, the low efﬁcacy of physical gelation has been reported [69].
The DHT-induced collagen gelation is achieved by the formation of amide bonds
between the free carboxyl group and amine group as a result of water removal under a
higher temperature and vacuum condition [ 70]. In brief, the vacuum was set at 0.05 mbar
and temperature at 40 degrees Celsius to remove water from COL molecule and prevent
denaturation. After that, higher temperature (over 100 degree Celsius) was utilized to
induce COL gelation further. It is worth noting that gelation and denaturation can co-occur.
Collagen denaturation can occur under the higher temperature condition, ﬁnally resulting
in poor-organized structure [ 71]. It is reported that temperature at 100 degree Celsius and
24 h treatment are the optimal parameters for DHT [72].
UV light is considered an effective and quick method compared to DHT treatment.
Once collagen exposures to UV light, double bonds and aromatic rings can give rise to
free radicals. The generated free radicals on the amino acids form covalent bonds between
collagen molecules.
Collagen gelation via 254 nm UV light only takes 15 min, and UV-induced collagen
shows higher resistance to degradation [ 73]. Dehydrothermal treatment is time-consuming
as it requires a more extended period compared to UV light. DHT-induced collagen is
more sensitive to trypsin but more resistant to degradation [74].
2.3. Collagen–Alginate Composite Hydrogel
2.3.1. Stiffness and Cell-Binding Sites
The combination of collagen with alginate overcomes the limitation of each material and
integrates their favorable properties altogether. The major hurdle that restricts the widespread
application of collagen is its poor mechanical properties. Incorporation with other materials
can improve the mechanical properties. It is reported that collagen in the combination
with alginate not only enhances the mechanical properties of the composite hydrogel
but also tunes the stiffness of CAC hydrogel simply via the concentration of Ca2+[26].
It is worth noting that stiffness is of great importance in the determination of stem cell
fate [ 75].Scaffold with suitable and proper mechanical properties is capable of providing the
mechanical cues to stem or progenitor cell towards certain cell lineages [ 76]. The increase in
calcium concentration improves the stiffness of the composite hydrogel and vice versa.
On account of collagen containing cell-binding ligands and the inherent lack of cell-
binding motifs inside alginate, the increase in the proportion of collagens in CAC hydrogel
improves cell-binding ligands, which enable more cell adhesion and attachment, thereby
maintaining cell viability and promoting cell proliferation. The relationship between the
stiffness of composite hydrogel and calcium concentration and the association between col-
lagen concentration and the cell-binding site inside the composite hydrogel are illustrated
in Figure 4.
Figure 4. The relationship between the stiffness of composite hydrogel and calcium concentration and
the association between collagen concentration and cell-binding sites inside the composite hydrogel.
With the increase in Ca2+concentration, the stiffness of composite hydrogel will be enhanced. Cell-
adhesion ligands also increase as collagen concentration increases. Reproduced from [ 26] with
permission, Copyright (2020) Elsevier.
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 8 of 26
2.3.2. Technique
Over the past decades, scientists have developed various techniques to manufacture
CAC hydrogel on a large scale, surpassing the limitations of traditional 3D culture, which is
time-consuming, technical, and laborious. In this section, 3D bioprinting on CAC hydrogel
and other techniques will be discussed.
Three-Dimensional (3D) Bioprinting
Compared to traditional technique, 3D printing is an advanced technique that enables
the construction of a complicated 3D structure via layer-by-layer manufacturing under the
help of computer system [ 77]. 3D printing has achieved great success in the preparation
of hydrogel scaffold in tissue engineering, especially in bone tissue and cartilage tissue
engineering [ 78]. It is worth noting that 3D bioprinting enables the rapid fabrication
of personalized implants which meet the individual need of patients [ 79]. The unique
features of hydrogel include high water content and sensitivity to various stimuli including
temperature, light as well as external signals. Therefore hydrogel is an excellent candidate
in 3D bioprinting when working with cells [80].
3D printing can be classiﬁed into three categories including laser-based printing,
nozzle-based printing and inkjet printer-based system [ 78]. Considering the good com-
patibility and ease of procession, alginate has received most popularity in bone tissue
engineering as well as bioprinting [ 81,82]. Chondrocyte laden alginate hydrogel by 3D
printing technique showed higher cell viability and promoted ECM deposition in vitro [83].
The main hurdle of using single materials as a bioink is poor mechanical properties [ 83].
Nevertheless, the poor mechanical properties of alginate usually result in instability of
3D structure, which is the main hurdle that restricts its application in hard tissue engi-
neering [ 84]. Therefore, alginate in combination with other materials has received much
popularity in 3D printing. Kim et al. demonstrated the prospect of a poly ( "-caprolactone)
PCL/alginate scaffold with greater mechanical properties in hard tissue engineering since
higher water absorption, greater retention efﬁcacy of encapsulated cells, increased cell
viability and signiﬁcant calcium deposition were observed in PCL/alginate group com-
pared to PCL group [ 85]. Recently, D’ Amora et al. combined 3D printing with surface
modiﬁcation, which enables the construction of 3D scaffold with structural and chemical
gradients [ 86]. Moreover, recent advance also allows the incorporation of nanoparticle into
the scaffold and the fabrication of injectable hydrogel [ 87]. Moreover, Collagen, one of the
most popular bioinks, has received much research interest in tissue engineering [52].
Nozzle system is gaining most popularity in the preparation of scaffold-based hydro-
gel. The construction of 3D scaffold via nozzle system is based on three steps including (1)
hydrogel solution was loaded into the system, (2) then it was forced out of the system into
pre-designed mold, and (3) sol-gel transition. It is widely accepted that interlayer adhesion
is essential for the successful fabrication of 3D structure. Besides, there are various factors
which can play a dominant role in the fabrication including temperature, shear thinning,
thixotropy and cross-linking methods.
A set of research groups proposed the use of dual concentric nozzle system to manu-
facture CAC hydrogel [ 88–90]. The dual concentric nozzle system consists of three different
parts including outer syringe, inner syringe and CaCl 2bath. Collagen and alginate solution
were loaded into inner syringe and outer syringe respectively to enable simultaneous
injection of CAC solution into the calcium bath to form a ﬁber [ 88,89]. It is worth men-
tioning that ﬁber manufactured by dual concentric nozzle system can be molded into any
irregular shapes. Besides, bioactive agents can be successfully loaded in collagen and
alginate solution [ 89,90]. Buitrago et al. incorporated bioactive glass nanoparticle into
alginate solution, which has demonstrated differentiation of stem cells towards osteogenic
lineage [90].
Yao et al. adopted another electro-assisted inkjet printing to produce alginate micro-
spheres coated with collagen [ 91]. Alginate microspheres were ﬁrst fabricated via inkjet
printing followed by collagen coating. The diameter of alginate-collagen microspheres,
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 9 of 26
ranging from 245 m to 657m, can be tuned by the following parameters including needle
size, voltage, electrode distance and push speed.
In addition to 3D printing technique, there are other techniques to manufacture CAC
hydrogel. One study applied a microconcave mold to fabricate CAC hydrogel for cell
encapsulation, which overcame the traditional cell encapsulation technique [ 92]. In this
study, islets cells were seeded into the microconcave mold followed by introduction of
CAC solution. After that, CaCl 2solution was added to form islet spheroid. Microcapsules
or spheroids can also be fabricated using microﬂuidics [ 93,94]. Jose et al. employed
microﬂuidics to manufacture stem cell laden CAC microspheres. In brief, a CAC-stem
cells mixture was loaded into the device. The CAC microspheres were fabricated when
the solution passed through the inlet followed by shear force [ 94]. The techniques for the
manufacture of CAC hydrogel are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Summary of novel techniques for the manufacture of CAC hydrogel.
Technique DescriptionIncorporation of
Bioactive AgentCell TypeHydrogel
CharacteristicsReference
Dual
concentric
nozzle systemAlginate and collagen solution were loaded
into outer and inner syringe respectively.
Simultaneous injection of ALG and COL
solution into CaCl 2bath to form a ﬁberBioactive glass
nanoparticles loaded in
the shell [90]Mesenchymal
stem cells
(MSCs)CAC ﬁber (core
diameter:
700–1000m and
shell diameter:
200–500m) [88][88–90]
BMP loaded in the core
and cobalt loaded in
the shell [89]CAC ﬁber (core
diameter: 1000 m
and shell diameter:
150m [89]
Electro-
assisted inkjet
printingAlginate microsphere was fabricated by inkjet
printing followed by collagen coatingNilEndothelial
cellCAC microsphere [91]
Concave well
moldCAC containing islet cells were introduced
into concave well mold followed by Ca2+bathNilPancreatic
islets cellIslets spheroid [92]
MicroﬂuidicsCAC microspheres/spheroids
were generated when pass through the inlet
followed by shear forceNil Stem cell CAC microsphere [93]
Nil Liver cell CAC spheroid [94]
3. Application of CAC Hydrogel
3.1. Tissue Engineering
3.1.1. Bone Tissue Engineering
In bone tissue engineering, despite transplantation of autografts into defects site is
the gold standard, the limited autograft sources and potential complications such as the
risk of bacterial infection and donor site morbidity cannot be ignored [ 95]. CAC hydrogel
has found prospect as their potential in treating bone defects via delivery of stem cells
or progenitor cell population, bone inductive growth factors, or the combination of cells
and molecules.
Many studies have demonstrated that alginate hydrogel, compared to others, can
be delivered into the human body in a minimally invasive way, its powerful molding
ability that enables it ﬁtting into any irregular defect sites and its tunning porosity to
release many drugs to the defects [ 96,97]. Nevertheless, the biological property of alginate
in terms of cell adhesion and attachment is limited. Therefore, alginate combined with
other biodegradable biomaterials and RGD peptides in attempt to improve long-term cell
viability and survival has attracted much research attention recently.
Collagen-based hydrogel is receiving much attention in bone tissue engineering since
collagen is the major component protein found in bone tissue [ 98]. Despite collagen
owns excellent biocompatibility and ECM-like structure that facilitates cell attachment and
proliferation, the limited biomechanical stability, especially in the presence of cells and
the poor moldability, limit its widespread application in the ﬁeld of orthopedics [ 99–102].
What is more, it has been reported that collagen has limited ability to induce osteogenic
differentiation from stem cells in comparison to other materials [99–101].
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 10 of 26
The composite hydrogel integrates the merits of each material and overcomes each lim-
itation such as enhanced mechanical properties, powerful moldability, capability to main-
tain cell viability and potential to induce osteogenic lineage under deﬁned environment.
The excellent biocompatibility of CAC hydrogel has been extensively examined [ 90,103]. A
study conducted by Benayahu et al. showed that up to six-month system stability of the
composite hydrogel under different storage conditions in vitro and excellent biocompat-
ibility by the observation of the absence of adverse effect and non-cytotoxicity near the
implants [103].
In an attempt to accelerate bone regeneration, the ability of CAC hydrogel to deliver
cell population to the defect site has also been examined. Perez et al. developed core-
shell dual-layered hydrogels using a nozzle system in which cell-containing collagen and
alginate were fabricated in the core and the outer shell respectively [ 88]. Moreover, the
nozzle system enables hydrogel to be easily molded into any irregular shape, which is
desirable and corresponds with clinical needs. More importantly, the authors illustrated
that compared to the non-cell-loading construct, core-shell hydrogel loaded with bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells (bMSCs) exhibited considerable bone formation at the
central region of the defect site in the rat model of calvarium defect [88]. CAC can also be
incorporated with other biomaterials. Bendtsen et al. incorporated hydroxyapatite, one of
the major component proteins found in bone, into CAC hydrogel [ 104]. The development of
in situ injectable hydrogels provided a candidate scaffold for bone tissue engineering [ 104].
Moreover, CAC hydrogel containing chitosan (ChS) and hydroxyapatite (HAp) has shown
their advantages for cell inﬁltration and proliferation [105].
While CAC hydrogel can support bMSCs survival and proliferation, bMSCs osteo-
genesis happens in the presence of osteo-inductive molecules [ 104,106]. CAC hydrogel
can be incorporated with other bioactive agents to provide mechanical cues to bMSCs.
Perez et al. showed bMSCs differentiation towards osteocytes under the inductive condi-
tion in vitro [107]. CAC hydrogel is also being incorporated with novel nanoparticles to
promote bone regeneration by guiding stem cell differentiation towards osteogenic lineages.
The sequential delivery of cobalt ions followed by bone morphogenetic protein (BMP2)
has shown promoting effect on bone regeneration in the rat model of calvarium defect
(Figure 5). In particular, the author developed a core-shell CAC construct that enables
the loading of Cobalt, which has a pro-angiogenic effect, and BMP-2 that stimulates bone
regeneration into the outer shell and inner cone respectively. The scaffold promoted bone
regeneration and angiogenesis [ 89]. Buitrago et al. further incorporated bioactive glass
nanoparticles into the outer alginate shell using a nozzle system and showed that bioactive
glass nanoparticles were capable of directing bMSCs cell differentiation into osteoblasts
in vitro [90].
The delivery of bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) has also been explored in
collagen–alginate hydrogel. Quinlan et al. showed the same kinetics BMPs release from
Col-HAp scaffold incorporated with ALG microparticle [ 108]. HAp-Col-Alg scaffold with
BMPs loading was also fabricated by Sotome et al., and the results showed the composite
hydrogel is a potential drug carrier scaffold for bone tissue engineering [109].
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 11 of 26
Figure 5. H&E stained sections of CAC implant in vivo after 6 weeks. ( a) Low magniﬁcation image of
CAC hydrogel groups including Co (  ) BMP (  ), Co (+) BMP (  ) Co ( ) BMP (+), and Co (+) BMP
(+), ( b) high magniﬁcation image of each groups. Reproduced from [ 89] with permission. Copyright
(2015) Elsevier.
3.1.2. Cartilage Tissue Engineering
Due to its nonrenewable property, cartilage itself cannot regenerate once damaged.
Therefore, cartilage regeneration poses a signiﬁcant challenge in the ﬁeld of orthopedics.
Up to now, extensive efforts and investigations are focusing on developing alternative
therapy to repair damaged cartilage. In particular, tissue engineering is considered a
promising approach in cartilage regeneration.
The use of bMSCs shows great promise in cartilage regeneration as its potential dif-
ferentiation into chondroblasts under certain conditions, and their favorable advantages.
including ease of isolation and the limited autologous source [ 110]. Therefore, it is a press-
ing need to develop an ideal bMSC scaffold that highly recapitulates the native scenario
and provides mechanical cues. Many studies have suggested that inducible molecules
are essential for guiding chondrogenic differentiation of bMSCs [ 111]. Zhang et al. (2017)
demonstrated that the CAC scaffold provides a suitable environment for bMSCs growth
and proliferation. Moreover, bMSCs were capable of differentiating into chondrocytes by
inducible agents secreted by co-cultured chondrocytes in vitro [111]. In addition, Ledo et al.
(2020) successfully incorporated SOX9 polynucleotides, which play a vital role in chon-
drogenesis, into CAC hydrogel, which may provide new approach for cartilage tissue
engineering [26].
Although transplantation of chondrocytes to damaged cartilage is attractive, one
major issue in cartilage regeneration is the chondrocytes’ dedifferentiation characterized by
the continuous loss of chondrocyte markers [ 112]. A set of studies have demonstrated that
alginate is capable of dedifferentiating the differentiated chondrocytes [ 113,114]. Neverthe-
less, alginate hydrogel has limited ability to maintain chondrocyte viability, restricting the
application in the preservation of chondrocyte phenotype. Collagen–alginate hydrogel has
the potential to preserve chondrocytes phenotypes [ 115]. Jin et al. (2018) demonstrated that
incorporating collagen into alginate can maintain long-term chondrocytes survival and
viability while preserving chondrocyte phenotype. Although collagen gel showed higher
cell viability when compared to CAC hydrogel, the enhanced chondrocyte dedifferentiation
was observed. Incorporating collagen into alginate, providing a suitable environment for
chondrocyte growth and proliferation, inhibits chondrocyte dedifferentiation and preserves
its phenotype [ 115]. Yang et al. (2018) employed 3D printing to fabricate cartilage tissue
using CAC hydrogel (Figure 6). In comparison with ALG and ALG/agarose group, CAC
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 12 of 26
group showed higher chondrocyte survival and enhanced chondrocyte gene expression
including Acan, Sox9 and Col2a1 and decreased Col1a1 gene expression which is a ﬁ-
broblast cell marker (Figure 7). This study may provide new approach for cartilage tissue
engineering [116].
Figure 6. Small grids by 3D printing. ( a) sodium alginate/agarose (3:1), ( b) sodium alginate/collagen
(3:1), and ( c) sodium alginate, sodium alginate/agarose (4:1) and sodium alginate/collagen (4:1).
Reproduced from [116] with permission. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.
Figure 7. Expression level of genes including Acan, Sox9, Col2a1, and Col1a1 was determined by qRT-PCR. 3D constructs
including SA, SA/AG and SA/Col in vitro after 3 days ( a), 7 days ( b), and 14 days ( c). *, **, and *** indicated p< 0.05, p< 0.01
andp< 0.001 between SA/AG and SA/COL vs. SA. ### indicated p< 0.001 between SA/AG vs. SA/COL. Reproduced
from [116] with permission. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.
3.1.3. Intervertebral Disc (IVD)
Intervertebral discs lie between adjacent vertebras and function as cushions during
movement, modulating spinal motion and providing ﬂexibility [ 117]. An IVD consists of
two distinct regions including annulus ﬁbrous (AF) and nucleus pulposus (NP). Gelatinous
nucleus pulposus (NP) is located in the inner region which is surrounded by ﬁbrocartilagi-
nous AF ring.
AF is a highly organized tissue composing of collagen (type I) and proteoglycans,
while NP is an unaligned structure consisting of collagen (type II) and proteoglycans [ 118].
Low back pain is highly associated with IVD degeneration. The majority of patients with
IVD degeneration suffer from low back pain, which poses a signiﬁcant burden on their
quality of life. Current treatment for low back pain includes analgesics, anti-inﬂammatory
and surgical intervention. Spinal fusion is regarded as gold standard for treating low back
pain caused by IVD degeneration. However, it comes with limited spinal mobility and
increased chance of adjacent IVD degeneration [ 119].Therefore, many efforts and strategies
have been placed on the development of engineered IVD to replace the degenerated
IVD [ 120–122]. In particular, hydrogels including alginate, chitosan, hyaluronic acid, and
collagen have been found to have potential as a scaffold in the IVD degeneration [ 121,123].
Collagen-based hydrogels have been widely investigated for their potential scaffold to
treat IVD regeneration. Moriguchi et al. seeded AF cells into high-density collagen gel and
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 13 of 26
showed that cell-loading group has the capacity of promoting IVD regeneration compared
to acellular group in the rat model of IVD degeneration induced by needle puncture [ 124].
Hussain et al. fabricated MSCs laden high-density collagen hydrogel and showed their
prospect in AF and NP regeneration in a sheep model of lumbar IVD degeneration [125].
Both alginate and collagen have been widely investigated in IVD regeneration.
Tsaryk et al. engineered collagen–alginate IVD construct containing gelatin microspheres.
Moreover, the composite hydrogel supported MSC cell survival and promoted its dif-
ferentiation towards chondrocytes [ 126]. Bowles et al. seeded AF cells into composite
hydrogel in which collagen and alginate were fabricated in the outer region and inner
region respectively. The increased alignments of circumferential ﬁbril were observed in the
1% collagen group in vitro [127], which provide a new approach for the engineered-IVD
with more complicated structure. Gloria et al. employed 3D bioprinting to manufacture
IVD construct containing PCL, collagen with low molecular weight, HA and chitosan
nanoparticles [ 128]. The study further demonstrated that the injectability of this scaffold,
similarity of compressive modulus to the natural IVD, and maintenance of cell viability
in vitro [128]. Moriguchi et al. constructed engineered IVD construct consisting of outer
collagen hydrogel and inner alginate hydrogel [ 129]. The author also seeded AF and NP
cells into both inner and outer region [ 129]. The implantation of the designed interverbal
discs into the canine model of discectomy showed a successful integration of composite
hydrogel into the host tissue with no immune response [129].
3.2. Tissue Regeneration
CAC hydrogel is also being extensively explored for the potential in the ﬁeld of tissue
regeneration to generate a range of tissues, including vessel, neuron, liver, and vocal
folds owing to its favorable properties, including gelling under mild condition, proper
environment for cell growth and proliferation, and ease of incorporation of bioactive agents,
and greater retention of bioactive agents.
3.2.1. Blood Vessel
In the human body, blood vessels play an important role in regulating and maintaining
homeostasis, such as carrying oxygen and transporting nutrients to tissues, clearance of
metabolic waste from cells, and delivering stem cells or progenitor cells to the tissues [ 130].
The establishment of the blood vessel network, deﬁned by new blood vessel formation
from existing blood vessels via cell proliferation, sprouting, and migration, is of great
importance in the ﬁeld of tissue engineering, especially in 3D constructs on a large scale
since angiogenesis is crucial for improving transplanted cell survival, and normal function
of newly constructed tissues [ 130,131]. Cells could suffer from hypoxia and receive limited
nutrient supply once the distance between cells and blood vessels is over a few hundred
microns (150–200 m) [132]. The situation is even worse in 3D constructs as cells in the core
receive oxygen and nutrients only via a blood perfusion reaction rather than a diffusion
pathway [ 133]. In addition, neovascularization is also holding great promise to treat
patients with myocardial infarction and stroke.
In order to achieve neovascularization, there are several strategies, including the
delivery of pro-angiogenic cells to the body, transportation of angiogenic stimulating
factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and platelet-derived growth
factor (PDGF), or the combination of both strategies. However, the direct delivery of cell
suspension or angiogenic growth factors to the ischemic tissue comes with poor retention
of pro-angiogenic cells and therapeutic factors [ 134]. In order to combat this issue, many
efforts have been placed on achieving better retention of cells and therapeutic agents using
biocompatible hydrogel in recent years.
CAC hydrogel has been studied as a drug delivery platform to deliver several angio-
genic growth factors to the ischemic tissues. Quinlan et al. incorporated collagen-based
scaffold with spray-dried alginate microparticle to achieve long-term (at least 35 days)
release of VEGF in vitro [135]. More importantly, when implanted into a rat model of
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 14 of 26
calvarial bone defect, the functionalized composite scaffold was capable of promoting bone
regeneration and stimulating new blood vessel formation as demonstrated by threefold
increase in the number of endothelial cells labelled by CD31 in comparison to the empty
scaffold group (Figure 8). Ali et al. engineered alginate collagen microspheres loaded
with FGF-2 and showed at least a 7-day FGF-2 release [ 136]. The direct transplantation of
injectable spheres into ischemic tissue enhances blood vessel formation in zebraﬁsh [136].
Figure 8. Immunobiological images of blood vessel formation and H&E sections. ( A) Immunological
images of endothelium labeled by CD31 (red). ( B) H&E staining of empty defect, empty scaffold and
VEGF-MP scaffold. HB, FT and WB for host bone, ﬁbrotic tissue, and woven bone. Arrows indicated
new bone formation. Reproduced from [ 135] with permission Copyright (2015) John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd. Hoboken, NJ, USA.
3.2.2. Neuron
In comparison with other tissues, the extracellular matrix of the brain is considered
complicated and soft with a heterogenous network of proteoglycan [ 137]. Hyaluronic
acid, a mucopolysaccharide, interacted with other proteins to contribute the majority of
proteoglycan [ 138]. Nevertheless, the cross-linking of hyaluronic acid-based hydrogel
requires chemical modiﬁcation or physical methods including high temperature, base and
UV [ 139]. The cytotoxicity of the chemical cross-linker or the uncompromised physical
method limits its use when working with cell [ 139]. Alginate is receiving research interest
in neuron regeneration in light of its high structure similarity to hyaluronic acid and
gelling method under mild condition [ 140]. Its incorporation with collagen, which contains
cell binding motifs to form CAC hydrogel has also been investigated for its ability to
encourage neurogenesis.
Moxon et al. demonstrated that compared to alginate hydrogel, composite hydrogel
provides a suitable 3D environment that maintains encapsulated cells survival, stimulates
neuronal maturation and encourages the projection from neurites as demonstrated by the
signiﬁcant expression of synaptophysin [ 25]. In addition to collagen ﬁbrils that provide
mechanical cues to iPSC-derived neuron, the study further demonstrated that increased
stiffness via Ca2+concentration signiﬁcantly decreased the expression of microtubule
associated protein 2 which is a marker for neurogenesis. The composite hydrogel may be
a potential approach to treat patients with disorders related to damaged or degenerated
nervous tissue as the work by Jose et al. demonstrated that neural stem cell encapsulated
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 15 of 26
into CAC microsphere using microﬂuidics technology maintained at least 10-day cell
viability and differentiated into neural lineage in the ex vivo model of spinal cord injury [ 94].
CAC hydrogel has also been combined with other biomaterials and peptides to promote
neuronal differentiation. Collagen–alginate composite hydrogel containing hyaluronic acid
and methacrylic anhydride has triggered the neuronal differentiation from iPSCs [141].
3.2.3. Liver
Collagen–alginate hydrogel may be a promising approach for the replacement of
damaged liver tissue. Chan et al. successfully employed microﬂuidics technology to
encapsulate hepatocytes into CAC hydrogel [ 93]. Moreover, hepatocytes showed greater
functions [ 93]. In particular, when compared to the control groups including collagen and
alginate group, the total albumin secretion from hepatocytes in the CAC group was signiﬁ-
cantly higher in vitro . In addition, increased cytochrome enzyme activity was observed in
the CAC group.
3.2.4. Vocal Folds Restoration
The work conducted by Hahn et al. showed promise as a potential scaffold in vocal
fold restoration [ 142]. A signiﬁcant increase in synthesized reticular collagen ﬁbrils was
observed in CAC group compared to the collagen-hyaluronic acid group. In addition,
CAC hydrogel maintained excellent mass and no reduction in gel size over a 42-day cell
culture, further suggesting that CAC hydrogel exhibited a desirable 3D matrix for vocal
folds regeneration compared to the collagen-HA scaffold.
CAC hydrogel has been found great potential as a scaffold in tissue engineering and
tissue regeneration. Table 3 provides a list of existing studies of CAC hydrogel as a scaffold
that can be used in different tissues.
Table 3. Summary of CAC as a scaffold in tissue engineering and tissue regeneration.
Tissue Engineering or Tissue Regeneration Tissue Application Reference
Tissue engineeringBone [88–90,104,105,109]
Cartilage [26,115,116]
IVD [129]
Tissue regenerationBlood vessel [135,136]
Neuron [25,94,141]
Liver [93]
Vocal folds [142]
3.3. Biomedical Sciences
3.3.1. Wound Dressing
The deﬁnition of a wound is the laceration or discontinuity of epithelium or mucosa
resulting from violence, accidents or surgical procedure. Wound can be classiﬁed into two
categories, including acute and chronic wound, based on the duration and nature of the
healing process [ 143,144]. Wound healing is a complicated, intricate, and dynamic process
orchestrated by an array of cells, growth factors, cytokines, and ECM, which requires
an appropriate and suitable environment to assist the healing process [ 145]. The wound
dressing is of great importance during the healing process since a proper wound dressing
can accelerate the physiological reconstruction meanwhile minimizing the risk of bacterial
infection and protecting wound contamination from the surroundings and retention of a
moist environment for the wound [ 146]. The ultimate goal of wound care is to completely
restore and reconstruct the damaged tissue to its prior functional level with satisfactory
cosmetic results [147].
When designing an ideal wound dressing, various considerations and factors should
be taken into account, including its ability to (1) keep and maintain a moist environment, (2)
promote new blood vessel and physiological reconstruction of connective tissue and skins,
(3) accelerate epidermal migration (4) permit gas exchange between injury site and the
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 16 of 26
surroundings (5) remove easily (6) ﬁght microbial infection (7) maintain appropriate envi-
ronments such as PH and temperature and (8) offer sterilized condition with noncytotoxic
and nonallergenic properties [148].
Traditional wound dressings, including gauze, and bandages, mainly provide a phys-
iological barrier to prevent microorganism infection, meanwhile permitting exudate ad-
sorption to maintain a dry environment for the wound site [ 149]. Nowadays, the market of
modern wound dressing is expanding as it can provide a moist environment that stimulates
cell proliferation and differentiation, therefore accelerating the healing process and mini-
mizing the chance of bacterial infection compared with traditional wound dressing. There
are growing modern wound dressing products available in the market that combine two or
three natural biomaterials, including alginate, collagen, chitosan, and cellulose, since the
composite hydrogel enables the integration of each individual favorable properties to meet
the requirements of ideal wound dressings.
Alginate-based wound dressing has been applied as one type of modern dressings for
many years since alginate provides several superior features, including biocompatibility,
low cytotoxicity to mammalian cells, and moist environment retention compared to tradi-
tional ones [ 149]. Plenty of studies have reported that alginate exhibited a great promoting
effect on the wound healing process. However, the poor hemostatic effect has also been rec-
ognized. Collagen has been studied as a biomaterial in wound dressing owing to its unique
characteristics, such as excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability [ 150]. Collagen
has been found to accelerate wound healing by increasing cell proliferation, guiding cell
differentiation, promoting neovascularization, and accelerating blood coagulation [ 151].
Incorporating collagen with alginate has attracted much research attention recently due to
its properties, including excellent biocompatibility, low immunogenicity and superb hemo-
static effect. In addition to that, collagen–alginate wound dressings have exhibited unique
properties, including (1) alginate could provide a moist environment which is essential
and beneﬁcial for wound healing, (2) collagen can stimulate ﬁbroblast migration, promote
re-epithelization and angiogenesis, (3) mild gelling that enables cell encapsulation and (4)
ease of incorporation with other materials and antimicrobial agents (Table 4). Therefore,
CAC composite hydrogel is a potential candidate in wound care. Several collagen–alginate
wound dressing products, including FIBRACOL Plus, DermaCol Ag, and ColActive Plus,
are commercially available.
Table 4. Summary of CAC hydrogel in wound dressing.
Composition Finding Reference
Collagen–alginate-AMPs Antimicrobial activity and no cytotoxicity to ﬁbroblasts [152]
Collagen–alginate-hyaluronic acid-AMPsAntimicrobial activity, good biocompatibility, reduced
inﬂammation, and angiogenesis[153]
Collagen–alginate wound dressing Accelerating wound healing and great patients’ satisfaction [154,155]
Aminated collagen-oxidized
alginate-polymyxin B sulfate-bacitracinAntimicrobial activity, angiogenesis, and reepithelization [156]
Chitosan-collagen–alginate dressing-PU
membraneHemocompatibility, reepithelization, and water-resistance [157]
Collagen–alginate-AgNPsAntibacterial activity but dose-dependent cytotoxicity to
mammalian cells[158]
Collagen–alginate-hUCMSCs Promote wound healing, reepithelization, and angiogenesis [159]
Recently, a novel wound dressing comprised of two or three biomaterials such as
collagen, alginate, chitosan, HA, and cellulose incorporated with functional and bioactive
agents has been studied since single material cannot meet all requirements of the ideal
wound dressing [160].
Carl et al. demonstrated that, compared to traditional dressing, the collagen–alginate
wound dressing consisting of 90% collagen and 10% alginate presented a decreased wound
healing duration and reduced chance of infection and contamination, improved patients’
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 17 of 26
compliance, and higher satisfaction in patients with chemical matricectomies [ 154]. In
another randomized clinical trial, patients with diabetic foot ulcers were treated with
traditional wound dressing (gauze moistened with 0.9% NaCl) and a modern collagen–
alginate wound dressing. The results showed that a reduction of wound size in the
collagen–alginate group compared to the gauze group. More patients reported having
complete wound healing in the CAC group, which suggested that the collagen–alginate
wound dressing has more efﬁcacy than commercially used gauze wound dressing [ 155].
Moreover, greater satisfaction was shown in collagen–alginate treatment group owing
to its ease of removal and limited wound care duration. Collagen–alginate dressing
group showed signiﬁcantly less painful index, cost-effectiveness, decreased duration of re-
epithelization. The transplantation of CAC scaffold into defects promoted wound healing
in vivo . Collagen–alginate wound dressings have more advantageous effects on promoting
wound healing [103].
The use of stem cells in wound dressing has emerged as a promising strategy due to
their potential to reconstruct tissue to a pre-injured state. A recent study by Zhang et al.
demonstrated that encapsulated human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (HUCM-
SCs) in collagen–alginate hydrogel maintained good viability and growth factors secreted
by HUCMSCs inhibited immunological response, thereby promoting wound healing and
tissue reconstruction [159].
CAC hydrogel can also be incorporated with other biomaterials to gain more favor-
able properties. A recent study by Xie et al. demonstrated that coupling chitosan, which
exhibits non-cytotoxicity, antibacterial effect, hemostatic effect, and biocompatibility, into
CAC wound dressing facilitated platelet aggregation and formation of a ﬁbrin clot, accel-
erated cell migration including ﬁbroblasts and endothelium to the wound site, thereby
promoting wound healing in the rat model of the full-thickness wound [ 157]. The CCA
wound dressing was further attached to polyurethanes (PU) membrane to obtain sea-
water resistance [ 157]. Patients with acute full-thickness wounds suffered from a more
extended wound healing period, which increases the risk of bacterial infection, ﬁnally
leading to wound ulceration, necrosis, and even life-threatening complications. It is esti-
mated that over two million people carry wounds containing antibiotic-resistant bacteria
contamination. The growing prevalence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogen has led to
more than twenty thousand deaths yearly, providing a strong impetus to develop modern
dressing with anti-bacterial infection [ 161]. Up to date, the functionalization of wound
dressings with antiseptic and anti-inﬂammatory agents are showing a more powerful effect
on promoting wound healing [ 162]. CAC wound dressing does not possess antibacterial
properties. Therefore, research into the development of novel dressing designs with antimi-
crobial properties by incorporating nanoparticles or antiseptic agents has received much
attention. Feng et al. incorporated polymyxin B sulfate and bacitracin into CAC wound
dressing. They reported that CAC-PB exhibited an excellent antibacterial effect against E.
coliandS. aureus and promoted wound healing in a rat model of a full-thickness wound
as the evidence of observation of granulation tissue, the new formation of the vascular
network, and re-epithelization [ 156]. Silver has been extensively studied as its excellent
antimicrobial activity against fungi, bacteria, and viruses. In a recent study by Zhang et al.,
AgNps, a silver nanoparticle, was introduced into a collagen–alginate wound dressing
to achieve the anti-microorganism function [ 158]. Functionalization of CAC with AgNps
showed their signiﬁcant antibacterial effect against E. coli and S. aureus . Nevertheless,
the dose-dependent cytotoxicity of silver nanoparticles to mammalian cells and impaired
wound healing process cannot be overlooked. Therefore, scientists are searching for novel
wound dressing with broad antibacterial function and weak toxicity to mammalian cells.
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), which belong to one part of innate immune system,
have found their beneﬁt for promoting wound healing and therapeutic potentials to treat
wound infection on account of their broad-spectrum antimicrobial effect on both Gram-
positive and Gram-negative bacteria and inherent favorable properties including limited
cytotoxicity to human mammalian cells and regulatory effect on immune cell migration
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 18 of 26
and dendritic differentiation [ 163]. Lin et al. conjugated AMP Tet213 with CAC hydrogel
containing hyaluronic acid via the chemical bond. Moreover, slow and controlled release of
AMP Tet213 from Alg/Ha/Col-AMP wound dressing showed a signiﬁcant inhibitory effect
on bacterial infection such as E. coli andS. aureus and promoting effect on wound healing
in vivo via its regulatory role in inﬂammation, collagen deposition, and angiogenesis [ 153].
Although a vast amount of biomaterial-based wound dressings has been developed,
there is limited knowledge regarding the impact of biomaterial scaffold on the wound heal-
ing process. One study conducted by Cunha et al. synthesized a set of CAC scaffolds with
different storage modulus via tuning the concentration of Ca2+. The result demonstrated
that varying stiffnesses caused the morphologic change on ﬁbroblasts and regulated the
secretion of inﬂammatory factors, therefore accelerating or inhibiting the wound dressing
process [164].
3.3.2. Encapsulated Cell Therapy
CAC hydrogel has been developed as cell carriers to deliver bioactive agents secreted
by encapsulated cells inside the device to treat a set of diseases including type 1 diabetes
and retina degeneration.
The concept of ECT is to deliver fresh and synthesized therapeutic agents secreted by
live cells either from allogeneic or xenogeneic sources that are encapsulated in a semiperme-
able membrane. The semipermeable membrane allows gas exchange and nutrients supply
while avoiding immunological reaction from host upon transplantation via blocking the
immune mediators [ 165]. Moreover, the function of polymers is to provide mechanical
protection to the enclosed cells from shear force damage [ 166]. The history of cell encap-
sulation can be traced back to the early 1930s when Bisceglie et al. encapsulated cancer
cells into the polymer scaffold and successfully transplanted the capsule into pig abdomen.
The concept of “artiﬁcial cell” was ﬁrstly depicted by Tomas Chang, who subsequently
proposed the idea of encapsulated cell therapy [167].
Various preclinical and clinical trials on the efﬁcacy of ECT to treat central nervous
system degeneration and retinal degeneration, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis,
Huntington’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease as well as retinitis pigmentosa have been under-
taken [ 168]. There are plenty of biomaterials which have been investigated and developed
as a scaffold for ECT device. Among these biomaterials, alginate is the most commonly
used biomaterial either alone or in combination with other biomaterials. Nevertheless,
the inherent lack of cell-binding sites limits its widespread application in ECT. Therefore,
incorporating collagen, which contains cell-binding motifs, maintains cell viability and
promotes cell proliferation via facilitating cell adhesion and attachment. CAC hydrogel is
becoming the focus in ECT as composite hydrogel combines collagen and alginate merits.
In this section, encapsulation of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF)-secreting
human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells, islet cells as an alternative therapy to treat retinal
degenerative disease, and type 1 diabetes will be illustrated.
Islet Cells
The increasing number of diabetes mellitus (DM) imposes a signiﬁcant burden on
the healthcare system around the world. Pancreatic islets transplantation recently has
been considered as a potential treatment for DM patients. Nevertheless, there remains
the difﬁculty in the isolation of pancreatic islet cells from the donor, maintaining viability
during the procedure, and the relative risk of pancreas transplantation is of grave concern.
The work conducted by Lee et al. revealed the great promise of ECT as a treatment for type
1 diabetes. The author encapsulated islet cells into collagen–alginate composite hydrogel
using the concave well array for manufacturing CAC hydrogel on a large scale.
The author showed the successful encapsulation of islet spheroids into CAC hydro-
gel. Compared to the pure alginate group, CAC showed increased islet cell viability and
integrity for at least eight weeks, suggesting CAC is an excellent biomaterial scaffold for
maintaining islet cell viability and function [ 92]. Moreover, the incorporation of collagen
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 19 of 26
enhanced the inward diffusion of oxygen and nutrient to the islet cells. More importantly,
encapsulated islet spheroids showed a glucose-controlling effect compared to the direct
implantation of intact islets into the mice with diabetes. Direct implant of intact islets
demonstrated robust and signiﬁcant CD 45 ﬂuorescent signals compared to the encapsu-
lated islet group, strongly suggesting that CAC protected islets cells from immune attack
and provided mechanical protection.
GDNF-Secreting HEK Cells
GDNF has demonstrated a neuroprotective effect on both the central nervous system
(CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS). GDNF has been proved its neuroprotective
effect in a set of animal models. Recently, GDNF has been applied into preclinical and
clinic trials to treat CNS degeneration. Nevertheless, considering the relative half-life of
GDNF, and the potential adverse effect of systemically administration of GDNF, ECT that
enables continuous GDNF release is required. Wong et al. encapsulated GDNF-secreting
HEK cells into three-dimensional collagen microspheres to achieve the continuous GDNF
secretion. When enclosing GDNF-secreting HEK cells into 3D collagen microsphere, it
showed dramatically increased GDNF secretion compared to monolayer cell culture since
collagen recapitulates a native tissue-like environment for cells to grow and proliferate [ 169].
Further analysis suggested that GDNF secreted from 3D collagen microspheres possesses
bioactive properties as GDNF promoted neurite extension, highly suggesting the potential
of cell-collagen encapsulation as a drug delivery platform in the ﬁeld of pharmaceutics.
Another study conducted by the same group introduced alginate into collagen-cell
microspheres to limit cell migration from collagen scaffold to the surroundings for further
application since cell migration from ECT may elicit immunological response and immune
rejection [ 170]. In this work, the author illustrated that the collaboration of alginate with
collagen is able to prevent cell migration and also allow continuous GDNF secretion
from the device. Moreover, cell viability is highly associated with alginate concentration.
In summary, the work developed a novel CAC ECT device as a potential drug delivery
platform to treat CNS degenerative disease. Wong et al. further developed CAC ECT device
from microsphere to cylinder-like structure as a potential treatment for retinal degeneration
and possibly retinitis pigmentosa. The work demonstrated that long-term system stability
and performance of CAC ECT design can be tuned by alginate concentration and the
importance of initial cell density on the optimization of ECT device. In vivo studies
demonstrated that rat vitreous can support cell survival and proliferation inside CAC ECT
device and GDNF secretion from the device [ 22]. Wong et al. further demonstrated that
the performance of CAC ECT device could be tuned by varying parameters, including
initial cell density, gelation sequence, alginate molecular weight, and concentration. More
importantly, continuous GDNF secretion from the CAC ECT device has a neuroprotective
effect on photoreceptor both histologically and electrophysiologically in the rat model of
photoreceptor degeneration, which strongly implied that CAC ECT platform is a promising
treatment to treat a group of retinal degenerative diseases [23].
3.3.3. Tumor Biology
There is no doubt that cells live in the extracellular matrix that facilitates cell inter-
action, cell migration and cell attachment to basement, allows metabolic waste exchange
and provides oxygen and nutrients to the cells. Although the vast majority of research
into cancer studies are performed in two-dimensional (2D) cell culture, the limitation of
2D cancer cell studies compared to 3D culture cannot be ignored, including lack of cell
interaction to ECM and cell migration, limited signal transduction, and the absence of
cytoskeletal organization, which may lead to inconsistent ﬁndings between in vitro and
in vivo studies.
The proliferation of tumor cells and their morphology are associated with the stiffness
of 3D scaffold. A study showed that higher 3D stiffness promoted multicellular aggre-
gate proliferation, which may provide an alternative strategy for cancer treatment and
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 20 of 26
diagnosis [ 171]. Wang et al. further demonstrated the effect of stiffness on tumor cell
migration. The study showed that higher stiffness can decrease cell volume, reducing the
tumor cell migration capability [ 172]. Liu et al. also developed a tumor-like scaffold to
mimick in vivo tumor scenario and showed tumor invasion in the 3D scaffold is similar to
in vivo environment [173].
4. Conclusions and Future Perspectives
CAC hydrogel has shown its great potential in tissue engineering and biomedical
sciences owing to its wide availability, excellent biocompatibility, ease of gelation, and
weak cytotoxicity. The unique properties of CAC hydrogel include enhanced mechanical
properties, moldability, and tunning porosity. Besides, CAC can also be incorporated with
other materials, molecules, and nanoparticles to obtain more favorable features. In particu-
lar, in tissue engineering, CAC has been developed as a platform to deliver molecules or
cells to the defect site. Moreover, Composite hydrogel can be further incorporated with
other bioactive agents, especially in bone tissue engineering. CAC hydrogel is also being
extensively explored for its potential in tissue regeneration, including angiogenesis, liver,
neuron, and vocal folds. CAC hydrogel promotes wound healing by providing a moist
environment and cell-binding site that enables cell migration and cell proliferation. The
ease of incorporation of antibacterial agents and AMPs further expands their application in
wound care. CAC hydrogel has been investigated as a drug delivery platform in the ﬁeld
of ECT. ECT device can be optimized by different parameters such as initial cell density,
ALG concentration and molecular weight, and collagen concentration, which provides a
new view for ECT application.
However, the majority of CAC studies in cartilage tissue engineering are performed
in vitro . The applicability of CAC in cartilage regeneration warrants further animal investi-
gation. 3D printing may provide an alternative approach for CAC application in cartilage
tissue engineering. Although hydrogel has been investigated in IVD regeneration, the
construction of IVD for clinical use is still a considerable challenge. More investigations
should be placed on the generation of engineered-IVD with optimal mechanical properties,
the integration of engineered-IVD to host tissue, and the maintenances of encapsulated
cell viability. The performance of CAC ECT device can be tuned via initial cell number,
ALG and COL concentration, and molecular weight. Therefore, the efﬁcacy of ECT in the
treatment of diseases requires more investigation. One of the merits of composite hydrogel
is its tunning mechanical properties. However, there are limited studies regarding the
effect of stiffness on encapsulated cells and tumor cells, which warrants more investigation.
Author Contributions: T.H. contributed to writing the manuscript. A.C.Y.L. contributed to editing
the manuscript. Both authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by Health and Medical Research Fund, the Food and Health
Bureau, The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (06171516). The funder
had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of
the manuscript.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Hubbell, J.A. Biomaterials in tissue engineering. Bio-technology 1995 ,13, 565–576. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Huebsch, N.; Mooney, D.J. Inspiration and application in the evolution of biomaterials. Nature 2009 ,462, 426–432. [CrossRef]
3. Ratner, B.D.; Bryant, S.J. Biomaterials: Where we have been and where we are going. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2004 ,6, 41–75.
[CrossRef]
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 21 of 26
4. Ullah, S.; Chen, X. Fabrication, applications and challenges of natural biomaterials in tissue engineering. Appl. Mater. Today 2020 ,
20, 100656. [CrossRef]
5. Porter, R.M.; Akers, R.M.; Howard, R.D.; Forsten-Williams, K. Alginate encapsulation impacts the insulin-like growth factor-
I system of monolayer-expanded equine articular chondrocytes and cell response to interleukin-1 beta. Tissue Eng. 2007 ,
13, 1333–1345. [CrossRef]
6. Wee, S.; Gombotz, W.R. Protein release from alginate matrices. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 1998 ,31, 267–285. [PubMed]
7. Kim, W.S.; Mooney, D.J.; Arany, P .R.; Lee, K.; Huebsch, N.; Kim, J. Adipose tissue engineering using injectable, oxidized alginate
hydrogels. Tissue Eng. Part A 2012 ,18, 737–743. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Suzuki, Y.; Nishimura, Y.; Tanihara, M.; Suzuki, K.; Nakamura, T.; Shimizu, Y.; Yamawaki, Y.; Kakimaru, Y. Evaluation of a novel
alginate gel dressing: Cytotoxicity to ﬁbroblasts in vitro and foreign-body reaction in pig skin in vivo .J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1998 ,
39, 317–322. [CrossRef]
9. Peters, M.C.; Polverini, P .J.; Mooney, D.J. Engineering vascular networks in porous polymer matrices. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 2002 ,
60, 668–678. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. You, J.O.; Liu, Y.C.; Peng, C.A. Efﬁcient gene transfection using chitosan-alginate core-shell nanoparticles. Int. J. Nanomed. 2006 ,
1, 173–180. [CrossRef]
11. Lee, K.Y.; Mooney, D.J. Alginate: Properties and biomedical applications. Prog. Polym. Sci. 2012 ,37, 106–126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Lee, J.W.; Juliano, R. Mitogenic signal transduction by integrin—And growth factor receptor—Mediated pathways. Mol. Cells
2004 ,17, 188–202.
13. Burgeson, R.E.; Nimni, M.E. Collagen types—Molecular-structure and tissue Distribution. Clin. Orthop. Relat. R. 1992 ,282, 250–272.
14. Ramachandran, G.N. Structure of collagen at the molecular level. In Treatise on Collagen ; Ramachandran, G.N., Ed.; Academic Press:
New York, NJ, USA, 1967; pp. 103–183.
15. Chattopadhyay, S.; Raines, R.T. Collagen-based biomaterials for wound healing. Biopolymers 2014 ,101, 821–833. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
16. Hesse, E.; Hefferan, T.E.; Tarara, J.E.; Haasper, C.; Meller, R.; Krettek, C.; Lu, L.C.; Yaszemski, M.J. Collagen type I hydrogel
allows migration, proliferation, and osteogenic differentiation of rat bone marrow stromal cells. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A 2010 ,
94, 442–449. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Lynn, A.K.; Yannas, I.V .; Bonﬁeld, W. Antigenicity and immunogenicity of collagen. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part B 2004 ,71B,
343–354. [CrossRef]
18. Radhakrishnan, S.; Nagarajan, S.; Bechelany, M.; Kalkura, S.N. Collagen based biomaterials for tissue engineering applications: A
review. In Processes and Phenomena on the Boundary between Biogenic and Abiogenic Nature—Lecture Notes in Earth System Sciences ;
Frank-Kamenetskaya, O., Vlasov, D., Panova, E., Lessovaia, S., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; pp. 3–22.
19. Antoine, E.E.; Vlachos, P .P .; Rylander, M.N. Review of collagen i hydrogels for bioengineered tissue microenvironments:
Characterization of mechanics, structure, and transport. Tissue Eng. Part B Rev. 2014 ,20, 683–696. [CrossRef]
20. Heino, J. Cellular signaling by collagen-binding integrins. I Domain Integrins 2014 ,819, 143–155.
21. Holder, A.J.; Badiei, N.; Hawkins, K.; Wright, C.; Williams, P .R.; Curtis, D.J. Control of collagen gel mechanical properties through
manipulation of gelation conditions near the sol-gel transition. Soft Matter 2018 ,14, 574–580. [CrossRef]
22. Wong, F.S.Y.; Wong, C.C.H.; Chan, B.P .; Lo, A.C.Y. Sustained delivery of bioactive GDNF from collagen and alginate-based
cell-encapsulating gel promoted photoreceptor survival in an inherited retinal degeneration model. PLoS ONE 2016 ,11, e0159342.
[CrossRef]
23. Wong, F.S.Y.; Tsang, K.K.; Chu, A.M.W.; Chan, B.P .; Yao, K.M.; Lo, A.C.Y. Injectable cell-encapsulating composite alginate-collagen
platform with inducible termination switch for safer ocular drug delivery. Biomaterials 2019 ,201, 53–67. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Liu, W.G.; Grifﬁth, M.; Li, F.F. Alginate microsphere-collagen composite hydrogel for ocular drug delivery and implantation. J.
Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 2008 ,19, 3365–3371. [CrossRef]
25. Moxon, S.R.; Corbett, N.J.; Fisher, K.; Potjewyd, G.; Domingos, M.; Hooper, N.M. Blended alginate/collagen hydrogels promote
neurogenesis and neuronal maturation. Mat. Sci. Eng. C 2019 ,104, 109904. [CrossRef]
26. Ledo, A.M.; Vining, K.H.; Alonso, M.J.; Garcia-Fuentes, M.; Mooney, D.J. Extracellular matrix mechanics regulate transfection
and SOX9-directed differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. Acta Biomater. 2020 ,110, 153–163. [CrossRef]
27. Strand, B.L.; Morch, Y.A.; Skjak-Braek, G. Alginate as immobilization matrix for cells. Minerva Biotecnol. 2000 ,12, 223–233.
28. Smidsrod, O.; Skjakbraek, G. Alginate as immobilization matrix for cells. Trends Biotechnol. 1990 ,8, 71–78. [CrossRef]
29. Rinaudo, M. Main properties and current applications of some polysaccharides as biomaterials. Polym. Int. 2008 ,57, 397–430.
[CrossRef]
30. Remminghorst, U.; Rehm, B.H.A. Bacterial alginates: From biosynthesis to applications. Biotechnol. Lett. 2006 ,28, 1701–1712.
[CrossRef]
31. Martinsen, A.; Skjakbraek, G.; Smidsrod, O. Alginate as immobilization material.1. Correlation between chemical and physical-
properties of alginate gel beads. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 1989 ,33, 79–89. [CrossRef]
32. Tonnesen, H.H.; Karlsen, J. Alginate in drug delivery systems. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm. 2002 ,28, 621–630. [CrossRef]
33. George, M.; Abraham, T.E. Polyionic hydrocolloids for the intestinal delivery of protein drugs: Alginate and chitosan—A review.
J. Control. Release 2006 ,114, 1–14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 22 of 26
34. LeRoux, M.A.; Guilak, F.; Setton, L.A. Compressive and shear properties of alginate gel: Effects of sodium ions and alginate
concentration. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1999 ,47, 46–53. [CrossRef]
35. Kong, H.J.; Smith, M.K.; Mooney, D.J. Designing alginate hydrogels to maintain viability of immobilized cells. Biomaterials 2003 ,
24, 4023–4029. [CrossRef]
36. Orive, G.; Carcaboso, A.M.; Hernandez, R.M.; Gascon, A.R.; Pedraz, J.L. Biocompatibility evaluation of different alginates and
alginate-based microcapsules. Biomacromolecules 2005 ,6, 927–931. [CrossRef]
37. Lee, J.; Lee, K.Y. Local and sustained vascular endothelial growth factor delivery for angiogenesis using an injectable system.
Pharm Res. 2009 ,26, 1739–1744. [CrossRef]
38. Mushollaeni, W.; Supartini, N.; Rusdiana, E. Toxicity test of alginate from Sargassum and Padina on the liver of mice. Food Public
Health 2014 ,4, 204–208.
39. Grant, G.T.; Morris, E.R.; Rees, D.A.; Smith, P .J.C.; Thom, D. Biological interactions between polysaccharides and divalent
cations—Egg-box model. FEBS Lett. 1973 ,32, 195–198. [CrossRef]
40. Kuo, C.K.; Ma, P .X. Ionically cross-linked alginate hydrogels as scaffolds for tissue engineering: Part 1. Structure, gelation rate
and mechanical properties. Biomaterials 2001 ,22, 511–521. [CrossRef]
41. Abasalizadeh, F.; Moghaddam, S.V .; Alizadeh, E.; Akbari, E.; Kashani, E.; Fazljou, S.M.B.; Torbati, M.; Akbarzadeh, A. Alginate-
based hydrogels as drug delivery vehicles in cancer treatment and their applications in wound dressing and 3D bioprinting. J.
Biol. Eng. 2020 ,14, 8. [CrossRef]
42. Mourino, V .; Newby, P .; Pishbin, F.; Cattalini, J.P .; Lucangioli, S.; Boccaccini, A.R. Physicochemical, biological and drug-release
properties of gallium cross-linked alginate/nanoparticulate bioactive glass composite ﬁlms. Soft Matter 2011 ,7, 6705–6712.
[CrossRef]
43. Hijazi, S.; Visaggio, D.; Pirolo, M.; Frangipani, E.; Bernstein, L.; Visca, P . Antimicrobial activity of gallium compounds on ESKAPE
pathogens. Front. Cell Infect. Microbiol. 2018 ,8, 316. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Chitambar, C.R. Gallium and its competing roles with iron in biological systems. BBA Mol. Cell Res. 2016 ,1863 , 2044–2053.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Rastin, H.; Ramezanpour, M.; Hassan, K.; Mazinani, A.; Tung, T.T.; Vreugde, S.; Losic, D. 3D bioprinting of a cell-laden
antibacterial polysaccharide hydrogel composite. Carbohydr. Polym. 2021 ,264, 117989. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Parenteau-Bareil, R.; Gauvin, R.; Berthod, F. Collagen-based biomaterials for tissue engineering applications. Materials 2010 ,
3, 1863–1887. [CrossRef]
47. Vanderrest, M.; Garrone, R. Collagen family of proteins. FASEB J. 1991 ,5, 2814–2823. [CrossRef]
48. Prockop, D.J.; Kivirikko, K.I. Collagens—Molecular-Biology, diseases, and potentials for therapy. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 1995 ,
64, 403–434. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Chevallay, B.; Herbage, D. Collagen-based biomaterials as 3D scaffold for cell cultures: Applications for tissue engineering and
gene therapy. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 2000 ,38, 211–218. [CrossRef]
50. Wolf, K.; Alexander, S.; Schacht, V .; Coussens, L.M.; von Andrian, U.H.; van Rheenen, J.; Deryugina, E.; Friedl, P . Collagen-based
cell migration models in vitro and in vivo. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 2009 ,20, 931–941. [CrossRef]
51. Gelse, K.; Poschl, E.; Aigner, T. Collagens—structure, function, and biosynthesis. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2003 ,55, 1531–1546.
[CrossRef]
52. Osidak, E.O.; Kozhukhov, V .I.; Osidak, M.S.; Domogatsky, S.P . Collagen as bioink for bioprinting: A comprehensive review. Int. J.
Bioprint. 2020 ,6, 270.
53. Badylak, S.F. Xenogeneic extracellular matrix as a scaffold for tissue reconstruction. Transpl. Immunol. 2004 ,12, 367–377.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Kumar, V .A.; Taylor, N.L.; Jalan, A.A.; Hwang, L.K.; Wang, B.K.; Hartgerink, J.D. A Nanostructured synthetic collagen mimic for
hemostasis. Biomacromolecules 2014 ,15, 1484–1490. [CrossRef]
55. Xu, X.; Gan, Q.L.; Clough, R.C.; Pappu, K.M.; Howard, J.A.; Baez, J.A.; Wang, K. Hydroxylation of recombinant human collagen
type I alpha 1 in transgenic maize co-expressed with a recombinant human prolyl 4-hydroxylase. BMC Biotechnol. 2011 ,11, 69.
[CrossRef]
56. Cooperman, L.; Michaeli, D. The immunogenicity of injectable collagen. II. A retrospective review of seventy-two tested and
treated patients. J. Am. Acad. Derm. 1984 ,10, 647–651. [CrossRef]
57. Addad, S.; Exposito, J.Y.; Faye, C.; Ricard-Blum, S.; Lethias, C. Isolation, characterization and biological evaluation of jellyﬁsh
collagen for use in biomedical applications. Mar. Drugs 2011 ,9, 967–983. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Kim, B.S.; Choi, J.S.; Kim, J.D.; Yoon, H.I.; Choi, Y.C.; Cho, Y.W. Human collagen isolated from adipose tissue. Biotechnol. Prog.
2012 ,28, 973–980. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. Lauer-Fields, J.L.; Fields, G.B. Triple-helical peptide analysis of collagenolytic protease activity. Biol. Chem. 2002 ,383, 1095–1105.
[CrossRef]
60. Fields, G.B. A Model for interstitial collagen catabolism by mammalian collagenases. J. Theor. Biol. 1991 ,153, 585–602. [CrossRef]
61. Aimes, R.T.; Quigley, J.P . Matrix metalloproteinase-2 Is an interstitial collagenase—Inhibitor-Free Enzyme catalyzes the cleavage
of collagen ﬁbrils and soluble native type-I collagen generating the speciﬁc 3/4-length and 1/4-length fragments. J. Biol. Chem.
1995 ,270, 5872–5876. [CrossRef]
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 23 of 26
62. Ohuchi, E.; Imai, K.; Fujii, Y.; Sato, H.; Seiki, M.; Okada, Y. Membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase digests interstitial collagens
and other extracellular matrix macromolecules. J. Biol. Chem. 1997 ,272, 2446–2451. [CrossRef]
63. Song, E.; Kim, S.Y.; Chun, T.; Byun, H.J.; Lee, Y.M. Collagen scaffolds derived from a marine source and their biocompatibility.
Biomaterials 2006 ,27, 2951–2961. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Wu, X.M.; Black, L.; Santacana-Lafﬁtte, G.; Patrick, C.W. Preparation and assessment of glutaraldehyde-cross-linked collagen-
chitosan hydrogels for adipose tissue engineering. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A 2007 ,81A, 59–65. [CrossRef]
65. Powell, H.M.; Boyce, S.T. EDC cross-linking improves skin substitute strength and stability. Biomaterials 2006 ,27, 5821–5827.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Tu, R.; Quijano, R.C.; Lu, C.L.; Shen, S.; Wang, E.; Hata, C.; Lin, D. A preliminary-study of the ﬁxation mechanism of collagen
reaction with a polyepoxy ﬁxative. Int. J. Artif. Organs 1993 ,16, 537–544. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Speer, D.P .; Chvapil, M.; Eskelson, C.D.; Ulreich, J. Biological effects of residual glutaraldehyde in glutaraldehyde-tanned collagen
biomaterials. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1980 ,14, 753–764. [CrossRef]
68. Weadock, K.S.; Miller, E.J.; Bellincampi, L.D.; Zawadsky, J.P .; Dunn, M.G. Physical cross-linking of collagen ﬁbers: Comparison of
ultraviolet irradiation and dehydrothermal treatment. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1995 ,29, 1373–1379. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69. Zork, N.M.; Myers, K.M.; Yoshida, K.; Cremers, S.; Jiang, H.F.; Ananth, C.V .; Wapner, R.J.; Kitajewski, J.; Vink, J. A systematic
evaluation of collagen cross-links in the human cervix. Am. J. Obs. Gynecol. 2015 ,212. [CrossRef]
70. Haugh, M.G.; Jaasma, M.J.; O’Brien, F.J. The effect of dehydrothermal treatment on the mechanical and structural properties of
collagen-GAG scaffolds. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part A 2009 ,89A, 363–369. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Miles, C.A.; Bailey, A.J. Thermally labile domains in the collagen molecule. Micron 2001 ,32, 325–332. [CrossRef]
72. Haugh, M.G.; Murphy, C.M.; McKiernan, R.C.; Altenbuchner, C.; O’Brien, F.J. Cross-linking and mechanical properties signiﬁ-
cantly inﬂuence cell attachment, proliferation, and migration within collagen glycosaminoglycan scaffolds. Tissue Eng. Part A
2011 ,17A, 1201–1208. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Weadock, K.S.; Miller, E.J.; Keuffel, E.L.; Dunn, M.G. Effect of physical cross-linking methods on collagen-ﬁber durability in
proteolytic solutions. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1996 ,32, 221–226. [CrossRef]
74. Gorham, S.D.; Light, N.D.; Diamond, A.M.; Willins, M.J.; Bailey, A.J.; Wess, T.J.; Leslie, N.J. Effect of chemical modiﬁcations on the
susceptibility of collagen to proteolysis. II. Dehydrothermal cross-linking. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 1992 ,14, 129–138. [CrossRef]
75. Lv, H.W.; Wang, H.P .; Zhang, Z.J.; Yang, W.; Liu, W.B.; Li, Y.L.; Li, L.S. Biomaterial stiffness determines stem cell fate. Life Sci.
2017 ,178, 42–48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Mitrousis, N.; Fokina, A.; Shoichet, M.S. Biomaterials for cell transplantation. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2018 ,3, 441–456. [CrossRef]
77. Velasco-Hogan, A.; Xu, J.; Meyers, M.A. Additive manufacturing as a method to design and optimize bioinspired structures. Adv.
Mater. 2018 ,30, 1800940. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. De Mori, A.; Fernandez, M.P .; Blunn, G.; Tozzi, G.; Roldo, M. 3D printing and electrospinning of composite hydrogels for cartilage
and bone tissue engineering. Polymers 2018 ,10, 285. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79. Nagarajan, N.; Dupret-Bories, A.; Karabulut, E.; Zorlutuna, P .; Vrana, N.E. Enabling personalized implant and controllable
biosystem development through 3D printing. Biotechnol. Adv. 2018 ,36, 521–533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Higuchi, A.; Ling, Q.-D.; Kumar, S.S.; Chang, Y.; Kao, T.-C.; Munusamy, M.A.; Alarfaj, A.A.; Hsu, S.-T.; Umezawa, A. External
stimulus-responsive biomaterials designed for the culture and differentiation of ES, iPS, and adult stem cells. Prog. Polym. Sci.
2014 ,39, 1585–1613. [CrossRef]
81. Draget, K.I.; Skjåk-Bræk, G.; Smidsrød, O. Alginate based new materials. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 1997 ,21, 47–55. [CrossRef]
82. Venkatesan, J.; Bhatnagar, I.; Manivasagan, P .; Kang, K.H.; Kim, S.K. Alginate composites for bone tissue engineering: A review.
Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2015 ,72, 269–281. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. You, F.; Wu, X.; Zhu, N.; Lei, M.; Eames, B.F.; Chen, X. 3D printing of porous cell-laden hydrogel constructs for potential
applications in cartilage tissue engineering. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 2016 ,2, 1200–1210. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Luo, Y.; Wu, C.; Lode, A.; Gelinsky, M. Hierarchical mesoporous bioactive glass/alginate composite scaffolds fabricated by
three-dimensional plotting for bone tissue engineering. Biofabrication 2013 ,5, 015005. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Kim, Y.B.; Kim, G.H. PCL/alginate composite scaffolds for hard tissue engineering: Fabrication, characterization, and cellular
activities. ACS Comb. Sci. 2015 ,17, 87–99. [CrossRef]
86. D’Amora, U.; D’Este, M.; Eglin, D.; Safari, F.; Sprecher, C.M.; Gloria, A.; De Santis, R.; Alini, M.; Ambrosio, L. Collagen density
gradient on three-dimensional printed poly( "-caprolactone) scaffolds for interface tissue engineering. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med.
2018 ,12, 321–329. [CrossRef]
87. Gloria, A.; Russo, T.; Rodrigues, D.F.L.; D’Amora, U.; Colella, F.; Improta, G.; Triassi, M.; De Santis, R.; Ambrosio, L. From 3D
hierarchical scaffolds for tissue engineering to advanced hydrogel-based and complex devices for in situ cell or drug release.
Procedia CIRP 2016 ,49, 72–75. [CrossRef]
88. Perez, R.A.; Kim, M.; Kim, T.H.; Kim, J.H.; Lee, J.H.; Park, J.H.; Knowles, J.C.; Kim, H.W. Utilizing core-shell ﬁbrous collagen–
alginate hydrogel cell delivery system for bone tissue engineering. Tissue Eng. Part A 2014 ,20A, 103–114. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. Perez, R.A.; Kim, J.H.; Buitrago, J.O.; Wall, I.B.; Kim, H.W. Novel therapeutic core-shell hydrogel scaffolds with sequential delivery
of cobalt and bone morphogenetic protein-2 for synergistic bone regeneration. Acta Biomater. 2015 ,23, 295–308. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 24 of 26
90. Buitrago, J.O.; Perez, R.A.; El-Fiqi, A.; Singh, R.K.; Kim, J.H.; Kim, H.W. Core-shell ﬁbrous stem cell carriers incorporating
osteogenic nanoparticulate cues for bone tissue engineering. Acta Biomater. 2015 ,28, 183–192. [CrossRef]
91. Yao, R.; Alkhawtani, A.Y.F.; Chen, R.Y.; Luang, J.; Xu, M.E. Rapid and efﬁcient in vivo angiogenesis directed by electro-assisted
bioprinting of alginate/collagen microspheres with human umbilical vein endothelial cell coating layer. Int. J. Bioprint. 2019 ,
5, 3–14. [CrossRef]
92. Lee, B.R.; Hwang, J.W.; Choi, Y.Y.; Wong, S.F.; Hwang, Y.H.; Lee, D.Y.; Lee, S.H. In situ formation and collagen–alginate composite
encapsulation of pancreatic islet spheroids. Biomaterials 2012 ,33, 837–845. [CrossRef]
93. Chan, H.F.; Zhang, Y.; Leong, K.W. Efﬁcient One-step production of microencapsulated hepatocyte spheroids with enhanced
functions. Small 2016 ,12, 2720–2730. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
94. San Jose, L.H.; Stephens, P .; Song, B.; Barrow, D. Microﬂuidic encapsulation supports stem cell viability, proliferation, and
neuronal differentiation. Tissue Eng. Part C Methods 2018 ,24, 158–170. [CrossRef]
95. Henkel, J.; Woodruff, M.A.; Epari, D.R.; Steck, R.; Glatt, V .; Dickinson, I.C.; Choong, P .F.M.; Schuetz, M.A.; Hutmacher, D.W. Bone
regeneration based on tissue engineering conceptions—A 21st century perspective. Bone Res. 2013 ,1, 216–248. [CrossRef]
96. Sakiyama-Elbert, S.E.; Hubbell, J.A. Functional biomaterials: Design of novel biomaterials. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 2001 ,
31, 183–201. [CrossRef]
97. Boontheekul, T.; Kong, H.J.; Mooney, D.J. Controlling alginate gel degradation utilizing partial oxidation and bimodal molecular
weight distribution. Biomaterials 2005 ,26, 2455–2465. [CrossRef]
98. Rico-Llanos, G.A.; Borrego-Gonzalez, S.; Moncayo-Donoso, M.; Becerra, J.; Visser, R. Collagen type I Biomaterials as scaffolds for
bone tissue engineering. Polymers 2021 ,13, 599. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
99. Brinkman, W.T.; Nagapudi, K.; Thomas, B.S.; Chaikof, E.L. Photo-cross-linking of type I collagen gels in the presence of smooth
muscle cells: Mechanical properties, cell viability, and function. Biomacromolecules 2003 ,4, 890–895. [CrossRef]
100. Sionkowska, A.; Kozlowska, J. Properties and modiﬁcation of porous 3-D collagen/hydroxyapatite composites. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 2013 ,52, 250–259. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Liu, X.H.; Ma, P .X. Polymeric scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 2004 ,32, 477–486. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Lee, C.H.; Singla, A.; Lee, Y. Biomedical applications of collagen. Int. J. Pharm. 2001 ,221, 1–22. [CrossRef]
103. Benayahu, D.; Pomeraniec, L.; Shemesh, S.; Heller, S.; Rosenthal, Y.; Rath-Wolfson, L.; Benayahu, Y. Biocompatibility of a marine
collagen-based scaffold in vitro and in vivo. Mar. Drugs 2020 ,18, 420. [CrossRef]
104. Bendtsen, S.T.; Wei, M. Synthesis and characterization of a novel injectable alginate-collagen-hydroxyapatite hydrogel for bone
tissue regeneration. J. Mater. Chem. B 2015 ,3, 3081–3090. [CrossRef]
105. Yu, C.C.; Chang, J.J.; Lee, Y.H.; Lin, Y.C.; Wu, M.H.; Yang, M.C.; Chien, C.T. Electrospun scaffolds composing of alginate, chitosan,
collagen and hydroxyapatite for applying in bone tissue engineering. Mater. Lett. 2013 ,93, 133–136. [CrossRef]
106. Parmentier, L.; Riffault, M.; Hoey, D.A. Utilizing osteocyte derived factors to enhance cell viability and osteogenic matrix
deposition within IPN hydrogels. Materials 2020 ,13, 1690. [CrossRef]
107. Perez, R.A.; Won, J.E.; Knowles, J.C.; Kim, H.W. Naturally and synthetic smart composite biomaterials for tissue regeneration.
Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2013 ,65, 471–496. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Quinlan, E.; Lopez-Noriega, A.; Thompson, E.; Kelly, H.M.; Cryan, S.A.; O’Brien, F.J. Development of collagen-hydroxyapatite
scaffolds incorporating PLGA and alginate microparticles for the controlled delivery of rhBMP-2 for bone tissue engineering. J.
Control. Release 2015 ,198, 71–79. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Sotome, S.; Uemura, T.; Kikuchi, M.; Chen, J.; Itoh, S.; Tanaka, J.; Tateishi, T.; Shinomiya, K. Synthesis and in vivo evaluation of a
novel hydroxyapatite/collagen–alginate as a bone ﬁller and a drug delivery carrier of bone morphogenetic protein. Mat. Sci. Eng.
C2004 ,24, 341–347. [CrossRef]
110. Pak, J.; Lee, J.H.; Kartolo, W.A.; Lee, S.H. Cartilage regeneration in human with adipose tissue-derived stem cells: Current status
in clinical implications. Biomed. Res. Int. 2016 ,2016 . [CrossRef]
111. Zhang, L.; Zheng, L.; Fan, H.S.; Zhang, X.D. A scaffold-ﬁlter model for studying the chondrogenic differentiation of stem cells
in vitro. Mat. Sci. Eng. C 2017 ,70, 962–968. [CrossRef]
112. Roach, H.I.; Erenpreisa, J.; Aigner, T. Osteogenic differentiation of hypertrophic chondrocytes involves asymmetric cell divisions
and apoptosis. J. Cell Biol. 1995 ,131, 483–494. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Domm, C.; Schunke, M.; Christesen, K.; Kurz, B. Redifferentiation of dedifferentiated bovine articular chondrocytes in alginate
culture under low oxygen tension. Osteoarthr. Cartil. 2002 ,10, 13–22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
114. Bonaventure, J.; Kadhom, N.; Cohensolal, L.; Ng, K.H.; Bourguignon, J.; Lasselin, C.; Freisinger, P . Reexpression of cartilage-
speciﬁc genes by dedifferentiated human articular chondrocytes cultured in alginate beads. Exp. Cell Res. 1994 ,212, 97–104.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Jin, G.Z.; Kim, H.W. Efﬁcacy of collagen and alginate hydrogels for the prevention of rat chondrocyte dedifferentiation. J. Tissue
Eng. 2018 ,9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Yang, X.; Lu, Z.; Wu, H.; Li, W.; Zheng, L.; Zhao, J. Collagen–alginate as bioink for three-dimensional (3D) cell printing based
cartilage tissue engineering. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 2018 ,83, 195–201. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Chan, S.C.W.; Ferguson, S.J.; Gantenbein-Ritter, B. The effects of dynamic loading on the intervertebral disc. Eur. Spine J. 2011 ,
20, 1796–1812. [CrossRef]
118. Eyre, D.R. Biochemistry of the intervertebral disc. Int. Rev. Connect. Tissue Res. 1979 ,8, 227–291. [PubMed]
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 25 of 26
119. Kishen, T.J.; Diwan, A.D. Fusion versus disk replacement for degenerative conditions of the lumbar and cervical spine: Quid est
testimonium? Orthop. Clin. N. Am. 2010 ,41, 167–181. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
120. Tavakoli, J.; Diwan, A.D.; Tipper, J.L. Advanced strategies for the regeneration of lumbar disc annulus ﬁbrosus. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2020 ,21, 4889. [CrossRef]
121. Choi, Y.; Park, M.H.; Lee, K. Tissue engineering strategies for intervertebral disc treatment using functional polymers. Polymers
2019 ,11, 872. [CrossRef]
122. Zhao, R.Z.; Liu, W.Q.; Xia, T.T.; Yang, L. Disordered mechanical stress and tissue engineering therapies in intervertebral disc
degeneration. Polymers 2019 ,11, 1151. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Borzacchiello, A.; Gloria, A.; De Santis, R.; Ambrosio, L. Spinal disc implants using hydrogels. In Biomedical Hydrogels ; Rimmer, S.,
Ed.; Woodhead Publishing: Cambridge, UK, 2011; pp. 103–117.
124. Moriguchi, Y.; Borde, B.; Berlin, C.; Wipplinger, C.; Sloan, S.R.; Kirnaz, S.; Pennicooke, B.; Navarro-Ramirez, R.; Khair, T.;
Grunert, P .; et al .In vivo annular repair using high-density collagen gel seeded with annulus ﬁbrosus cells. Acta Biomater. 2018 ,
79, 230–238. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
125. Hussain, I.; Sloan, S.R.; Wipplinger, C.; Navarro-Ramirez, R.; Zubkov, M.; Kim, E.; Kirnaz, S.; Bonassar, L.J.; Härtl, R. Mesenchymal
stem cell-seeded high-density collagen gel for annular repair: 6-week results from in vivo sheep models. Neurosurgery 2019 ,85,
E350–E359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Tsaryk, R.; Gloria, A.; Russo, T.; Anspach, L.; De Santis, R.; Ghanaati, S.; Unger, R.E.; Ambrosio, L.; Kirkpatrick, C.J. Collagen-low
molecular weight hyaluronic acid semi-interpenetrating network loaded with gelatin microspheres for cell and growth factor
delivery for nucleus pulposus regeneration. Acta Biomater. 2015 ,20, 10–21. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
127. Bowles, R.D.; Williams, R.M.; Zipfel, W.R.; Bonassar, L.J. Self-assembly of aligned tissue-engineered annulus ﬁbrosus and
intervertebral disc composite via collagen gel contraction. Tissue Eng. Part A 2010 ,16A, 1339–1348. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
128. Gloria, A.; Russo, T.; D’Amora, U.; Santin, M.; De Santis, R.; Ambrosio, L. Customised multiphasic nucleus/annulus scaffold for
intervertebral disc repair/regeneration. Connect. Tissue Res. 2020 ,61, 152–162. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
129. Moriguchi, Y.; Mojica-Santiago, J.; Grunert, P .; Pennicooke, B.; Berlin, C.; Khair, T.; Navarro-Ramirez, R.; Arbona, R.J.R.;
Nguyen, J.; Hartl, R.; et al . Total disc replacement using tissue-engineered intervertebral discs in the canine cervical spine. PLoS
ONE 2017 ,12, e0185716. [CrossRef]
130. Carmeliet, P . Angiogenesis in life, disease and medicine. Nature 2005 ,438, 932–936. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Risau, W. Mechanisms of angiogenesis. Nature 1997 ,386, 671–674. [CrossRef]
132. Folkman, J.; Hochberg, M. Self-regulation of growth in three dimensions. J. Exp. Med. 1973 ,138, 745–753. [CrossRef]
133. Carmeliet, P . Angiogenesis in health and disease. Nat. Med. 2003 ,9, 653–660. [CrossRef]
134. Gelmi, A.; Cieslar-Pobuda, A.; de Muinck, E.; Los, M.; Rafat, M.; Jager, E.W.H. Direct mechanical stimulation of stem cells: A
beating electromechanically active scaffold for cardiac tissue engineering. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2016 ,5, 1471–1480. [CrossRef]
135. Quinlan, E.; Lopez-Noriega, A.; Thompson, E.M.; Hibbitts, A.; Cryan, S.A.; O’Brien, F.J. Controlled release of vascular endothelial
growth factor from spray-dried alginate microparticles in collagen-hydroxyapatite scaffolds for promoting vascularization and
bone repair. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. Med. 2017 ,11, 1097–1109. [CrossRef]
136. Ali, Z.; Islam, A.; Sherrell, P .; Le-Moine, M.; Lolas, G.; Syrigos, K.; Rafat, M.; Jensen, L.D. Adjustable delivery of pro-angiogenic
FGF-2 by alginate: Collagen microspheres. Biol. Open 2018 ,7, bio027060. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Ruoslahti, E. Brain extracellular matrix. Glycobiology 1996 ,6, 489–492. [CrossRef]
138. Ripellino, J.A.; Klinger, M.M.; Margolis, R.U.; Margolis, R.K. The hyaluronic acid binding region as a speciﬁc probe for the
localization of hyaluronic acid in tissue sections. Application to chick embryo and rat brain. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 1985 ,
33, 1060–1066. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
139. Luo, Y.; Kirker, K.R.; Prestwich, G.D. Cross-linked hyaluronic acid hydrogel ﬁlms: New biomaterials for drug delivery. J. Control.
Release 2000 ,69, 169–184. [CrossRef]
140. Park, H.; Kang, S.W.; Kim, B.S.; Mooney, D.J.; Lee, K.Y. Shear-reversibly cross-linked alginate hydrogels for tissue engineering.
Macromol. Biosci. 2009 ,9, 895–901. [CrossRef]
141. Kuo, Y.C.; Hsueh, C.H. Neuronal production from induced pluripotent stem cells in self-assembled collagen-hyaluronic acid-
alginate microgel scaffolds with grafted GRGDSP/Ln5-P4. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 2017 ,76, 760–774. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
142. Hahn, M.S.; Teply, B.A.; Stevens, M.M.; Zeitels, S.M.; Langer, R. Collagen composite hydrogels for vocal fold lamina propria
restoration. Biomaterials 2006 ,27, 1104–1109. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Robson, M.C.; Steed, D.L.; Franz, M.G. Wound healing: Biologic features and approaches to maximize healing trajectories—In
brief. Curr. Prob. Surg. 2001 ,38, 65–140. [CrossRef]
144. Szycher, M.; Lee, S.J. Modern wound dressings: A systematic approach to wound healing. J. Biomater. Appl. 1992 ,7, 142–213.
[CrossRef]
145. Singer, A.J.; Clark, R.A.F. Mechanisms of disease—Cutaneous wound healing. N. Engl. J. Med. 1999 ,341, 738–746. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
146. Jayakumar, R.; Prabaharan, M.; Kumar, P .T.S.; Nair, S.V .; Tamura, H. Biomaterials based on chitin and chitosan in wound dressing
applications. Biotechnol. Adv. 2011 ,29, 322–337. [CrossRef]
147. Pinho, E.; Soares, G. Functionalization of cotton cellulose for improved wound healing. J. Mater. Chem. B 2018 ,6, 1887–1898.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Polymers 2021 ,13, 1852 26 of 26
148. Dhivya, S.; Padma, V .V .; Santhini, E. Wound dressings—A review. Biomedicine 2015 ,5, 24–28. [CrossRef]
149. Boateng, J.S.; Matthews, K.H.; Stevens, H.N.E.; Eccleston, G.M. Wound healing dressings and drug delivery systems: A review. J.
Pharm. Sci. 2008 ,97, 2892–2923. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
150. Liu, B.; Ding, F.X.; Hu, D.; Zhou, Y.; Long, C.L.; Shen, L.J.; Zhang, Y.Y.; Zhang, D.Y.; Wei, G.H. Human umbilical cord mesenchymal
stem cell conditioned medium attenuates renal ﬁbrosis by reducing inﬂammation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition via
the TLR4/NF-kappa B signaling pathway in vivo and in vitro. Stem Cell Res. Ther. 2018 ,9, 7. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Zhu, S.C.; Yuan, Q.J.; Yin, T.; You, J.; Gu, Z.P .; Xiong, S.B.; Hu, Y. Self-assembly of collagen-based biomaterials: Preparation,
characterizations and biomedical applications. J. Mater. Chem. B 2018 ,6, 2650–2676. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
152. Lozeau, L.D.; Grosha, J.; Smith, I.M.; Stewart, E.J.; Camesano, T.A.; Rolle, M.W. Alginate affects bioactivity of chimeric collagen-
binding LL37 antimicrobial peptides adsorbed to collagen-alginate wound dressings. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 2020 ,6, 3398–3410.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
153. Lin, Z.F.; Wu, T.T.; Wang, W.S.; Li, B.L.; Wang, M.; Chen, L.L.; Xia, H.; Zhang, T. Biofunctions of antimicrobial peptide-conjugated
alginate/hyaluronic acid/collagen wound dressings promote wound healing of a mixed-bacteria-infected wound. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 2019 ,140, 330–342. [CrossRef]
154. Van Gils, C.C.; Roeder, B.; Chesler, S.M.; Mason, S. Improved healing with a collagen–alginate dressing in the chemical
matricectomy. J. Am. Podiat. Med. Assoc. 1998 ,88, 452–456. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
155. Donaghue, V .M.; Chrzan, J.S.; Rosenblum, B.I.; Giurini, J.M.; Habershaw, G.M.; Veves, A. A clinical evaluation of a collagen–
alginate topical wound dressing in the management of diabetic foot ulcers. Diabetologia 1996 ,39, 1019.
156. Feng, X.L.; Zhang, X.F.; Li, S.Q.; Zheng, Y.Q.; Shi, X.N.; Li, F.; Guo, S.B.; Yang, J.M. Preparation of aminated ﬁsh scale collagen and
oxidized sodium alginate hybrid hydrogel for enhanced full-thickness wound healing. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020 ,164, 626–637.
[CrossRef]
157. Xie, H.X.; Chen, X.L.; Shen, X.R.; He, Y.; Chen, W.; Luo, Q.; Ge, W.H.; Yuan, W.H.; Tang, X.; Hou, D.Y.; et al. Preparation
of chitosan-collagen–alginate composite dressing and its promoting effects on wound healing. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2018 ,
107, 93–104. [CrossRef]
158. Zhang, H.J.; Peng, M.X.; Cheng, T.; Zhao, P .; Qiu, L.P .; Zhou, J.; Lu, G.Z.; Chen, J.H. Silver nanoparticles-doped collagen–alginate
antimicrobial biocomposite as potential wound dressing. J. Mater. Sci. 2018 ,53, 14944–14952. [CrossRef]
159. Zhang, Z.K.; Li, Z.; Li, Y.; Wang, Y.Y.; Yao, M.H.; Zhang, K.; Chen, Z.Y.; Yue, H.; Shi, J.J.; Guan, F.X.; et al. Sodium alginate/collagen
hydrogel loaded with human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells promotes wound healing and skin remodeling. Cell Tissue
Res. 2021 ,383, 809–821. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
160. Michalska-Sionkowska, M.; Walczak, M.; Sionkowska, A. Antimicrobial activity of collagen material with thymol addition for
potential application as wound dressing. Polym. Test. 2017 ,63, 360–366. [CrossRef]
161. Qu, J.; Zhao, X.; Liang, Y.P .; Xu, Y.M.; Ma, P .X.; Guo, B.L. Degradable conductive injectable hydrogels as novel antibacterial,
anti-oxidant wound dressings for wound healing. Chem. Eng. J. 2019 ,362, 548–560. [CrossRef]
162. Zahedi, P .; Rezaeian, I.; Ranaei-Siadat, S.O.; Jafari, S.H.; Supaphol, P . A review on wound dressings with an emphasis on
electrospun nanoﬁbrous polymeric bandages. Polym. Advan. Technol. 2010 ,21, 77–95. [CrossRef]
163. Otvos, L., Jr.; Ostorhazi, E. Therapeutic utility of antibacterial peptides in wound healing. Expert Rev. Anti-Infect. Ther. 2015 ,
13, 871–881. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
164. Branco da Cunha, C.; Klumpers, D.D.; Li, W.A.; Koshy, S.T.; Weaver, J.C.; Chaudhuri, O.; Granja, P .L.; Mooney, D.J. Inﬂuence of the
stiffness of three-dimensional alginate/collagen-I interpenetrating networks on ﬁbroblast biology. Biomaterials 2014 ,35, 8927–8936.
[CrossRef]
165. Orive, G.; Hernandez, R.M.; Gascon, A.R.; Calaﬁore, R.; Chang, T.M.S.; De Vos, P .; Hortelano, G.; Hunkeler, D.; Lacik, I.;
Shapiro, A.M.J.; et al. Cell encapsulation: Promise and progress. Nat. Med. 2003 ,9, 104–107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
166. Uludag, H.; De Vos, P .; Tresco, P .A. Technology of mammalian cell encapsulation. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2000 ,42, 29–64. [CrossRef]
167. Chang, T.M.S.; Malave, N. Development and First clinical use of semipermeable microcapsules (artiﬁcial cells) as a compact
artiﬁcial kidney. Trans. Am. Soc. Artif. Intern. Organs 1970 ,16, 141–148. [CrossRef]
168. Zurn, A.D.; Henry, H.; Schluep, M.; Aubert, V .; Winkel, L.; Eilers, B.; Bachmann, C.; Aebischer, P . Evaluation of an intrathecal
immune response in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients implanted with encapsulated genetically engineered xenogeneic cells.
Cell Transplant. 2000 ,9, 471–484. [CrossRef]
169. Wong, H.L.; Wang, M.X.; Cheung, P .T.; Yao, K.M.; Chan, B.P . A 3D collagen microsphere culture system for GDNF-secreting
HEK293 cells with enhanced protein productivity. Biomaterials 2007 ,28, 5369–5380. [CrossRef]
170. Lee, M.; Lo, A.C.; Cheung, P .T.; Wong, D.; Chan, B.P . Drug carrier systems based on collagen–alginate composite structures for
improving the performance of GDNF-secreting HEK293 cells. Biomaterials 2009 ,30, 1214–1221. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
171. Khavari, A.; Nyden, M.; Weitz, D.A.; Ehrlicher, A.J. Composite alginate gels for tunable cellular microenvironment mechanics.
Sci. Rep. 2016 ,6, 30854. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
172. Wang, M.; Yang, Y.W.; Han, L.C.; Han, S.; Liu, N.; Xu, F.; Li, F. Effect of three-dimensional ECM stiffness on cancer cell migration
through regulating cell volume homeostasis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2020 ,528, 459–465. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
173. Liu, C.; Mejia, D.L.; Chiang, B.; Luker, K.E.; Luker, G.D. Hybrid collagen alginate hydrogel as a platform for 3D tumor spheroid
invasion. Acta Biomater. 2018 ,75, 213–225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction
prohibited without permission.
