Vol.:(0123456789)Netherlands International Law Review (2022) 69:383–410
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40802-022-00219-9
123
ARTICLE
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law 
to Resurrect the Soviet Union: The International Law 
Context of Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine
Sofia Cavandoli1 · Gary Wilson1
Accepted: 4 July 2022 / Published online: 26 July 2022 
© The Author(s) 2022
Abstract
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine which commenced on 24 February 2022 represented 
just the latest, albeit most devastating, intervention in a neighbouring former Soviet 
state. This article considers the legal justifications for Russia’s actions and finds 
them to be far from satisfactory. The claims advanced by Russia closely mirror those 
made in respect of its prior interventions in the former Soviet space, underlining 
an attempt to distort some of the most fundamental norms of international law in 
order to afford an air of legitimacy to its actions. Although it is too soon to con-
clude with any certainty what the longer term implications of the recent conflict will 
be, both politically and legally, it is apparent that it can be seen as part of a wider 
policy objective on Russia’s part to maintain and/or reassert influence over its ‘near 
abroad’. While in some respects indicative of the possible emergence of a new ‘Cold 
War’, the international reaction to its intervention in Ukraine suggests that any inten-
tion to manipulate or reconstitute legal norms in support of its agenda is meeting 
with mass rejection.
Keywords Use of force · Self-determination · Human rights · War · Ukraine · Russia
1 Introduction
On 24 February 2022, Russia commenced military action against Ukraine. The 
action was widely condemned by the international community as a violation of fun-
damental norms of international law, while as the conflict progressed allegations of 
the commission of war crimes by Russian forces grew. Although the most severe 
 * Sofia Cavandoli 
 S.Cavandoli@ljmu.ac.uk
 Gary Wilson 
 G.Wilson@ljmu.ac.uk
1 Senior Lecturer in Law, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, UK
384 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
action of its kind, the operation against Ukraine represented just the latest in a series 
of incidents over the course of the post-Cold War era in which Russia has sought to 
reassert its authority over former Soviet states. In so doing it has relied upon a famil-
iar series of purported legal justifications grounded in norms pertaining to the right 
of self-determination of peoples and permitted exceptions to international law’s pro-
hibition on the use of force. This article considers the justifications asserted by Rus-
sia in support of its action against Ukraine, within the context of previous incursions 
against the Crimea and Donbas regions of Ukraine and South Ossetia and Abkha-
zia within Georgia. We begin by outlining the historical and political background 
to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, before briefly introducing Russia’s purported legal 
justifications and the international reaction. The main body of the article is then sep-
arated into analysis, in turn, of the justifications advanced by Russia grounded in ref-
erences to self-determination and permitted exceptions to the prohibition of the use 
of force respectively. The article concludes with some tentative observations upon 
the wider implications of the Russia/Ukraine conflict.
2  The Historical and Political Background to the Invasion of Ukraine
Conventional wisdom holds that the Cold War was lost by the Soviet Union. In 
developments famously labelled as ushering in the ‘end of history’,1 the states of 
Eastern Europe which had comprised the Warsaw Pact and effectively operated 
as Soviet satellites overthrew communism and became liberal democracies in the 
western tradition.2 Gradually, many became members of the European Union (EU)3 
and/or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).4 These developments were 
accompanied by the disintegration of the Soviet Union, which ceased to exist on 
1 January 1992. Although dissolved into its constituent republics, Russia assumed 
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics’ (USSR’s) international personality for most 
legal and political purposes.5 The period since, has been characterised by tensions 
arising from Russia’s loss of influence in its near abroad and policies centred on 
efforts to reclaim this in the face of indications on the part of some ex-Soviet states, 
principally Ukraine, that they seek a future founded on closer relationships with the 
EU and NATO, leaving Russia feeling ‘boxed in’ by the perception of the reach of 
these organisations extending ever closer to its borders.
In making sense of the recent Russian invasion of Ukraine as simply the latest and 
most extreme stage in the evolution of its policy of reasserting regional hegemony, 
comparisons with its earlier interventions in Georgia (2008) and Crimea (2014) are 
1 Fukuyama (1992).
2 Stokes (2011).
3 In the first wave of the EU’s eastern expansion, 2004 saw ten new member states join including the 
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia. Bulgaria and 
Romania joined in 2007, followed by Croatia in 2013.
4 The Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland joined NATO in 1999, followed by Bulgaria, Estonia, Lat-
via, Lithuania, Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia in 2004.
5 Blum (1992).
385
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
particularly relevant.6 Long-running tensions between Georgia and Russia escalated 
into full-blown armed conflict during 2008 which, albeit brief in duration, was used 
by Russia to intervene in support of separatist factions in the regions of Abkhazia 
and South Ossetia.7 Russia justified its interventions by reference to humanitarian 
necessity,8 subsequently moving to recognise the independence of these areas which 
have not been recognised by very many other states.9 However, Russia’s intervention 
enabled it to exert de facto control over significant swathes of Georgian territory 
along its border. Russia’s 2014 annexation of the Crimea region of Ukraine came 
in the aftermath of Ukraine’s ‘revolution of dignity’, during which its Parliament 
had impeached its Russian supported President and given a clear indication that the 
country desired a future built upon closer relations with the EU.10 In response, Rus-
sia intervened to support separatist factions take control of Crimea, instigating a ref-
erendum in which a reported 96% backed union with Russia.11 On 18 March 2014, 
Russia effectively annexed Crimea by proclaiming it part of Russia.12 In his speech 
justifying Russia’s actions in Ukraine and Crimea’s annexation to the Russian 
Federation, Putin outlined Russia’s strong historical ties with the Crimean region 
and claimed that Russia was responding to Crimea’s request for help because its 
Russian-speaking population feared repression following events that had unfolded 
in the Ukraine. He went on to refute claims that Russia was acting in contraven-
tion of international law. Putin stated that the Crimean people were doing nothing 
more than exercising their right to self-determination granted to them by the UN 
Charter—a precedent which he claims was set by Ukraine when it seceded from 
the USSR and by Kosovo when it seceded from Serbia. The move was widely con-
demned, including by the UN General Assembly.13
In April 2014, aided by Russia, separatists subsequently seized control of the 
Donetsk and Luhansk regions, collectively known as the Donbas.14 The rebels 
called for referenda on independence to be carried out in both cities and publicly 
demanded that Russia send ‘peacekeepers’ to protect them. Hastily organised ref-
erenda were carried out on 11 May 2014, despite Russian President Putin’s call on 
the rebels to postpone them. Voter turnout was reportedly high and results showed 
that over 90% of voters in both Donetsk and Luhansk endorsed political independ-
ence from Kiev. The Peoples’ Republic of Luhansk and The Peoples’ Republic of 
Donetsk were subsequently declared quasi-independent entities by rebel separatists. 
The referendum process and its outcome were widely criticised and declared illegal 
6 On which, see Wilson (2016).
7 For discussions of the 2008 military action, see Toomey (2009).
8 See Toomey (2009).
9 For discussion, see Samkharadze (2021). The only United Nations (UN) member states apart from 
Russia to recognise the independence of these entities are Nicaragua, Venezuela, Syria and Nauru.
10 See Shveda and Park (2016).
11 The Guardian (2014a).
12 The Guardian (2014b).
13 GA Res. 68/262. The General Assembly voted 100-11 to condemn Russia’s actions, with 58 absten-
tions.
14 The Guardian (2014c).
386 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
by most countries. The Kremlin Press Service stated that ‘Moscow respected the 
outcome of the referendum and called for peaceful “practical implementation” of the 
people’s wishes in those regions of eastern Ukraine’. Within hours of declaring itself 
independent, the Republic of Donetsk asked to join the Russian Federation, urging 
Moscow to listen to the will of the people. Russia, at that stage did not publicly 
respond to this request.
Following the two referenda, violent clashes escalated between Ukraine militia 
and the separatist rebels. This led to the outbreak of civil unrest in the eastern region 
of the Ukraine that saw the loss of thousands of lives and caused numerous people 
to flee from their homes. In order to end months of fighting in the Donbas region, on 
5 September 2014, Ukraine and pro-Russian rebels signed a peace deal (The Minsk 
Protocol) drafted by the Trilateral Contact Group on Ukraine, consisting of Ukraine, 
Russia, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). The 
agreement failed to stop fighting and was subsequently followed with a revised and 
updated agreement, Minsk II, which was signed on 12 February 2015. This agree-
ment consisted of a package of measures, including the possible granting of special 
status to rebel-held parts of Ukraine’s eastern Donetsk and Luhansk regions, giving 
them broader autonomy for a temporary 3-year period. While fighting subsided fol-
lowing the agreement’s signing, it never ended completely, and the agreement’s pro-
visions were never fully implemented. While in all of these incidents Russia sought 
to play down the extent of its intervention in the states affected, a common theme in 
its official explanations of them was to portray each development as an expression of 
self-determination on the part of separatist entity which it had intervened on behalf 
of.15
Amid growing tensions over the following years, during 2021 it became appar -
ent that Russia was building up its military presence along the Russian border.16 
Despite its protestations to the contrary,17 speculation grew that Russia was prepar -
ing to launch a military operation against Ukraine. Russia made clear its objections 
to the prospect of NATO expansion to, or even closer cooperation with, Ukraine, 
which it regarded as a hostile act.18 Over a period of several weeks, extensive diplo-
matic missions were undertaken by a range of states and international organisations 
to both Ukraine and Russia with a view to defuse the situation.19 However, follow -
ing Russia’s recognition of the independence of the Donbas on 21 February 2022, 
the commencement of an armed attack appeared inevitable.20
15 BBC News Online (2014).
16 The Guardian (2021).
17 The Independent (2022a).
18 For discussion of Russian concerns about NATO expansion, see Suny (2022).
19 Financial Times (2022).
20 BBC News Online (2022).
387
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
3  The Invasion of Ukraine: Justification and Reaction
Following Russian recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk as independent states on 21 
February 2022, Russia’s Federation Council moved the following day to authorise 
the use of force against Ukraine and Russian troops entered both regions.21 This was 
followed on 24 February by Vladimir Putin’s announcement of a special military 
operation to ‘demilitarise’ and ‘denazify’ Ukraine.22 A significant military action 
against Ukraine commenced rapidly, consisting of the deployment of ground forces, 
air strikes and missile weaponry.23 It was readily apparent that far from constituting 
a limited military action with narrow aims, the Russian attack on Ukraine repre-
sented a full onslaught which had as its ultimate goal the occupation of Ukraine 
and removal of its government.24 In an alarming indication of the severity of the 
situation, Russia placed its nuclear forces on a state of high alert just days into the 
conflict.25
Russia’s formal legal justification for its attack on Ukraine, the central tenets of 
which might be discerned from statements made by Vladimir Putin and Russian 
authorities both before and during the action, is considered in greater detail below. 
Far from representing a clear, coherent narrative, various claims were asserted. 
Some attempts were made to question Ukraine’s entitlement to statehood, with sug-
gestions being made that historically it had no significant record of independence 
and that ethnically Russians and Ukrainians were essentially the same.26 However, 
the core theme of Russian efforts to justify its actions centred on the characterisa-
tion of Ukraine as posing a threat which needed to be removed. Various claims were 
made that Ukraine was responsible for denying the right to self-determination to 
Russian speakers,27 and that it was responsible for attacks and crimes of genocide 
against such minorities in the Donbas region.28 In this sense, Russian legal justifica-
tions were couched primarily in a confused blend of self-defence and humanitarian 
necessity.
Russia’s attack on Ukraine was met with widespread international condemna-
tion. Although a Russian veto prevented the UN Security Council passing a con-
demnatory resolution,29 the General Assembly quickly stepped in to do so by an 
21 The Independent (2022b).
22 New York Times (2022c). Similarly, in the UN Security Council Russia’s representative stated: ‘We 
are not waging a war against Ukraine or the Ukrainian people. We are carrying out a special operation 
against nationalists to protect the residents of Donbas and for the purposes of denazification and demili-
tarization’, UN Doc. S/PV.8979, p. 14.
23 Sky News (2022).
24 The UK stated thus in the UN Security Council debate following the invasion, suggesting Putin’s ‘aim 
is to remove its Government and subjugate its people’, UN Doc. S/PV.8979, p. 4.
25 The Guardian (2022b).
26 New York Times (2022b).
27 New York Times (2022c).
28 New York Times (2022c).
29 UN Doc. S/2022/155. See UN Doc. S/PV.8979.
388 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
overwhelming margin.30 Other prominent organisations were similarly scathing in 
denouncing Russia’s actions, including NATO,31 the EU,32 and the OSCE.33 Inter -
national measures to exert pressure upon Russia to reverse its actions have largely 
taken the form of the implementation of extensive sanctions. Although UN man-
dated sanctions would not be possible in light of Russia’s ability to veto any such 
measures, many states—including the United States (US) and the United Kingdom 
(UK)—and the EU have imposed a range of sanctions targeted to weaken and iso-
late Russia, including significant measures pertaining to the banking and finan-
cial services sector, and measures targeted at individuals including financial assets 
freezes.34 While stopping short of direct involvement in hostilities, a number of 
states have provided military equipment to Ukraine,35 while several have offered ref-
uge to those fleeing Ukraine.36
4  The Distortion of Fundamental Norms (I): Self‑Determination
The right to self-determination is found in multiple international treaties and con-
ventions,37 and has ‘crystallised into a rule of customary international law, applica-
ble to and binding on all states’.38 In simple terms, self-determination denotes the 
legal right of a people to decide their own destiny in the international order. Pre-
cisely what people achieve through self-determination is unclear and remains con-
tested in international law. In practice, self-determination has ranged from secession 
and granting independence to a people from the parent state (external self-deter -
mination) through to granting a people (national minorities) the right to self-gov -
ernment or autonomy within the confines of their parent state (internal self-deter -
mination). Although there is no official stance on what self-determination entails, 
the right to secession has been strongly disfavoured under international law in order 
30 The General Assembly resolution passed by a 141-5 margin, with 35 abstentions. See UN Doc. 
GA/12407, 2 March 2022.
31 Statement by the North Atlantic Council on Russia’s attack on Ukraine, 24 February 2022, https:// 
www. nato. int/ cps/ en/ natohq/ offic ial_ texts_ 192404. htm (accessed 27 June 2022).
32 Press Statement of President Charles Michel of the European Council and President Ursula von der 
Leyen of the European Commission on Russia’s unprecedented and unprovoked military aggression of 
Ukraine, 24 February 2022, Statement/22/1321, https:// ec. europa. eu/ commi ssion/ press corner/ detail/ en/ 
state ment_ 22_ 1321 (accessed 27 June 2022).
33 OSCE Press Release, 24 February 2022, https:// www. oscepa. org/ en/ news-a- media/ press- relea ses/ 
2022/ osce- parli ament  arians- conde mn- russi an- milit  ary- action- in- ukrai ne- call- for- de- escal ation- at-  
vienna- winter- meeti ng (accessed 27 June 2022).
34 For details of UK sanctions on Russia, see https:// www. gov. uk/ gover  nment/ colle ctions/ uk- sanct ions- 
on- russia. For details of EU sanctions, see https:// www. consi lium. europa. eu/ en/ infog  raphi cs/ eu- sanct 
ions- again st- russia- over- ukrai ne/. For details of US sanctions, see https:// www. state. gov/ ukrai ne- and- rus-
sia- sanct ions/ (all accessed 27 June 2022).
35 Curtis and Mills (2022).
36 The Guardian (2022a).
37 Art. 1 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and International Covenant on 
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) 1966, Art. 1 UN Charter 1945.
38 Sterio (2013), p. 9.
389
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
to protect the territorial integrity and political unity of existing states.39 Exceptions 
to this rule have traditionally applied to people under colonial domination or some 
kind of oppression. More recently the right to secede from a state has also been 
granted in situations where a people have been denied civil and political rights and 
subject to serious human rights abuses (remedial secession).
Kosovo’s unilateral declaration of independence from Serbia in 2008, was sin-
gled out as a case sui generis, a form of ‘remedial secession’ which was necessary 
because of the circumstances of the situation. This justification has not been uni-
versally accepted. Although Kosovo’s independence has been recognised by over 
100 countries worldwide, including the US and most EU states, countries like China 
and Russia, have refused to recognise it as a legitimate state, citing the importance 
of respect for the principle of territorial sovereignty as the primary reason for their 
position. Russia further emphasised that self-determination of peoples by way of 
secession should only be recognised in extreme circumstances. Utilising the territo-
rial approach for its definition of a people, it sustained that the term represented the 
population of a state taken as a whole as opposed to sub-national groups.40 In fact, 
on the basis of this argument Russia did not recognise the citizens of Kosovo as 
a ‘people’ for the purposes of self-determination because they were a sub-national 
group.41
4.1  Self‑Determination Used as a Justification for Russia’s Intervention 
in February 2022
On 21 February 2022, President Putin took what he described as a ‘long and over -
due decision’ and recognised ‘the independence and sovereignty of the Donetsk 
People’s Republic and the Luhansk People’s Republic’. Russia then signed Treaties 
of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance with the leaders of those regions. 
He justified this decision on the basis that the Donbas communities were ‘facing 
horror and genocide’ by Ukraine forces. He further continued by stating that the 
people of these regions ‘are fighting for their elementary right to live on their own 
39 Sterio (2014–2015), p. 299.
40 Two approaches have been used to identify a people for the purposes of self-determination: the ter -
ritorial approach and the characteristics approach. The territorial approach looks at all persons within a 
defined territory and identifies them as a people. It was used during the decolonisation era and was based 
on the principle of uti possidetis, which meant that colonies would become independent on the basis of 
established colonial boundaries. The characteristics approach on the other hand identifies a people by the 
common characteristics of its members. In 1989, during one of its expert meetings, the UN Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) identified ‘a people’ as a group of individual human 
beings who enjoy some or all of the following common features: a common historical tradition, a racial 
or ethnic identity, cultural homogeneity, linguistic unity, religious or ideological affinity, territorial con-
nection and a common economic life. It further stated that ‘the group as a whole must have the will to be 
identified as a people or the consciousness of being a people’ and that the group may have institutions or 
other means of expressing its common characteristics and will for identity.
41 Cavandoli (2016), p. 880.
390 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
land, to speak their own language, and to preserve their culture and traditions’.42 
Putin’s announcement drew widespread condemnation. The UN Secretary-General 
responded by stating that the decision of the Russian Federation was a ‘violation of 
the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine and inconsistent with the prin-
ciples of the Charter of the United Nations’.43 US President Joe Biden ‘strongly 
condemned’ Putin’s decision ‘to purportedly recognize the “independence” of the 
eastern regions of Ukraine’.44 French President Emmanuel Macron tweeted: ‘By 
recognising the separatist regions in eastern Ukraine, Russia is violating its com-
mitments and undermining Ukraine’s sovereignty’. Australian Prime Minister Scott 
Morrison slammed as ‘nonsense’ Putin’s claims that the troops being sent into east-
ern Ukraine were peacekeepers. He further stated, ‘we cannot have threats of vio-
lence being used to seek to advantage nation’s positions over others’.45
When President Putin commenced his ‘special military operation’ he maintained 
it was in accordance with Article 51 of the UN Charter, following a request by the 
peoples in the Donbas Republics. In his speech, Putin talks about the right to self-
determination and the fact that ‘people living in certain territories that are part of 
modern Ukraine, were not asked how they wanted to arrange their lives’. He contin-
ues by stating that Russia’s policy ‘is based on freedom, the freedom of choice for 
everyone to independently determine their own future and the future of their chil-
dren. And we consider it important that this right—the right to choose—could be 
used by all the peoples living on the territory of today’s Ukraine, by everyone who 
wants it’.46
4.2  Do the People of the Donbas Region Have a Right to Self‑Determination 
by Way of Secession?
The Donbas (the area of the Don River basin, 85% of which is currently within the 
modern-day Ukrainian administrative regions of Donetsk and Luhansk) is strategi-
cally important, because it was the mining and manufacturing, iron and steel-indus-
try capital of the Soviet Union. It was an area to which many Russians immigrated 
into during that industrialization campaign. The Donbas only accounts for 9% of 
Ukrainian territory, but for 17% of its population and 21 per cent of its industrial 
output. Also, the Donbas is the geographical lynchpin to a whole area of Ukrain-
ian territory from Kharkiv in the north-east to Odesa in the south-west that is fer -
vently contested between Ukraine and Russia. More than three-quarters of Ukraine’s 
42 Address by the President of the Russian Federation, 21 February 2022, http:// en. kreml in. ru/ events/ 
presi dent/ news/ 67828 (accessed 11 March 2022).
43 ‘Secretary-General Says Russian Federation’s Recognition of “Independent” Donetsk, Luhansk Vio-
late Ukraine’s Sovereignty, Territorial Integrity’, SG/SM/21153, 23 February 2022, United Nations Press 
Release, https:// www. un. org/ press/ en/ 2022/ sgsm2 1153. doc. htm (accessed 27 June 2022).
44 ‘Readout of President Biden’s Call with President Zelenskyy of Ukraine’, 21 February 2022, https:// 
www. white house. gov/ briefi  ng- room/ state ments- relea ses/ 2022/ 02/ 21/ reado ut- of- presi dent- bidens- call-  
with- presi dent- zelen skyy- of- ukrai ne-4/ (accessed 27 June 2022).
45 Al Jazeera (2022).
46 New York Times (2022c).
391
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
Russian speaking minority live in this area (eastern and southern Ukraine). Moreover, 
3.6 million of these are in the Donbas, where they form 44% of the local population, the 
largest percentage in Ukraine, apart from Crimea.47
As a result of this unique identity, residents of the Donbas region have tradi-
tionally favoured a political order which, though subject to Ukrainian sovereignty, 
maintained close ties with Russia economically, socially, and politically.48 In fact, in 
1994, during the first Ukrainian elections, post-independence, the Donbas region’s 
support for much closer ties with Russia was confirmed by poll results in Donetsk 
and Luhansk on the question of joining the Commonwealth of Independent States 
(CIS): 88.7% of Donetsk voters and 90.7% of Luhansk voters’ voted in favour of 
joining.49 These same attitudes came to a head with the Euromaidan revolution, 
when President Yanukovych was overthrown in 2014. As a Donbas native, residents 
of this region saw Yanukovych as ‘one of them’ and someone who made decisions 
‘in their best interest’. His removal was perceived as a threat to the interests of peo-
ple living in the region and the culmination of irreconcilable differences in priori-
ties over Ukraine’s future.50 These events are what spurred separatist rebels in April 
2014, to demand referenda on independence from Ukraine in the cities of Donetsk 
and Luhansk.
As a general premise, the right to self-determination does not give rise to a unilat-
eral at-will justification for secession of any group defined as a ‘people’.51 As previ-
ously mentioned, the right to self-determination only permits unilateral secession 
in limited circumstances. This was highlighted by the Supreme Court of Canada in 
its advisory opinion on the legality of the secession of Quebec. The court held that 
a right to secession arises where a people is governed by a colonial empire; where 
a people is subject to alien subjugation, domination, or exploitation and where a 
people is denied meaningful access to its right to self-determination within the state 
of which it forms part. Unless any of those conditions are met, peoples are expected 
to achieve self-determination within the framework of their existing state.52 In the 
Declaration on Friendly Relations, the principle of self-determination was limited in 
the following way:
Nothing in the foregoing paragraphs shall be construed as authorizing or 
encouraging any action which would dismember or impair, totally or in part, 
the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign and independent States 
conducting themselves in compliance with the principle of equal rights and 
self-determination of peoples as described above and thus possessed of a gov -
47 Wilson (1995), p. 267.
48 Pirie (1996), pp. 1098–1100.
49 See Pirie (1996), p.1098.
50 Esposito (2020), p. 144.
51 The notion of a people has depended mainly on the context in which the right to self-determination 
has been invoked, and has included former colonised peoples, citizens from a given state and self-identi-
fying peoples.
52 Reference re Secession of Quebec, [1998] 2 SCR 217 at 222, https:// scc- csc. lexum. com/ scc- csc/ scc- 
csc/ en/ item/ 1643/ index. do (accessed 27 June 2022).
392 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
ernment representing the whole people belonging to the territory without dis-
tinction as to race, creed or colour.53
Donetsk and Luhansk did not fall under any of the above conditions. In 2014, 
when people of both republics voted to secede, it was not because they had been 
denied meaningful access to self-determination by Ukraine, it was because of the 
ousting of President Yanukoych from the country and the fall of the Donbas-based 
Party of Regions from power. Following the Euromaidan crisis however, as a direct 
reaction to Russia’s interference in the Donbas, the government in Kyiv introduced 
several measures which may be interpreted as undermining the self-determination 
of the majority Russian-speaking population in the Donbas region. On Septem-
ber 2017, the Ukraine Parliament passed an education reform bill that included a 
clause making Ukrainian the required language of study in state schools from the 
fifth grade onwards. Russia’s Foreign Ministry stated that the law was designed to 
‘forcefully establish a mono-ethnic language regime in a multinational state’.54 In 
2018, the Ukrainian Supreme Court overturned a 2012 law which permitted national 
minorities in their home regions to carry out official business with the government, 
in their native language.55 In January 2022, a new state language law came into force 
which requires that Ukrainian be used in most aspects of public life.56 This new law 
has raised concerns about the protection of minority languages. Article 25, regard-
ing print media outlets, makes exceptions for certain minority languages, English, 
and official EU languages, but not for Russian. Ukrainian authorities justify this 
by referring to the country’s European ambitions and ‘the century of oppression of 
[…] Ukrainian in favour of Russian’.57 The Ukrainian government has every right to 
promote its state language and strengthen its national identity, however a balance is 
required, to avoid discrimination against linguistic minorities, especially, Russian.
The degree of deprivation of internal self-determination that would justify a case 
for secession is not clear. Commentators in the past, have stressed the importance 
of exhausting other avenues for peaceful resolution of disputes before secession can 
take place, such as resolving the matter internally within the same state structure 
or making legal remedies available to put an end to the situation.58 While the level 
of deprivation necessary for secession to be legitimate will always be an area of 
disagreement, cases concerning genocide would not necessarily prove to be as con-
troversial. Given the extensive international human rights mechanisms available, 
53 Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation 
among States in Accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, UNGA Res. 2625 (XXV), 24 Octo-
ber 1970, Principle V.
54 Wesolowsky (2017).
55 UKRINFORM (2018).
56 Law of Ukraine, On ensuring the functioning of the Ukrainian language as the state language, https:// 
zakon. rada. gov. ua/ laws/ show/ 2704- 19# Text (accessed 27 June 2022).
57 Denber (2022).
58 Points put across by Cassese and Doehring mentioned in Wilson (2009), p. 469.
393
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
serious violations of such norms require appropriate remedies, which in extreme cir -
cumstances might entail secession.59
President Putin’s speech on 24 February 2022 mentions his intention to protect 
people subjected to bullying and to stop the ‘genocide of millions of people living 
there’. He continues by stating that ‘it was these aspirations, feelings, pain of people 
that were for us the main motive for making a decision to recognise the people’s 
republics of Donbas’.60 Like with Crimea in 2014, Putin justified the independence 
of the Donbas republics on 21 February through the medium of remedial secession 
which has been used in non-colonial situations where a people has been persecuted 
and subjected to serious human rights violations by the parent state.61
Putin’s claim of genocide has been emphatically denied by the Ukrainian govern-
ment. On the 26 February 2022, the Ukraine sought a pronouncement by the Inter -
national Court of Justice (ICJ) on what it retained to be a false claim of genocide 
made by Russia as an excuse to use force, in the context of Article IX of the 1948 
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, to which 
both states are signatories. On 16 March 2022, the ICJ issued an order on provi-
sional measures. The Court in essence accepted all arguments made by Ukraine for 
the purposes of the provisional measures stage of the proceeding and rejected those 
in Russia’s submission to the Court that followed its non-appearance. The Court 
accepted as plausible Ukraine’s argument that it had a right under the Convention 
not to be subjected to a false claim of genocide which was then used as a basis for 
using force against it.62 Russia’s remedial secession thesis regarding the Donbas 
region, manifestly fails on account of evidence, but more than that, it remains legally 
inconclusive from the point of view of positive international law.63
4.3  What About the Ukraine’s Right to Self‑Determination?
Referring to the invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022, the vice president of Tai-
wan, Lai Ching-te, tweeted that the ‘principle of self-determination cannot be erased 
by brute force’. Russia’s armed intervention of Ukraine is a clear breach of its terri-
torial sovereignty and an attempt at undermining Ukraine’s existence as a sovereign 
independent state.
Ukraine officially declared itself an independent country on 24 August 1991. In 
early December of that year, the Ukrainian declaration was ratified by a referendum 
with a 90% ‘yes’ vote. Leonid Kravchuk was elected as its first president. The same 
month, Gorbachev resigned and the Soviet Union ceased to exist. The Union could 
59 See Wilson (2009), p. 473.
60 See New York Times (2022c).
61 The argument for remedial secession was used in the cases of Bangladesh declaring itself independent 
from Pakistan (1971) and in the partition of North and South Sudan (2011).
62 Allegations of Genocide under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of 
Genocide (Ukraine v. Russian Federation), Provisional Measures, Order of 16 March 2022, paras. 59–60, 
https:// www. icj- cij. org/ public/ files/ case- relat ed/ 182/ 182- 20220 316- ORD- 01- 00- EN. pdf (accessed 27 
June 2022).
63 Pentassuglia (2022).
394 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
not continue without Ukraine, the closest, most important partner to Russia in the 
Soviet Union construct. In fact, the then US ambassador in Moscow, Robert Strauss, 
advised Washington that this result was devastating for Russians—‘the most revo-
lutionary event of 1991 for Russia may not be the collapse of Communism, but the 
loss of something Russians of all political stripes think of as part of their own body 
politic, and near to the heart at that: Ukraine’.64
When Ukraine declared independence from the Soviet Union, it emerged from 
70  years of totalitarianism, having suffered civil war in the Bolshevik revolution, 
famine (holomodor) in the 1930s, the Nazi occupation, holocaust of the Second 
World War, and in more recent decades several political upheavals.65 The Soviet 
Union was a Russian-dominated political construct with the Ukrainian communist 
party a puppet of Muscovite rulers. Ukrainian culture and language were suppressed 
and considered secondary to Russian which was the language that enjoyed privi-
leged status.66 1991 marked a historical milestone, a profound change in the cul-
tural, social, political, and economic life of the Ukrainian people. An opportunity 
for them to finally exercise their right to self-determination and ‘freely determine 
their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural develop-
ment’.67 Respect for this right was further reaffirmed in 1994 when the Budapest 
Memorandum on Security Assurances was signed by the US, Russia, and Britain, 
who committed ‘to respect the independence and sovereignty and the existing bor -
ders of Ukraine’ and ‘to refrain from the threat or use of force’ against the country.
In July 2021, in his essay, ‘On the historical unity of Russians and Ukrainians’, 
published on the Kremlin’s website, Putin made an emotional claim to Ukrainian 
territory by sustaining that Ukrainians, Belarusians and Russians are one people 
bound by a shared common heritage, the heritage of a realm known as Kievan Rus 
(862–1242), which was a loose medieval political federation located in modern-day 
Belarus, Ukraine, and part of Russia. Putin claims that Ukraine never existed as a 
separate state and had never been a nation.68 Instead, he argues, Ukrainian nation-
ality was always an integral part of a triune nationality: Russian, Belorussian, and 
Ukrainian. Putin essentially accuses the Bolsheviks of detaching from Russia its his-
torical territories, in complete disregard of people’s views. He continues by stating 
that Ukraine’s ruling circles decided to justify their country’s independence through 
the denial of its past.
The ‘historical reality’ of modern-day Ukraine is more complex than Putin’s ver -
sion of events, encompassing ‘a thousand-year history of changing religions, bor -
ders and peoples’.69 Over the course of centuries, the territory recognised today 
as Ukraine has been conquered, controlled, or taken over by the Mongol Empire, 
later the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and the 
64 Sarotte (2022).
65 Lutsevych (2021).
66 Besemeres (2016), p. 337.
67 Art 1. ICCPR and ICESCR 1966.
68 See Putin (2021).
69 Cengel (2022).
395
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
Russian Empire, while Crimea was at one point a client state of the Ottoman Empire. 
Between the World Wars, portions of western Ukraine were ruled by Poland, Roma-
nia, and Czechoslovakia. Ukraine’s history is undoubtedly connected with Russian 
history, but it’s also intertwined with Polish history, with the history of the Greek 
Orthodox Church, even Romanian history, and the history of the Turkic peoples on 
the Eurasian Steppe.70
A further point to highlight, is that Putin’s claims about the lack of cultural and 
other distinctions between Ukrainians and Russians makes his application of the 
principle of self-determination difficult to reconcile with the situation in the Don-
bas region. As mentioned earlier, the right of self-determination only attaches to a 
distinct ‘people’, whatever that term might imply. Putin’s statements asserting that 
Ukrainians and Russians are a single ‘people’ would seem to undermine its applica-
tion in this case.
Russia’s ongoing use of force in Ukraine is a clear violation of Ukraine’s ter -
ritorial integrity, sovereignty, and political independence. If there is any lesson that 
Putin should have learned from Ukraine’s Revolution of Dignity, it is that the annex-
ation of Crimea and the undeclared war in eastern Ukraine have only reinforced 
the Ukrainian people’s resolve to leave Russia’s orbit and to seek closer ties to the 
West.71 Ukrainians aren’t only fighting for the independence of their state; they’re 
fighting for the survival of their identity because Russia has long been a neighbour -
ing power that has tried to wrestle control over the people of Ukraine to bring it 
under its influence.
5  The Distortion of Fundamental Norms (II): Use of Force
5.1  The Prohibition of the Use of Force
The starting point for the assessment of the legality of any state’s use of mili-
tary force against another is Article 2(4) of the UN Charter, which prohibits ‘the 
threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of 
any state’. Article 2(4)’s prohibition has evolved into a jus cogens norm of custom-
ary international law,72 and the dominant view amongst international lawyers is 
that it represents a complete prohibition on the use of force, subject to expressly 
stated exceptions.73 The UN Charter recognises two exceptions to Article 2(4): mili-
tary enforcement action authorised by the UN Security Council, in response to a 
determination of the existence of a threat to the peace, breach of the peace or act of 
aggression and the right of individual or collective self-defence in response to an 
70 Lenoe (2022).
71 Rumer and Weiss (2021).
72 See, e.g., UN Doc. A/C.6/32/SR.64, 6 December 1977; Military and Paramilitary Activities in and 
against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of America) (Merits), ICJ Reports 1986, p. 100, para. 
190.
73 For discussions of the scope and requirements of Art. 2(4)’s prohibition, see, e.g., Corten (2010), chs. 
1 and 4; Dinstein (2017), pp. 89–105; Schrijver (2015), pp. 465–484.
396 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
armed attack. While further exceptions to Article 2(4) have been advocated,74 the 
most prevalent of which has been the doctrine of humanitarian intervention,75 these 
have been controversial and there is at best limited consensus upon their existence.
In the absence of any legal justification by way of exemption, there appears to be 
little doubt that Russia’s action against Ukraine constitutes a prima facie violation of 
Article 2(4). As Corten notes in respect of the prevailing legal consensus, ‘there is 
no doubt that article 2(4) […] is applicable to any military operations conducted by 
one state against another’.76 Russia has subject Ukraine to the application of military 
force, directed against its territory with the ultimate objective of furthering goals 
inconsistent with its political independence. Notwithstanding any legal justifica-
tions offered, Russia confirmed on 24 February 2022 that it had launched military 
operations against Ukraine. Any claim to the contrary would be futile in light of the 
overwhelming evidence accumulated in media reportage of the effects of Russia’s 
attack. Beyond constituting a prima facie violation of Article 2(4), Russia’s invasion 
also places it in breach of the Budapest Memorandum, under the terms of which 
it pledged to respect Ukraine’s independence and sovereignty, and, mirroring Arti-
cle 2(4), refrain from any threat or use of force against it.77 Several other interna-
tional legal principles are also infringed,78 including Ukraine’s own right of internal 
self-determination.79
Absent any legal justification, the invasion of Ukraine is also capable of amount-
ing to the commission of the international crime of aggression.80 There have been 
reports suggesting that some of the hostilities directed against targets in Ukraine 
have been the acts of non-uniformed Russian directed personnel.81 Under the law 
of state responsibility, however, where attacks are committed by those under the 
‘effective control’ of a state, these acts will be attributable to that state.82 Thus, these 
would still constitute Russian acts for the purposes of Article 2(4) to the extent that 
they involve the application of coercive force upon or directed against Ukrainian 
territory.83
74 For example, pro-democratic intervention and intervention in support of self-determination. See 
Wippman (2015), pp. 797–815; Chadwick (2015), pp. 841–860.
75 There is a voluminous literature on humanitarian intervention. Some of the more substantive treat-
ments include Weiss (2016); Wheeler (2000); Chesterman (2001).
76 Corten (2010), p. 52.
77 Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances, 5 December 1994, paras. 1–2.
78 For example, principles enshrined within the Helsinki Final Act to protect the subjection of sovereign 
states within Europe to the threat or use of force, inviolability of their frontiers and the compromise of 
their integrity. See Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe Final Act 1975, Pt. I(a)(ii)-(iv). 
See also the Doctrine of Non-Intervention, reiterated in GA Res. 2131 (XX); GA Res. 2625 (XXV).
79 See above.
80 This issue is beyond the scope of the present article.
81 New York Times (2022a).
82 Military and Paramilitary Activities in and against Nicaragua (Nicaragua v. United States of Amer -
ica) (Merits), ICJ Reports 1986, para. 115.
83 See also the Definition of Aggression (GA Res. 3314 (XXIX)), which informed the ICJ’s development 
of its ‘effective control’ test in the Nicaragua case, ibid.
397
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
A state may avoid violating Article 2(4) where its intervention is at the request 
of the state upon whose territory it deploys its forces, in order to assist in quash-
ing internal violence or disorder.84 Claims of an invitation have been advanced by 
Russia previously as part of efforts to legitimise its interventions in its near abroad, 
including in Crimea during 2014 when it purported to have been invited to intervene 
by ousted Ukrainian President Yanyukovych, albeit with little merit.85
Only a state’s highest authorities may extend such an invitation, which must be 
validly given.86 Certainly, the Ukrainian authorities have extended no such invita-
tion. It may have been assumed that Russia’s recognition of Donetsk and Luhansk 
as independent states may serve as a precursor to its invocation of an invitation on 
their part to assist in tackling threats directed against them by Ukraine. In Putin’s 
case for Russian intervention, he suggested that ‘[t]he people’s republics of Donbas 
have asked Russia for help’.87 That this represented such a small part of a lengthy 
statement which went on to refer to bases for action grounded in the right of self-
defence and humanitarian intervention,88 however, would suggest perhaps limited 
belief in the strength of the invitation claim. In any event, serious difficulties arise 
in respect of such a claim. Firstly, only sovereign states are entitled to invite assis-
tance from external actors.89 Notwithstanding Russia’s recognition of Donetsk and 
Luhansk, they are not so recognised by the overwhelming majority of the interna-
tional community for whom they remain part of Ukraine. This makes any discus-
sion pertaining to the standing which must be enjoyed by those authorities extending 
the invitation irrelevant.90 It is arguably for similar reasons that Russian claims to 
be undertaking ‘peacekeeping’ in the Donbas have been scoffed at.91 Secondly, if 
Donetsk and Luhansk did indeed constitute independent states, any threat posed to 
them by Ukraine would instead represent an inter-state challenge and engage debates 
surrounding the right of collective self-defence.92
5.2  Russia’s Purported Legal Justifications
Vladimir Putin’s address of 24 February represented a long, rambling series of 
assertions within which can be identified the strands of two central justifications 
84 On the general principles of invitation as a ground precluding the unlawfulness of the use of force, see 
Corten (2010), pp. 249–310; Fox (2015).
85 See Wilson (2016), pp. 167–168.
86 See Corten (2010), pp. 259–260, 266–276.
87 See New York Times (2022c).
88 See below.
89 See Wippman (2015), pp. 797–815; Chadwick (2015), pp. 841–860.
90 Although see Roth (1999), pp. 136–149.
91 UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres labelled such claims a ‘perversion of the concept of peace-
keeping. […] When troops of one country enter the territory of another country without its consent, 
they are not impartial peacekeepers. They are not peacekeepers at all’. See ‘Secretary-General’s open-
ing remarks at press encounter on Ukraine’, 22 February 2022, https:// www. un. org/ sg/ en/ node/ 262001 
(accessed 27 June 2022).
92 See below.
398 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
for its military action against Ukraine: these take the form of a blend of references 
to self-defence and humanitarian intervention, embedded within broader justifica-
tory language not too dissimilar from that employed to rationalise Russian military 
interference in Georgia in 2008 and Crimea and the Donbas in 2014. Putin made a 
number of assertions which suggested the emergence of various threats from vari-
ous sources. In implying the existence of a NATO threat against Russia, he pro-
claimed that its ‘military machine is moving and […] approaching our border’.93 
By making comparison with the USSR’s failure to pre-empt its invasion by Nazi 
Germany in 1940/41, Putin claimed that ‘[w]e will not make this mistake the second 
time […] a military presence in territories bordering on Russia, if we permit it to 
go ahead, will […] [be] creating an ever mounting and totally unacceptable threat 
for Russia’.94 Linking these perceived threats to Ukraine, he asserted that ‘Russia 
cannot feel safe […] while facing a permanent threat from the territory of today’s 
Ukraine’.95 Significantly, Putin invoked Article 51 of the UN Charter, noting it was 
‘in accordance with [its provisions] […] [that he] made a decision to carry out a spe-
cial military operation’.96 In so doing, that this represented at least partially a collec-
tive self-defence action was hinted at, Putin claiming that ‘[t]he people’s republics 
of Donbass have asked Russia for help’, and that its military operation constituted 
execution of treaties entered into with Donetsk and Luhansk.97
Although Putin did not expressly refer to any right of humanitarian intervention 
in explaining Russia’s actions, references were made to some of the alleged humani-
tarian effects of conflict in attempting to justify them. In respect of events in the 
Donbas region, he asserted that ‘we had to stop that atrocity, that genocide of the 
millions of people who live there’, adding more generally in respect of its military 
operation that it served a ‘purpose […] to protect people who […] have been fac-
ing humiliation and genocide perpetrated by the Kiev regime […] we will seek to 
demilitarise and denazify Ukraine’.98
5.3  Self‑Defence Against Who, from What Threat, and Constituting an ‘Armed 
Attack’ When?
The right of self-defence is governed by Article 51 of the UN Charter, which pro-
vides that:
Nothing in the present Charter shall impair the inherent right of individual 
or collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs against a Member of the 
United Nations, until the Security Council has taken measures necessary to 
maintain international peace and security. Measures taken by Members in the 
93 New York Times (2022c).
94 New York Times (2022c).
95 New York Times (2022c).
96 See New York Times (2022c).
97 See New York Times (2022c).
98 See New York Times (2022c).
399
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
exercise of this right of self-defence shall be immediately reported to the Secu-
rity Council and shall not in any way affect the authority and responsibility of 
the Security Council under the present Charter to take at any time such action 
as it deems necessary in order to maintain or restore international peace and 
security.
As noted, President Putin invoked Article 51 in his statement setting out Rus-
sia’s case for action against Ukraine. Russia also wrote to the UN Security Council 
informing it of its invocation of the right of self-defence,99 as required by Article 
51, albeit not expanding upon its exercise of the right in any detail or having sub-
sequently updated the Council on the specific measures taken in the exercise of this 
right.100 Article 51 permits both individual and collective self-defence. Thus, Russia 
would be equally entitled to afford military assistance to another state that has been 
attacked as it would be to defend itself. However, there are several problems in cat-
egorising Russia’s military action against Ukraine as a defensive act.
Article 51 is predicated on there having been an armed attack against the state 
exercising the right of self-defence or that which it is supporting through collective 
self-defence measures. There is a certain degree of confusion in Putin’s statement as 
to who is responsible of having attacked who. Putin went to some lengths to spell 
out the threat felt by Russia as a consequence of NATO’s eastward expansion, but 
there is no suggestion that NATO members have attacked Russia, while Putin goes 
on to specifically refer to a ‘permanent threat from the territory of today’s Ukraine’. 
However, Putin fails to cite any specific military action that has been taken by 
Ukraine against Russia, and indeed there is no evidence to suggest that any such act 
has taken place prior to Russia’s commencement of military operations on 24 Febru-
ary. Although Russia has made claims that Ukraine has undertaken actions against 
the territory of Donetsk and Luhansk,101 warranting Russian military assistance in 
support of their collective self-defence, apart from doubts over the satisfaction of 
evidential standards to warrant such assertions, the ability to assist these regions in 
acts of self-defence would be dependent upon their statehood. A sub-state unit does 
not enjoy a right of self-defence against a parent state. Article 51 is quite clear in 
this respect, reserving the right to responses to armed attacks against members of 
the United Nations—which only states can be.102 It is surely significant that Russia 
moved to recognise Donetsk and Luhansk before commencing military operations 
against Ukraine, yet the fact that other states have declined to do so underlines the 
fact that on most assessments they fail to satisfy the criteria for statehood. That these 
regions only found themselves able to exercise a degree of de facto independence 
99 Letter dated 24 February 2022 from the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the 
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General, UN Doc. S/2022/154.
100 The Russian letter merely annexed Putin’s statement of the same day by way of explanation. See 
ibid., Annex.
101 See, e.g., UN Docs. S/PV.8968 (at pp. 9–12), S/PV.8974 (at p. 11), S/PV.8979 (at p. 12).
102 Art. 4 UN Charter.
400 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
from Ukraine as a result of Russian intervention further undermines their claims to 
independence,103 a duty of non-recognition arising in such circumstances.104
There is increased acceptance within discussions of the right of self-defence that, 
notwithstanding Article 51’s requirement of an armed attack, it permits defensive 
action to be taken in response to broader threats directed against states. In particu-
lar, there is a considerable body of support for the existence of a right of anticipa-
tory self-defence derived from customary international law.105 This permits states to 
take action in anticipation of an armed attack that is imminent.106 Although Russia 
has not formally suggested that it acted in anticipation of an attack by Ukraine, its 
proclaimed objective of ‘demilitarising’ Ukraine might be taken to implicitly sug-
gest that it was regarded as posing an imminent military threat that needed to be 
eliminated. However, no evidence has been adduced to support any such assump-
tion. Furthermore, on the basis of any informed assessment of the relative military 
capacities of Russia and Ukraine,107 to label Ukraine as a military threat to Russia 
would appear preposterous.
Putin’s reference to the growing threat posed to Russia as a result of NATO’s 
presence in neighbouring countries and a permanent threat faced from Ukraine as 
a result of potential NATO expansion further eastward might be taken as indica-
tive of a desire to take action to weaken or remove the prospect of military action 
in the future being directed against Russia from Ukraine. This would sit coherently 
with Putin’s proclaimed objective of the military action launched on February 24 
to ‘demilitarize’ Ukraine. By destroying Ukraine’s military capacity, any ability to 
threaten Russia in the future would be severely weakened. However, this would be 
to take the basis of Russia’s justificatory discourse into the realms of pre-emption, a 
hugely controversial notion in international law. Whereas anticipatory self-defence 
is based on action to respond to threats in circumstances where an armed attack is 
imminent, there being relatively conclusive evidence of its impending nature, the 
logic of pre-emption is that states may act to remove threats before they even mate-
rialise. In this sense it is a very speculative notion. Famously advanced by the US in 
its post-9/11 national security strategy,108 there is little support for the doctrine in 
state practice.109
Even where a legitimate right of self-defence arises, it is conditioned by require-
ments which govern the manner of its exercise. Measures taken in self-defence must 
103 Katchanovski (2016).
104 For discussion of the content of the duty of non-recognition, see Talmon (2005), pp. 99–125.
105 See, e.g., Wilmhurst (2005); Maogoto (2004); Ronzitti (2006).
106 The classic formulation of anticipatory self-defence under customary international law is found in the 
Caroline Incident, which required ‘a necessity of self-defence, instant, overwhelming, leaving no choice 
of means, and no moment for deliberation’. The incident is summarised in Wood (2018).
107 According to SIPRI data, Russia’s military expenditure in 2020 was over ten times that of Ukraine. 
See SIPRI, Military Expenditure by Country (2021), https:// sipri. org/ sites/ defau lt/ files/ Data% 20for% 
20all% 20cou  ntries%  20from%  201988%  E2%  80% 932020%  20in%  20con  stant%  20% 282019%  29% 20USD%  
20% 28pdf% 29. pdf (accessed 27 June 2022).
108 US National Security Strategy, September 2002, Pt. V, https:// georg  ewbush- white house. archi ves. gov/ 
nsc/ nss/ 2002/ (accessed 27 June 2022).
109 See, e.g., Henderson (2010), pp. 171–193; Deeks (2015), pp. 661–678.
401
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
be necessary and proportionate in response to the threat which they seem to repel, 
requirements that have been confirmed in ICJ rulings on multiple occasions.110 
Although it is difficult to establish any solid legal basis for Russia’s exercise of a 
right of self-defence against Ukraine, even if the requirements for such a right to 
arise were satisfied it would be difficult to consider Russia’s military action from 
24 February onwards as being compliant with the strictures of necessity and pro-
portionality. Measures taken in self-defence would typically be expected to be tar -
geted and specific in nature, designed at repelling the armed attack against which 
they had been initiated in response. Although President Putin claimed that Russia 
did not intend the occupation of Ukraine, the scale of the military operation under -
taken by Russia represents an onslaught of the gravest form with it being difficult to 
draw any conclusion other than that its ultimate objective is the complete subjuga-
tion and domination of Ukraine. This further undermines any suggestion that Rus-
sia’s actions are compatible with the right of self-defence.
5.4  Humanitarian Intervention? Identifying an Oppressor and a Victim
In some respects, it may be easier for Russia to attempt to base its military action 
against Ukraine on the doctrine of humanitarian intervention than self-defence, as 
this does not require evidence of any attack committed by Ukraine against Russia or 
hinge upon the legal status of Donetsk and Luhansk if it is alleged they have suffered 
from military action originating from Ukrainian authorities. However, humanitarian 
intervention represents a controversial notion which continues to divide the inter -
national community, although there are some indications that it has gained in terms 
of its perceived acceptability,111 even if traditionally states have avoided invoking it 
as their justification for the use of force.112 The major difficulty with humanitarian 
intervention as an exception to the prohibition on the use of force lies in the fact that 
it is not one of those grounds upon which military force may be exercised provided 
for within the UN Charter, it being necessary to identify its emergence as a princi-
ple of customary international law grounded in state practice. While it cannot be 
claimed that there is an undeniable right of humanitarian intervention, there have 
certainly been some signs in the post-Cold War era that states look more favour -
ably upon what would otherwise constitute unlawful uses of force where accom-
panied by humanitarian objectives than was once the case. A significant step was 
arguably the international reaction to NATO’s military campaign against the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) in response to the FRY authorities oppression of the 
Kosovar Albanian population. Although UN Security Council authorisation for the 
110 See, e.g., Nicaragua case, supra n. 72; Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory 
Opinion of 8 July 1996, ICJ Reports 1996, p. 226, at p. 245.
111 See, e.g., discussions cited supra n. 75.
112 Classic examples of such an approach being taken by intervening states are found with the inter -
ventions in Bangladesh, Uganda and Cambodia during the 1970s when notwithstanding the severe 
humanitarian crises existing and addressed by the military interventions, legal justifications offered were 
grounded in the more conventional right of self-defence. See Wheeler (2000), chs. 2–4.
402 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
operation was not forthcoming due to the likelihood of Russian and Chinese vetoes, 
it is notable that a draft resolution condemning NATO was roundly defeated in the 
Council,113 leaving the action with an air of legitimacy if not strictly legality.114 In 
subsequent proceedings before the ICJ some of the intervening NATO states cited 
humanitarian grounds in support of the action.115 The UN’s later endorsement of the 
Responsibility to Protect doctrine underlined the fact that there is growing collec-
tive appreciation of the need for robust action to tackle humanitarian crises,116 and 
the Security Council has referred to the doctrine in the context of the conferment of 
mandates to use force to further humanitarian objectives.117 Although there is no 
consensus upon what specifically humanitarian intervention is or requires, it can be 
regarded on a general level as entailing non-consensual military intervention by one 
or more states within the territory of another state for the purpose of ending or ame-
liorating the effects of serious human rights abuses or humanitarian crises.118
A number of assertions by Russia have hinted at the humanitarian basis of their 
intervention against Ukraine, ranging from claims that Russian speakers have been 
oppressed to wilder charges of genocide being perpetrated by Ukraine.119 There is 
no evidence to support the more outlandish claims made by Russia. In proceedings 
brought before the ICJ by Ukraine pursuant to the Genocide Convention, the ICJ 
went so far as to assert that it found no evidence to substantiate Russia’s claims of 
genocide.120 While it is plausible that instances of human rights abuses may have 
arisen in Ukraine,121 even if such claims could be substantiated they would be likely 
to fall far short of the threshold which is typically laid down for the exercise of any 
right of humanitarian intervention to arise. Put simply, it requires far more than the 
existence of some human rights abuses, instead necessitating widescale abuses caus-
ing significant deaths.122 Furthermore, any Russian claims of serious human rights 
113 UN Doc. S/1999/328, 26 March 1999.
114 For discussions of the legal nature of the military action, see, e.g., Simma (1999); Cassese (1999).
115 See ICJ: Legality of Use of Force (Serbia and Montenegro v. Portugal, United Kingdom, Netherlands, 
Italy, Germany, Canada, France, Belgium) [February 18, 2005], 44 ILM 299 (2005). For discussion, see 
Vitucci (2006).
116 UN Doc. A/60/L.1, paras. 138–139.
117 E.g., SC Res. 1973 (2011), in relation to Libya. It is important to note, however, that the Council’s 
references to the Responsibility to Protect have accompanied authorisations to use force pursuant to its 
UN Charter powers, and not in respect of unilateral military interventions lacking its authority.
118 For example, Pattison defines humanitarian intervention as ‘forcible military action by an external 
agent in the relevant political community with the predominant purpose of preventing, reducing, or halt-
ing an ongoing or impending grievous suffering or loss of life’, in Pattison (2010), p. 28.
119 See New York Times (2022c).
120 Allegations of Genocide under the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of 
Genocide (Ukraine v. Russian Federation), Provisional Measures, Order of 16 March 2022, para. 59.
121 For independent assessments of levels of protection for human rights in Ukraine, see e.g., Amnesty 
International’s 2021 Ukraine report, https:// www. amnes  ty. org/ en/ locat ion/ europe- and- centr  al- asia/ ukrai 
ne/ report- ukrai ne/ (accessed 27 June 2022).
122 Those who have advanced criteria to govern the exercise of any such right have set high the threshold 
of suffering or fatalities which would warrant intervention. For example, Cassese envisaged ‘gross and 
egregious breaches of human rights involving loss of life of hundreds or thousands of innocent people, 
and amounting to crimes against humanity’. See Cassese (1999), p. 27.
403
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
abuses on the part of Ukraine are undermined by the nature of their own military 
campaign which has come to utilise bomb and missile attacks against civilian tar -
gets, likely placing it in breach of fundamental norms of international humanitarian 
law.123
To the extent that Russia has offered any legal justification for its attack on 
Ukraine, it has sought to manipulate existing norms by advancing what are for the 
most part outlandish factual claims to serve as the basis for their vague implicit 
articulation of established legal principles in support of military actions undertaken 
to reassert Russian control within the former Soviet space. The claims made in 
respect of Ukraine simply reflect those made at the time of its earlier interventions 
in Georgia and Crimea, and in this sense current events are simply the latest, most 
brutal stage in Russia’s approach to retaining influence in its near abroad.
6  The Wider Implications of Russia’s Interference in Ukraine
While unpicking the strategic and policy objectives underpinning Russia’s interven-
tion in Ukraine in detailed terms is a task for which international relations schol-
ars are better placed to undertake, it is nonetheless possible to make some general 
observations upon the nature of the Ukrainian situation and its potential wider 
implications in both legal and political terms. In simple terms, Russia’s intervention 
can be understood by reference to its policy objective of maintaining and/or extend-
ing its influence within its near abroad, essentially the former component republics 
of the Soviet Union, particularly those which neighbour it.124 This objective may 
be regarded as serving a combination of assertive and defensive aims, Russia seek -
ing to reassert a level of influence that has waned in the post-Cold War era, while 
also acting to pre-empt threats which it perceives may come to endanger its interests 
associated with political developments in neighbouring states. Recent developments 
in Ukraine cannot be understood in isolation from Russia’s previous interferences 
in the Donbas and Crimea, as well as yet earlier interventions in Georgia. While the 
events of 2022 may have taken on a far more severe form than those earlier cited 
actions on Russia’s part, they all form part of an ongoing, overriding narrative built 
around a singular policy goal. Furthermore, while varying to a degree in terms of 
their specifics, there is a certain level of consistency in Russia’s purported legal 
justifications for its actions that rely on dubious claims of a humanitarian impera-
tive to act, invitations to intervene and farcical assertions of exercising the right of 
self-defence. Russia’s justificatory discourse on each occasion has been accompa-
nied by an attempt to link it to proclaimed rights of self-determination on the part 
123 In particular, Art. 51 of the 1st Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions 1949, adopted in 
1977. This provision prohibits targeting of civilians or civilian objects. The UN Office of the High Com-
missioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) itself raised the possibility that Russian attacks on civilian targets 
may amount to war crimes. See ‘Russian attacks on civilian targets in Ukraine could be a war crime: UN 
rights office’, OHCHR, 11 March 2022, https:// news. un. org/ en/ story/ 2022/ 03/ 11137 82 (accessed 27 June 
2022).
124 See Abushov (2009); Simao (2016); Rezvani (2020).
404 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
of allegedly oppressed groups and its recognition of their independent statehood to 
bolster its questionable bases for the use of force. Russian legal discourse becomes 
all the more questionable when it is considered that they have rejected similar argu-
ments related to humanitarian intervention and self-determination when advanced in 
other situations, particularly that of Kosovo.125
Growing tensions between Russia and the US, which replaced the newfound 
cooperation between them which represented one of the hallmarks of the early post-
Cold War era, have prompted the question of whether the world has entered a new 
Cold War. An exploration of the contrasts between that period and current circum-
stances is far beyond the scope of this article, but it is pertinent to note that some 
analogies certainly exist with Soviet interventions in the satellite states of Eastern 
Europe—Hungary 1956 and Czechoslovakia 1968 specifically—where the govern-
ments of those states sought to chart a political course at odds with that favoured by 
their Soviet masters.126 It is difficult to foresee Russia attempting or being able to 
easily assert its influence over those former satellite states that now enjoy member -
ship of the EU and/or NATO, but it does not appear to have given up on this objec-
tive insofar as the neighbouring former Soviet states are concerned. Now, as during 
the Cold War, Russia enjoys a certain degree of immunity from punitive interna-
tional measures for its actions in legal terms through its permanent membership of 
the UN Security Council (and accompanying veto power) and politically by virtue 
of its nuclear status.
At the time of writing, it is not possible to predict how the current situation will 
develop or conclude. It appears difficult to envisage a situation emerging in which 
Russia seizes complete control of Ukraine and most discussions centre on the post-
conflict status of Ukraine vis-à-vis its relationship simultaneously with Russia and 
those organisations to which it aspires to join. Some indications have emerged of 
progress in peace talks,127 although the key issues of contention are likely to cen-
tre on Ukraine’s potential neutrality status, and control of the Donbas and Crimea 
regions. As the price for a lasting peace, it appears conceivable that Ukraine may 
accept a neutral status which would involve its foregoing of possible NATO mem-
bership, while concessions may also be made which envisage a potential change to 
the territorial status of those regions which Russia has recognised as independent 
states or annexed as part of Russia.128
Outcomes along some of these lines may legitimately warrant charges that inter -
national law has been ineffective, actions widely condemned as unlawful having 
instigated consequences that represent a gross compromising of Ukraine’s sover -
eignty and territorial integrity. Undoubtedly, international law suffers from its limi-
tations in the face of the application of might by a major power. However, the scale 
125 See, e.g., UN Doc. S/PV. 3989, pp. 5–6 for Russian condemnation of NATO’s intervention in 
response to events in Kosovo, and UN Doc. S/PV. 5839, pp. 6–7 for its rejection of Kosovo’s purported 
independence from Serbia.
126 For an overview of developments in these states culminating in Soviet intervention, see Judt (2005), 
pp. 313–323, 440–447.
127 New York Times (2022d).
128 The Guardian News (2022).
405
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
of international condemnation of Russia’s intervention in Ukraine and the accompa-
nying widespread imposition of sanctions by significant swathes of the international 
community demonstrate the continued respect for the fundamental applicable norms 
of international law and disinclination to tolerate consequences brought about by 
their violation. In this respect, the international unity evidenced stands in contrast 
to the more polarised nature of the global divisions that perpetuated the Cold War 
environment. The Cold War remains lost for Russia, but there is a danger that it 
stands to become a pariah state in the eyes of much of the international community 
unless it moderates its means of furthering its policy objectives accordingly. Rus-
sia’s successful engagement as a serious global actor arguably depends upon such a 
change taking place.
7  Conclusion
The Russian government’s ‘special military operation’ in Ukraine is still ongoing 
at the time of writing. President Putin’s distorted interpretation and application of 
international legal norms has led to the loss of thousands of lives, the destruction of 
numerous cities and the largest refugee crisis in Europe since WWII. The key con-
tention of this article has been to demonstrate how key principles of public interna-
tional law, including self-determination and the use of force have been manipulated 
by Russia to justify the invasion of Ukraine. As previously mentioned, such tactics 
are not new and were used by Russia in its earlier interventions in Georgia (2008) 
and Crimea (2014). The only difference this time around is that the intervention has 
not been so straightforward thanks to the unexpected resistance of the Ukrainian 
army.
It has been suggested that Putin is nostalgic for the Soviet Union and wishes to 
re-form the USSR. In 2005, Putin called the Soviet collapse ‘the biggest geopolitical 
catastrophe of the twentieth century’. He further clarified this statement by adding, 
‘tens of millions of our citizens and countrymen found themselves outside Russian 
territory’.129 In other words, the Soviet collapse was a catastrophe specifically for 
Russians because it left their country divided and incomplete. In December 2021, 
Putin further elaborated on this point and described the fall of the USSR as ‘the 
disintegration of historical Russia under the name of the Soviet Union’. ‘We turned 
into a completely different country’, he claimed. ‘And what had been built up over 
1000 years was largely lost’.130
Putin considers Ukraine to be the greatest loss of all. The invasion of Ukraine has 
been on the cards for some time. In March 2014, Putin wrote ‘Kiev is the mother of 
Russian cities. Ancient Rus is our common source and we cannot live without each 
other’.131 A few days later Russia went ahead and annexed Crimea. Shortly after, 
129 BBC News Online (2005).
130 Kuzio (2022).
131 Address by President of the Russian Federation, 18 March 2014, http:// en. kreml in. ru/ events/ presi 
dent/ news/ 20603 (accessed 27 June 2022).
406 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
Russia instigated civil conflict in the Donbas region causing the loss of thousands of 
lives over a period of 8 years. On 21 February 2022, Putin revisited this idea by stat-
ing that ‘Ukraine is not just a neighbouring country for us, it is an inalienable part 
of our own history, culture and spiritual space’. He continued by repeatedly deny -
ing Ukraine’s independence and existence as a sovereign nation.132 When one looks 
at these pronouncements it is clear what Putin’s dominant motive is. Denying that 
Ukraine has any right to statehood independent of Russia and glorifying the expan-
sionism of his country’s Czarist and Stalinist past, he is engrossed in a reaction-
ary nostalgia for empire. Or put simply, his aim is to Make Russia Great Again.133 
Putin’s imperialist fantasy poses a serious threat to international peace and is a clear 
affront to fundamental principles of international law.
However, the consequences of Russia’s actions for the future of international law 
must not be overstated. While it is difficult to view the political situation arising 
from Russia’s intervention in Ukraine in anything other than negative terms, argu-
ably it is possible to consider its wider international legal dimension through a more 
optimistic lens. Russia’s flagrant violation of core tenets of the global legal order 
undoubtedly demonstrates the fragility of international law in the absence of auto-
mated enforcement mechanisms, which are all the more problematic where pow -
erful states seek to advance policy objectives that are justified by controversial or 
unfounded claims, grounded in gross distortions of fundamental norms of interna-
tional law. The limits of international law are undeniable. However, all systems of 
rules are imperfect in the extent of their observance. Arguably the future legitimacy 
of international law is only seriously damaged if attempts to distort its core princi-
ples come to set precedential value to the extent that they result in a major overhaul 
of those principles and the assumptions upon which they are based. This is avoided 
where the wider international community of states reject and condemn such distor -
tions, as indeed they roundly have in response to Russia’s actions against Ukraine. 
States have always sought to interpret legal norms to support their courses of action. 
This in itself highlights the value which is attached to the system of international 
law and the perceived legitimacy which derives from its invocation.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http:// creat iveco mmons. org/ licen 
ses/ by/4. 0/.
132 Address by the President of the Russian Federation, 21 February 2022, http:// en. kreml in. ru/ events/ 
presi dent/ news/ 67828 (accessed 27 June 2022).
133 See Wittner (2022).
407
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
References
Abushov K (2009) Policing the near abroad: Russian foreign policy in the South Caucasus. Aust J Int Aff  
63(2):187–212
Al Jazeera (2022) Ukraine: World reacts to Putin’s recognition of Donetsk, Luhansk. 22 February 2022. 
https:// www. aljaz eera. com/ news/ 2022/2/ 21/ world- react ion- to- putins- move- to- recog ise- ukrai ne-  
rebel- regio ns. Accessed 13 June 2022
BBC News Online (2005) Putin deplores collapse of USSR. 25 April 2005. http:// news. bbc. co. uk/1/ hi/ 
44807 45. stm. Accessed 13 June 2022
BBC News Online (2014) Ukraine rebels hold referendums in Donetsk and Luhansk. 11 May 2014. www. 
bbc. co. uk/ news/ world- europe- 27360 146. Accessed 13 June 2022
BBC News Online (2022) Ukraine: Putin announces Donetsk and Luhansk recognition. 21 February 
2022. https:// www. bbc. co. uk/ news/ av/ world- europe- 60470 900. Accessed 13 June 2022
Besemeres A (2016) A difficult neighbourhood—essays on Russia and East-Central Europe since World 
War II. Australian National University Press, Canberra
Blum Y (1992) Russia takes over the Soviet Union’s seat at the United Nations. Eur J Int Law 3:354–361
Cassese A (1999) Ex iniuria ius oritur: are we moving towards international legitimation of forcible 
humanitarian countermeasures in the world community? Eur J Int Law 10(1):23–30
Cavandoli S (2016) The unresolved dilemma of self-determination: Crimea, Donetsk and Luhansk. Int J 
Hum Rights 20(7):875–892
Cengel K (2022) The 20th-century history behind Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Smithsonian Magazine, 
4 March 2022. https:// www. smith sonia nmag. com/ histo ry/ the- 20th- centu ry- histo ry- behind- russi as- 
invas ion- of- ukrai ne- 18097 9672/. Accessed 27 June 2022
Chadwick E (2015) National liberation in the context of post- and non-colonial struggles for self-deter -
mination. In: Weller M (ed) The Oxford handbook of the use of force in international law. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, pp 841–860
Chesterman S (2001) Just war or just peace? Humanitarian intervention and international law. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford
Corten O (2010) The law against war: the prohibition on the use of force in contemporary international 
law. Hart, Oxford
Curtis J, Mills C (2022) Military assistance to Ukraine since the Russian invasion. House of Commons 
Library Research Briefing. https:// resea rchbr  iefin gs. files. parli ament. uk/ docum ents/ CBP- 9477/ CBP- 
9477. pdf. Accessed 13 June 2022
Deeks AS (2015) Taming the doctrine of pre-emption. In: Weller M (ed) The Oxford handbook of the use 
of force in international law. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 661–678
Denber R (2022) New language requirement raises concerns in Ukraine. Human Rights Watch. https:// 
www. hrw. org/ news/ 2022/ 01/ 19/ new- langu age- requi rement- raises- conce rns- ukrai ne. Accessed 13 
June 2022
Dinstein Y (2017) War, aggression and self-defence, 6th edn. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
Esposito R (2020) Ukraine, self-determination, and emerging norms for unilateral secession of states. 
Wash Univ Glob Stud Law Rev 19(1):139–163
Financial Times (2022) Joe Biden says there is still ‘room for diplomacy’ to solve Ukrainian crisis. 15 
February 2022. https:// www. ft. com/ conte nt/ 4f2dd 5d6- 8f9a- 4b7d- 97c1- 8cf39 9e3c5 e3. Accessed 13 
June 2022
Fox GH (2015) Intervention by invitation. In: Weller M (ed) The Oxford handbook of the use of force in 
international law. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 816–840
Fukuyama F (1992) The end of history and the last man. Free Press, New York
Henderson C (2010) The persistent advocate and the use of force. Ashgate, Farnham
Judt T (2005) Postwar: a history of Europe since 1945. Vintage, London
Katchanovski I (2016) The separatist war in Donbas: a violent break-up of Ukraine? Eur Politics Soc 
17(4):473–489
Kuzio T (2022) Inside Putin’s Ukraine obsession. Atlantic Council, 27 January 2022. https:// www. atlan 
ticco uncil. org/ blogs/ ukrai neale rt/ inside- putins- ukrai ne- obses sion/. Accessed 13 June 2022
Lutsevych O (2021) Ukraine-Russia relations. Chatham House, 24 November 2021. https:// www. chath 
amhou se. org/ 2021/ 11/ ukrai ne- russia- relat ions. Accessed 13 June 2022
408 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
Lenoe M (2022) Fact-checking Putin’s claims that Ukraine and Russia are ‘one people’. University of 
Rochester, 3 March 2022. https:// www. roche ster. edu/ newsc enter/ ukrai ne- histo ry- fact- check ing- 
putin- 513812/. Accessed 13 June 2022
Maogoto JN (2004) New frontiers, old problems: the war on terror and the notion of anticipating the 
enemy. Neth Int Law Rev 51:1–39
New York Times (2022a) U.S. says Russia sent saboteurs into Ukraine to create pretext for invasion. 14 
January 2022. https:// www. nytim es. com/ 2022/ 01/ 14/ us/ polit ics/ russia- ukrai ne- us- intel ligen ce. html. 
Accessed 13 June 2022
New York Times (2022b) Putin calls Ukrainian statehood a fiction. History suggests otherwise. 21 Febru-
ary 2022. https:// www. nytim es. com/ 2022/ 02/ 21/ world/ europe/ putin- ukrai ne. html. Accessed 13 June 
2022
New York Times (2022c) Putin’s case for war, annotated. 24 February 2022. https:// www. nytim es. com/ 
2022/ 02/ 24/ world/ europe/ putin- ukrai ne- speech. html. Accessed 13 June 2022
New York Times (2022d) Peace talks produce signs of progress, but no end to war is in sight. 29 
March 2022. https:// www. nytim es. com/ 2022/ 03/ 29/ world/ europe/ peace- talks- russia- ukrai ne. html. 
Accessed 13 June 2022
Pattison J (2010) Humanitarian intervention and the responsibility to protect. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford
Pentassuglia G (2022) Ukraine: What’s behind Putin’s ethnic irredentism? Reset Dialogues on Civiliza-
tions. https:// www. reset doc. org/ story/ ukrai ne- whats- behind- putins- ethnic- irred entism/. Accessed 13 
June 2022
Pirie PS (1996) National identity and politics in Southern and Eastern Ukraine. Eur Asia Stud 
48:1079–1104
Putin V (2021) On the historical unity of Russians and Ukrainians. Boris Yeltsin Library. https:// www. 
prlib. ru/ en/ artic le- vladi mir- putin- histo rical- unity- russi ans- and- ukrai nians. Accessed 13 June 2022
Ronzitti N (2006) The expanding law of self-defence. J Confl Secur Law 11(3):343–359
Rezvani B (2020) Russian foreign policy and geopolitics in the Post-Soviet space and the Middle East: 
Tajikistan, Georgia, Ukraine and Syria. Middle East Stud 56(6):878–899
Roth B (1999) Governmental illegitimacy in international law. Clarendon Press, Oxford
Rumer E, Weiss AS (2021) Ukraine: Putin’s unfinished business. Carnegie Endowment for International 
Peace, 12 November 2021. https:// carne gieen dowme nt. org/ 2021/ 11/ 12/ ukrai ne- putin-s- unfin ished- 
busin ess- pub- 85771. Accessed 13 June 2022
Samkharadze N (2021) Russia’s recognition of the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia: analysis 
of a deviant case in Moscow’s foreign policy behavior. Columbia University Press, New York
Sarotte ME (2022) Russia, Ukraine and the 30 year quest for a Post-Soviet order. The Weekend Essay, 
The Financial Times, 25 February 2022. https:// www. ft. com/ conte nt/ 742f1 5fc- 675a- 4622- b022- 
cbec4 44651 cf. Accessed 13 June 2022
Schrijver N (2015) The ban on the use of force in the UN Charter. In: Weller M (ed) The Oxford hand-
book of the use of force in international law. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 465–484
Shveda Y, Park JH (2016) Ukraine’s revolution of dignity: the dynamics of Euromaidan. J Eurasian Stud 
7:85–91
Simao L (2016) The Ukrainian conflict in Russian foreign policy: rethinking the interconnections 
between domestic and foreign policy strategies. Small Wars Insur 27(3):491–511
Simma B (1999) NATO, the UN and the use of force: legal aspects. Eur J Int Law 10(1):1–22
Sky News (2022) Russia launches invasion of Ukraine—Putin’s troops ‘seize control’ of Chernobyl 
nuclear disaster site. 25 February 2022. https:// news. sky. com/ story/ russia- launc  hes- invas ion- of- 
ukrai ne- forces- trying- to- seize- site- of- chern obyl- nucle ar- disas  ter- 12550 026#. Accessed 13 June 
2022
Sterio M (2013) The right to self-determination under international law: ‘selfistans’, secession and the 
rule of the Great Powers. Routledge, London
Sterio M (2014–2015) Self-determination and secession under international law: the new framework. 
ILSA J Int Comp Law 23:293–306
Stokes G (2011) The walls came tumbling down: collapse and rebirth in Eastern Europe, 2nd edn. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford
Suny R (2022) Ukraine war follows decades of warnings that NATO expansion into Eastern Europe could 
provoke Russia. The Conversation, 28 February 2022. https:// theco nvers ation. com/ ukrai ne- war- follo 
ws- decad es- of- warni ngs- that- nato- expan sion- into- easte rn- europe- could- provo ke- russia- 177999. 
Accessed 13 June 2022
409
Distorting Fundamental Norms of International Law to Resurrect…
123
Talmon S (2005) The duty not to ‘recognize as lawful’ a situation created by the illegal use of force or 
other serious breaches of a jus cogens obligation: an obligation without real substance? In: Tomus-
chat C, Thouvenin J-M (eds) The fundamental rules of the international legal order. Brill, Leiden, 
pp 99–125
The Guardian (2014a) Crimea votes to secede from Ukraine in ‘illegal’ poll. 16 March 2014. https:// 
www. thegu ardian. com/ world/ 2014/ mar/ 16/ ukrai ne- russia- truce- crimea- refer  endum. Accessed 13 
June 2022
The Guardian (2014b) Ukraine: Putin approves draft bill for Russia to annex Crimea. 18 March 2014. 
https:// www. thegu ardian. com/ world/ 2014/ mar/ 18/ ukrai ne- putin- draft- bill- russia- annex- crimea. 
Accessed 13 June 2022
The Guardian (2014c) Pro-Russian rebels vow to take control of infrastructure across Donetsk region. 14 
April 2014. https:// www. thegu ardian. com/ world/ 2014/ apr/ 14/ ukrai ne- deadl ine- pro- russi an- rebels- 
passes. Accessed 13 June 2022
The Guardian (2021) Russia’s activity on the Ukraine border has put the west on edge. 2 December 
2021. https:// www. thegu ardian. com/ world/ 2021/ dec/ 02/ ukrai ne- border- russia- west- troop- build up. 
Accessed 13 June 2022
The Guardian (2022a) How European response to Ukraine refugees differs from UK. 11 March 2022. 
https:// www. thegu ardian. com/ global- devel opment/ 2022/ mar/ 11/ we- must- welco me- them- how-  
europe- is- helpi ng- ukrai nian- refug  ees. Accessed 13 June 2022
The Guardian (2022b) Putin signals escalation as he puts Russia’s nuclear force on high alert. 28 Febru-
ary 2022. https:// www. thegu ardian. com/ world/ 2022/ feb/ 27/ vladi mir- putin- puts- russia- nucle ar- deter 
rence- forces- on- high- alert- ukrai ne. Accessed 13 June 2022
The Guardian News (2022) Zelenskiy: Ukraine willing to discuss neutrality and compromise on Donbas. 
28 March 2022. https:// www. youtu be. com/ watch?v= Q5A7S zTyTqo. Accessed 13 June 2022
The Independent (2022a) Russia denies looking for pretext to invade Ukraine. 17 January 2022. https:// 
www. indep endent. co. uk/ news/ world/ ameri cas/ us- polit ics/ russia- ukrai ne- sergey- lavrov- nato- washi  
ngton- b1994 574. html. Accessed 13 June 2022
The Independent (2022b) Russia approves use of armed forces abroad as US says invasion of Ukraine 
‘underway’. 22 February 2022. https:// www. indep endent. co. uk/ news/ world/ europe/ putin- russia- 
ukrai ne- milit  ary- invas ion- b2020 642. html. Accessed 13 June 2022
Toomey M (2009) The August 2008 battle of South Ossetia: does Russia have a legal argument for inter -
vention? Tempe Int Comp Law J 23:443–477
UKRINFORM (2018) Parliament passes bill on Ukrainian language at first reading. 4 October 2018. 
https:// www. ukrin form. net/ rubric- polyt ics/ 25520 57- parli ament- passes- bill- on- ukrai nian- langu age-  
at- first- readi ng. html. Accessed 13 June 2022
Vitucci MC (2006) Has Pandora’s box been closed? The decisions on the Legality of Use of Force Cases 
in relation to the status of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) within the 
United Nations. Leiden J Int Law 19(1):105–127
Weiss TG (2016) Humanitarian intervention, 3rd edn. Polity, Cambridge
Wesolowsky T (2017) Ukrainian Language Bill facing barrage of criticism from minorities, foreign capi-
tals. Radio Free Europe. https:// www. rferl. org/a/ ukrai ne- langu age- legis lation- minor  ity- langu ages- 
russia- hunga ry- roman ia/ 28753 925. html. Accessed 13 June 2022
Wheeler N (2000) Saving strangers: humanitarian intervention in international society. Oxford University 
Press, Oxford
Wilmhurst E (2005) The Chatham House Principles of international law on the use of force in self-
defence. Int Comp Law Q 55:963–972
Wilson A (1995) The Donbas between Ukraine and Russia: the use of history in political disputes. J Con-
temp Hist 30(2):265–289
Wilson G (2009) Self-determination, recognition and the problem of Kosovo. Neth Int Law Rev 
56:455–481
Wilson G (2016) Secession and intervention in the former Soviet space: the Crimean incident and Rus-
sian interference in its ‘near abroad’. Liverp Law Rev 37:153–175
Wippman D (2015) Pro-democratic intervention. In: Weller M (ed) The Oxford handbook of the use of 
force in international law. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 797–815
Wittner L (2022) Putin’s attacks on Ukraine are squarely rooted in the imperialist 20th century. Opinion, 
10 March 2022. https:// eu. lohud. com/ story/ opini on/ 2022/ 03/ 10/ putins- attac  ks- ukrai ne- rooted- imper 
ialism/ 94375 68002/. Accessed 13 June 2022
410 S. Cavandoli, G. Wilson 
123
Wood M (2018) The caroline incident—1837. In: Ruys T, Corten O, Hofer A (eds) The use of force in 
international law: a case-based approach. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 5–15
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.
© The Author(s) 2022. This work is published under
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
(the “License”). Notwithstanding the ProQuest Terms
and Conditions, you may use this content in
accordance with the terms of the License.
