E1094 CMAJ  | August 15, 2022  |  Volume 194  |  Issue 31 © 2022 CMA Impact Inc. or its licensorsWe meet in a coffee shop frequented by 
musicians, the space is filled with the 
buzz of students and instruments all 
sounding together. She is wearing a hijab 
and a smile that is broad and bright and 
makes me feel welcome. Her eyes radiate 
compassion and sorrow. I am stiffer, still 
wearing my professional demeanor. This 
is my neighbourhood. She has come from 
much further away: travelling by subway 
from Mississauga, by plane from Beirut, 
by transport truck from a refugee camp in 
Lebanon, clandestinely by foot from her 
hometown, a Syrian village under bom­
bardment and destruction. Seemingly, we 
couldn’t be more different.
According to the accepted truths of 
geopolitics, we are enemies. She is Mus­
lim from Syria, a country that is hostile to 
the state of Israel. I am Jewish and my 
parents went to Israel for refuge as dis­
placed persons from a Nazi concentration 
camp. She has been through hell. I have 
witnessed the ravages of hell through my 
parents’ stories and lives. Refugee camp/
concentration camp, refugees/displaced 
persons, escape, hell. But, geopolitics and 
our respective experiences of the hell they 
can inflict, are subjects of conversation 
for another day. Today, we have other 
things to talk about.
Mariam was an obstetrician in Syria. 
She worked delivering babies in the refu­
gee camp in Lebanon where she and her 
family lived for 2 years. Mariam, her hus­
band, and their 4 children were spon­
sored by my colleague’s church group to 
come to Canada. He told me about the 
family. About how Mariam knows she will 
not be able to practise medicine in Can ­
ada and has now decided to become a 
midwife. About how there is a one­year 
program for foreign­trained midwives to 
prepare for their licensing exams in Ontario. About how getting into this pro­
gram is so important so that Mariam can 
qualify quickly and start to earn money 
for her family. But, to be admitted, she 
has to pass an oral and written English 
proficiency exam, including relevant 
medical terminology. Learning English is 
one thing, but where does one learn the 
secret language of medicine, the mysteri­
ous abbreviations and acronyms that are 
its dialects? 
“I’ll help,” I said.
As the others in the coffee shop are 
playing their musical instruments, we are 
playing with a different set of instru­
ments: forceps, stethoscope and a specu­
lum. We are playing with a rubber fetus 
and a plastic placenta, which the musi­
cians probably find rather strange. 
 Mariam is trying to say difficult words like 
“placenta previa” but can’t quite get her 
tongue around them.
“Try this, I say: Polly bought a peck of 
pickled peppers. Say it again 10 times 
fast.”
“Now try this: Polly is a primipara with 
placenta previa. Say it again 10 times 
fast.”
We fall into riotous laughter. Now, for 
sure, the musicians think we’re up to 
something very strange.
***
Today, Mariam brings her daughters to 
meet me. Children’s ability to learn a new 
language in which they are immersed is 
enviable; her daughters are fluent. Their 
hair is beautiful, long and curly; one has 
black hair, one red. We decide to go out­
side and take a picture. Three radiant 
smiles, a family trait. The girls flash peace 
signs. I suggest to Mariam that the fastest 
way for her to learn English is to speak it at home with her children. She refuses. She 
wants Arabic to be the language of home. 
She wants her children to be able to speak 
to their grandparents, their cousins, their 
aunts and uncles. Losing that ability 
would mean losing their family. My par­
ents learned English from me, my sister 
and brother. Mariam is right. We lost our 
ability to speak the goulash of languages 
from the Austro­Hungarian empire. But, in 
our case, it didn’t matter. The family was 
already lost. There were no grandparents, 
cousins, aunts or uncles left.
***
We are both nervous as we prepare to 
face the head of the midwifery program. 
Mariam has to go for an interview and has 
asked me to come with her. We agree that 
I will be silent and only take notes, just to 
make sure she doesn’t miss anything. The 
program head is clearly annoyed by my 
presence. Why was I there? Surely I don’t 
expect special consideration just because 
I’m a doctor.   Mariam too is damned by 
the “doctor” label. “What makes you 
think you can be a midwife just because 
you’re an obstetrician?” the program 
head asks. Mariam and I share a conspira­
torial look: we have landed in the fraught 
politics of physician–midwife relations, 
which have been contentious for at least 
a century.
We burst through the door of the 
building running and giggling like school­
girls who have escaped a scolding. We 
don’t know what the outcome will be, but 
we need to celebrate. We savour great big 
double­scoops of ice cream as Mariam 
tells me that her “back­home” — as she 
calls it — is famous for its ice cream. I’m 
saddened by my ignorance of her culture 
and country.Humanities  |  Encounters
Friends
n Cite as: CMAJ 2022 August 15;194:E1094­5. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.220242
Humanities  CMAJ  | August 15, 2022  |  Volume 194  |  Issue 31 E1095***
Some months later, we are celebrating 
for real. Mariam has finished the course, 
passed the exams, and is on her way to 
being licensed as a midwife. Her husband 
is here to celebrate. His pride — and relief 
— are evident.
Some months later at an event, I meet 
the colleague who originally introduced 
me to Mariam, and his family. I’m sur­
prised when they call me “the angel” who 
helped Miriam.
She had told them how she would 
have given up without me. How it was my 
encouragement and positive words that 
kept her going. And now, she will be able 
to support her family. 
This is a huge reward. They don’t know 
how much I was rewarded too.  
Eva Grunfeld MD DPhil  
Department of Family and Community 
Medicine, University of Toronto; Ontario 
Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, Ont.
This article has been peer reviewed.
Content licence: This is an Open Access article 
distributed in accordance with the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY­NC­ND 
4.0) licence, which permits use, distribution and 
reproduction in any medium, provided that the 
original publication is properly cited, the use is 
noncommercial (i.e., research or educational 
use), and no modifications or adaptations are 
made. See: https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by­nc­nd/4.0/
