Ze et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabm7834 (2022)     30 March 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE1 of 9ENGINEERING
Soft robotic origami crawler
Qiji Ze1†, Shuai Wu1†, Jun Nishikawa2, Jize Dai2, Yue Sun2,3, Sophie Leanza2, Cole Zemelka2, 
Larissa S. Novelino4, Glaucio H. Paulino4,5,6*, Ruike Renee Zhao1,2*
Biomimetic soft robotic crawlers have attracted extensive attention in various engineering fields, owing to their 
adaptivity to different terrains. Earthworm-like crawlers realize locomotion through in-plane contraction, while 
inchworm-like crawlers exhibit out-of-plane bending-based motions. Although in-plane contraction crawlers 
demonstrate effective motion in confined spaces, miniaturization is challenging because of limited actuation 
methods and complex structures. Here, we report a magnetically actuated small-scale origami crawler with in-
plane contraction. The contraction mechanism is achieved through a four-unit Kresling origami assembly consist-
ing of two Kresling dipoles with two-level symmetry. Magnetic actuation is used to provide appropriate torque 
distribution, enabling a small-scale and untethered robot with both crawling and steering capabilities. The crawler 
can overcome large resistances from severely confined spaces by its anisotropic and magnetically tunable 
structural stiffness. The multifunctionality of the crawler is explored by using the internal cavity of the crawler for 
drug storage and release. The magnetic origami crawler can potentially serve as a minimally invasive device 
for biomedical applications.
INTRODUCTION
Crawling motion is a navigation strategy that is commonly ob-
served in animals, especially in worms. In these animals, body con-
traction paired with inhomogeneous friction between the surfaces 
of contact enables forward motion. Worm-based crawling motion 
shows high adaptivity to complicated terrains (1 –3) because of the 
soft deformable body. By engineering effective crawling, robotic 
crawlers on various scales have attracted extensive efforts for appli-
cations, including planetary subsurface exploration (4,  5), in-pipe 
inspection (6,  7), and gastrointestinal endoscopy (8,  9), where the 
operating space is limited or confined.
On the basis of the observed crawling mechanisms, earthworm- 
like crawlers have been designed to realize locomotion through 
in-plane contraction (10,  11), while inchworm-like crawlers are de-
signed to exhibit out-of-plane bending-based motions (12,  13). In 
confined spaces where out-of-plane motion is constrained, the in-
plane contraction crawling mechanism surpasses the bending-based 
counterpart. The contraction of in-plane crawlers is usually achieved 
through contractile structures (14– 16) or soft materials (17– 19). 
Most of the crawlers based on contractive mechanisms only demon-
strate straight motion by actuating either the whole body with a single 
actuator (20,  21) or several individual segments synergistically with 
multiple actuators (22,  23). On the other hand, the steering func -
tion requires additional mechanisms with added actuators (24). 
These actuators, including motors and pneumatic pumps, commonly 
lead to bulky systems with extensive wires or tubes. The complicated 
structures and control systems pose challenges for small-scale ap-
plications such as those in the biomedical field. To this effect, an alternative is crawlers made of stimuli-responsive soft materials 
that generate contraction via large deformation of the soft crawler 
body (25,  26), which usually has a relatively simple structure that 
permits small-scale design. Some recent crawlers with a millimeter- 
sized beam structure have demonstrated the capabilities of effective 
locomotion and cargo transportation for open biomedical environ-
ments, such as the stomach (27,  28). Although soft materials allow 
easy deformation for contraction, their low material stiffness makes 
it challenging for the crawler to overcome the large environmental 
resistance introduced by confined spaces, such as those in the gas-
trointestinal tract and abdomen, where contacts between tissues or 
organs are common. To navigate in these environments, systems 
that allow effective contraction for crawling while having the capa-
bility to overcome external load in the lateral direction are desirable.
Origami provides a seamless and effective way of generating 
contraction by means of structural folding and thus has been adopted 
to engineer robotic crawlers (29– 31). Origami structures demonstrate 
anisotropic structural stiffness along folding directions and lateral 
directions, which is beneficial for effective crawling in confined spaces 
(32, 33). The inherently low stiffness in the foldable direction allows 
for easy contraction, while the appreciably higher stiffness in the 
lateral direction makes the crawler more immune to unexpected 
disturbances from working environments. The Kresling pattern 
(34–36) is a specific type of origami that generates axial contraction 
under either torque or compressive force. Its contraction is coupled 
with a twist from the relative rotation between the two ends of the 
unit (Fig. 1A). When using the Kresling unit for crawler contrac-
tion, the twist induces undesired lateral movement, which prohibits 
the straight motion of the crawler and limits its application to spe-
cific environments, such as in a tube (37). Although some works 
adopt two parallel Kresling assemblies with reverse crease directions 
to cancel out twists in the system (38,  39), the clumpy structure and 
multiple wired actuators hinder the miniaturization of the robotic 
crawler for applications in environments with limited access.
In this work, we report a magnetically actuated small-scale origami 
crawler for effective in-plane crawling motion. The crawler is made 
of a four-unit Kresling assembly with a rationally designed structure 
to avoid the relative rotation between the two ends of the assembly 1Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
USA. 2Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. 3Department of Mechanical Engineering, 
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. 4School of Civil and 
Environmental Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, 
USA. 5Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Princeton University, 
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA. 6Princeton Institute for the Science and Technology of 
Materials (PRISM), Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: gp1863@princeton.edu (G.H.P.); rrzhao@stanford.
edu (R.R.Z.)
†These authors contributed equally to this work.Copyright © 2022 
The Authors, some 
rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee 
American Association 
for the Advancement 
of Science. No claim to 
original U.S. Government 
Works. Distributed 
under a Creative 
Commons Attribution 
NonCommercial 
License 4.0 (CC BY-NC).
Ze et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabm7834 (2022)     30 March 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE2 of 9and to cancel out internal twists for efficient straight motion. The re -
quired torque distribution on the crawler is theoretically derived and veri -
fied by finite element analysis (FEA) to obtain simultaneous contraction of 
all four Kresling units for the crawling motion. The torques are then 
realized by distributed magnetic actuation. By controlling the magnitude 
and direction of the external magnetic field, the Kresling crawler can achieve 
contraction for forward motion and instantaneous steering. The untethered 
magnetic actuation eliminates the need for bulky and wired actuators, enabling 
a small-scale and neat robotic system. The measured anisotropic and mag -
netically tunable structural stiffness along the axial and lateral directions 
of the Kresling crawler helps the crawler achieve effective locomotion in 
severely confined spaces. In addition, drug storage and release capabili -
ties are demonstrated to illustrate the multifunctionality of the crawler.
RESULTS
The Kresling unit shows a coupled twist contraction motion (blue and 
green circles in Fig. 1A) under either a pair of torques or compressive forces. The twisting direction is either clockwise (CW) or counter-
clockwise (CCW) on the basis of the crease direction of the Kresling 
unit (fig. S1). To have a purely translational crawling motion, the 
Kresling-based crawler design needs to avoid the lateral movement 
that can be caused by the relative rotation between the two ends of 
a Kresling unit. To address this, the Kresling dipole is introduced to 
eliminate the overall twist during contraction. As illustrated in 
Fig. 1B, the Kresling dipole is composed of two Kresling units with 
the same geometry and reverse crease directions, showing mirror 
symmetry. Note that the crease direction only decides the twisting 
direction without influencing the magnitude of force/torque re-
quired to fold the unit. The two units with reverse crease direc -
tions can achieve equal amounts of contraction when compressing 
the two ends of the Kresling dipole (Fig. 1B). Because of the same 
relative rotation angles with reverse directions of two Kresling 
units, the two ends of the Kresling dipole are free of relative rota-
tion, as indicated by green circles, while its middle interface shows 
a rotation, as indicated by blue circles (movie S1). In this way, the 
Fig. 1. Mechanism of the four-unit Kresling crawler based on the Kresling dipole. (A) Schematic of a Kresling unit, showing contraction coupled with a twist defor-
mation. (B) Schematic of a Kresling dipole made of two standard Kresling units with reverse crease directions, showing no rotation at the two ends (green circles) but 
rotation at the center plane (blue circles) during contraction. (C) The experimentally measured torque contraction curve of the Kresling unit. Contraction is defined as 
∆H/H, where H is the initial height of the unit and ∆H is the difference between the initial and contracted heights. Parameter T e is defined as the corresponding torque at 
35% contraction of the unit for effective crawling motion. The solid line is the averaged responses of three Kresling unit samples, and the shaded region represents the 
range of responses. (D) Schematic of the Kresling crawler made of two Kresling dipoles, showing no rotation at the center plane and two ends. (E) The required torque 
distribution to actuate the Kresling crawler for simultaneous contraction of all units. (F) FEA verification of the derived torque distribution for simultaneous contraction of 
all units.
Ze et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabm7834 (2022)     30 March 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE3 of 9Kresling dipole serves as a robust alternative to build crawlers by 
providing effective in-plane contraction for translational motion 
while maintaining contacts of two end points with the ground for 
stick-slip motion, which is usually necessary for crawling motion 
(28, 40, 41).
The Kresling unit can be designed to be monostable or bistable 
(35, 42). For the in-plane crawling motion with contraction phase 
and recovery phase, the Kresling assembly is designed to be monostable 
for smooth and continuous deformation. Meanwhile, monostability 
allows automatic recovery to the stress-free initial state of the crawl-
er after releasing the applied loading. By choosing appropriate geo-
metric design (fig. S1) and material (fig. S2), a fabricated Kresling 
unit shows monostable behavior from the measured force contrac-
tion curve (figs. S3 and S4A) and torque contraction curve (Fig. 1C). 
Under a pair of reasonably small torques of T e = 0.18 N·mm, the 
fabricated unit can generate a 35% contraction for effective crawl-
ing motion (Fig. 1C).
To further cancel out the contraction-induced rotational motion 
at the middle interface of the Kresling dipole (white arrow in 
Fig. 1B), a crawler made of two Kresling dipoles aligned in the axial 
direction is designed, as shown in Fig. 1D. Here, we define direc-
tions perpendicular and parallel to hexagonal planes as the axial and 
lateral directions of the Kresling assembly, respectively. The struc-
ture has two levels of symmetry, including central symmetry of the 
whole structure and mirror symmetry of each Kresling dipole. With 
this configuration, the second and fourth hexagonal planes of the 
crawler from left to right have the same degree of rotation in reverse 
directions (white arrows in Fig. 1D) when the four units contract 
simultaneously. The Kresling crawler shows no rotation at both the 
center (third hexagonal plane) and two ends (first and fifth hexagonal 
planes) during contraction (movie S1).
To achieve such deformations for effective in-plane crawling 
motion, a well-designed torque distribution (Fig. 1E) is needed to 
ensure simultaneous contraction of the four units based on three 
requirements.
1)A purely translational crawling motion requires torque balance 
of the whole system, which can be expressed as
   T  1   +  T  3   =  T  2   +  T  4    (1)
where T1, T2, T3, and T 4 are the magnitudes of applied torques at 
first, second, fourth, and fifth hexagonal planes of the crawler from 
left to right.
2)The simultaneous and equal contraction of all four Kresling 
units requires the torque exerted to each Kresling unit to be the same, 
which can be expressed as
   T  U1   =  T  U2   =  T  U3   =  T  U4    (2)
where TU1, TU2, TU3, and T U4 are torque magnitudes on units U1, 
U2, U3, and U4, respectively. On the basis of the structural symme-
try and the torque balance analysis from free body diagrams (see the 
Supplementary Materials and fig. S5 for more details), we have
   T  2   = 2  T  1  ,  T  3   =  T  2  ,  T  4   =  T  1    (3)
3)The torque on each Kresling unit needs to reach a sufficient value 
to generate effective contraction, and we define this torque as T e, 
which comes from the mechanical characterization of the Kresling unit (Fig. 1C). Note that Te for the yellow and blue units have the 
same magnitude but opposite directions. Upon fulfilling the three 
aforementioned requirements, the crawler can generate contraction 
by simultaneously folding the four units, while the two ends remain 
free of relative rotation.
To verify the derived torque distribution, we simulated the con-
traction of the Kresling crawler via FEA, as shown in Fig. 1F (see fig. 
S6 for the comparison between FEA results and analytical deriva-
tion). On the basis of the relative rotation angle contraction curve of 
the Kresling unit (fig. S4C), a 32° relative rotation between the two 
ends of the Kresling unit corresponds to 35% contraction for effec-
tive crawling motion. Rotation angles of 0°, 32°, −32°, and 0° are 
then enforced to the first, second, fourth, and fifth hexagonal planes 
of the crawler from left to right in the FEA, with all hexagonal planes 
free to move along the axial direction. In the simulation, we record 
the corresponding reaction torques T 1, T2, T3, and T 4 at the first, 
second, fourth, and fifth hexagonal planes of the crawler from left 
to right and compare their relations with the theoretical derivation. 
Under the applied boundary conditions, the four units of the crawler 
contract simultaneously and show no rotation at the center plane 
(the third hexagonal plane) and the two ends of the crawler (movie S1). 
The simulated reaction torque relations (T 2/T1 and T 3/T2) shown in 
fig. S6D follow Eq. 3 during the entire contraction process, which 
verifies the analytically derived torque distribution. By applying the 
distributed loadings cyclically, the monostable Kresling crawler can 
provide repeatable contraction for continuous crawling motion.
An appropriate actuation method is necessary to provide the 
torque distribution for the crawler to achieve desired simultaneous 
contraction. Compared to other actuation methods, such as motor 
(33, 38) and pneumatic actuation (11,  19), magnetic actuation is an 
ideal option, as outlined next. First, magnetic actuation permits un-
tethered and fast response, allowing real-time manipulation of the 
crawler in an environment with limited access. Second, magnetic 
actuation isolates the power and controlling system from the crawler, 
making miniaturization of the crawler feasible for applications in 
small and confined spaces (27). Figure 2A shows an image of the 
fabricated Kresling crawler on a fingertip, illustrating the miniatur-
ized robot for potential applications in environments with limited 
access, such as drug delivery in the intestines and stomach. Third, 
magnetic control has recently demonstrated distributed actuation 
for selective or sequential actuation of functional deformable units 
of origami assembly (34,  43). This further provides the possibility of 
using the magnetic field to program the torque distribution on the 
Kresling crawler to have simultaneous contraction of all Kresling 
units for effective crawling motion.
As shown in Fig. 2A, four magnetic plates are attached to the 
first, second, fourth, and fifth hexagonal planes of the crawler from 
left to right, where distributed torques are needed according to the 
theoretical derivation. Each magnetic plate is made of silicone em-
bedded with hard magnetic particles so that the magnetization den-
sity is tunable by adjusting the volume fraction of the magnetic 
particles. The magnetic plate has a predetermined magnetization M 
with a specific direction. Under a uniform magnetic field B , the 
magnetic plate generates a torque T =  V(M × B), which tends to 
align its M with the applied B by rigid body rotation of the magnetic 
plate. V is the volume of the magnetic plate. Both the direction and 
magnitude of the torque can be programmed by specially designing 
the magnetic plate magnetization and manipulating the applied 
magnetic field. Here, the four magnetic plates have the same 
Ze et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabm7834 (2022)     30 March 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE4 of 9magnetization density but different magnetization directions (Fig. 2A) 
to provide local and distributed torques that satisfy the derived 
torque relations in Eq. 3.
To better describe the magnetic actuation and relative rotation 
of the magnetic plates, we define a local right-handed coordinate 
system whose origin sits at the center of the rightmost magnetic 
plate of the crawler. The y axis and the z axis are parallel and per-
pendicular to the top edge of the rightmost magnetic plate, respec-
tively, as shown in Fig. 2A. The x axis is along the axial direction of 
the crawler and faces outward. The magnetization directions of the 
four magnetic plates are all in the yz plane of the local coordinate 
system with relative angles of  1, 2, 3, and  4 to the y axis. Under a 
uniform magnetic field along the y axis, the generated distributed 
torques of the four magnetic plates have magnitudes of
    T i  m  = ∣ T i  m ∣= V∣ M  i   × B∣=  BM  r   Vsin  θ  i   (  i = 1, 2, 3, and 4 )     (4)
where Mi is the magnetization of each magnetic plate, B is the ap-
plied magnetic field with a magnitude of B, and M r and V are the 
measured remanent magnetization and volume of each magnetic plate, 
respectively. The magnetization directions of the first and fourth 
(second and third) plates indicate mirror symmetry about the y axis to assure that   T 1  m   and   T 4  m  , or   T 2  m   and   T 3  m    have the same torque mag -
nitude but reverse directions under the uniform magnetic field applied 
along the y axis. Note that the crawler always aligns its net magneti-
zation Mnet (y axis) with the applied magnetic field, and the corre-
sponding torque distribution would then provide simultaneous 
contraction of all four Kresling units. By substituting Eq. 4 into Eq. 
3, we have
  sin    1   =   1 ─ 2   sin    2   =   1 ─ 2   sin    3   =   1 ─ 2   sin    4    (5)
However, the magnetization directions  2 and  3 change during the 
continuous contraction of the crawler, as shown in Fig. 2B. Thus, in 
practice, the torque distribution would deviate from the ideal 
torque relations. Taking the left Kresling dipole of the crawler as an 
example, we derive the torques on units U1 and U2 as
    {     T U1  m   =  T 1  m  =  BM  r   Vsin    1       T U2  m   =  T 2  m  −  T 1  m  =  BM  r   Vsin    2   −  BM  r   Vsin    1      (6)
where   T U1  m    and   T U2  m    are torque magnitudes on units U1 and U2 un-
der magnetic actuation, respectively. Assuming that the four units 
of the Kresling crawler still contract simultaneously and its two 
Fig. 2. Magnetic actuation mechanism of the Kresling crawler. (A) Image of a fingertip holding the fabricated Kresling crawler and designed magnetization directions 
of attached four magnetic plates for distributed torques. (B) Crawler configurations and magnetization directions at the initial state and the contracted state. B y is the 
magnetic field applied to the crawler along its net magnetization direction. Angle  r is the total rotation angle of  2 or  3 during contraction.   T U1  m   ,   T U2  m   ,   T U3  m   , and   T U4  m    are 
torque magnitudes on units U1, U2, U3, and U4 under magnetic actuation, respectively. Green marks on the vertices of the magnetic plates indicate no rotation at the two 
ends of the Kresling crawler. (C) Torque ratio between units U1 and U2 (U4 and U3) during contraction. Contraction of the unit of 35% (rotation angle  r of 32°) is defined 
as an effective crawling motion under a reasonably small torque. Note that angles  1 and  4 stay unchanged during contraction. Angles  2 and  3 are designed to swing 
between 106° and 74° to minimize the dynamic fluctuation of magnetic torques during contraction. (D) The magnetically actuated contraction under a magnetic field of 
40 mT. (E) Characterization of the Kresling crawler contraction at different magnetic field magnitudes. Contraction is defined as 1 − ℓ/L, where L and ℓ are lengths of the 
crawler at the initial state and after contraction, respectively. The solid line is the averaged responses of three Kresling crawler samples, and the shaded region represents 
the range of responses. Scale bars, 5 mm.
Ze et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabm7834 (2022)     30 March 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE5 of 9ends do not rotate during this dynamic process,  2 gradually de-
creases, while  1 remains unchanged. To ensure that the torque   T U2  m    
follows   T U1  m    as much as possible, the change of sin  2 should be min-
imized to limit the torque fluctuation during the crawler contrac-
tion. In this way,   T U1  m    and   T U2  m    are close enough to guarantee nearly 
simultaneous and equal contraction. This is possible when  2 swings 
around 90°, as the change rate of sin  2 reaches zero at this point 
and stays very small within a moderate angle variation. The corre-
sponding 1 is obtained to be 30°. Therefore, the ideal angles of the 
magnetizations are
     1   =    4   = 30° ,    2   =    3   = 90°  (7)
Because 2 and  3 are changing during contraction, the idealized 
90° is set to be the angle at the half-way contraction of the unit. 
Then, the angle swing during the whole contraction process is 
expressed as
    2  i   = 90° +    r   / 2,   2  c   = 90° −    r   / 2  (8)
where   θ 2  i    is the angle of  2 at the initial state of the Kresling crawler,    θ 2  c     
is the angle of  2 at the contracted state of the Kresling crawler, and 
r is the total rotation angle of  2 during contraction.
For the Kresling crawler, a 35% contraction of each unit could 
provide effective crawling motion under a reasonably small torque, 
which corresponds to a rotation angle  r of 32° from the relative 
rotation angle contraction curve of the Kresling unit in fig. S4C. For 
2 and  3 swinging from 106° (90° + 16°) to 74° (90° − 16°), sin  2 
and sin  3 range within 0.96 to 1, and sin  1 = sin 4 = 0.5. This fol-
lows the magnetization angle requirement in Eq. 5 with a small de-
viation. In this case, the ratio   T U2  m   /  T U1  m    (  T U3  m   /  T U4  m   ) ranges from 0.92 to 1 
during crawler contraction, as shown in Fig. 2C, exhibiting an 
acceptable torque fluctuation. Therefore, we finalize the magnetiza-
tion directions for magnetic plates as
     1   =    4   = 30° ,    2   =    3   = 106°  (9)
The derived crawler contraction is then experimentally verified by 
magnetic actuation (see fig. S7 for experimental setup of magnetic 
actuation). Upon applying the magnetic field in the y axis, the four 
units of the crawler start to contract simultaneously (movie S2). For 
the sake of illustration, Fig. 2D displays the initial and contracted 
states of the crawler under a 40-mT magnetic field. It can be seen 
that the four units of the crawler have roughly the same magnitude 
of contraction, and the magnetic plates on the two sides remain 
rotation free (green marks), while the middle planes of the two 
Kresling dipoles rotate in reverse directions (blue marks). The mag-
netically actuated contraction of the crawler is characterized as 
shown in Fig. 2E. Here, the contraction of the crawler is defined as 
1 − ℓ/L, where L and ℓ are the lengths of the crawler at the initial 
state and contracted state, respectively. The magnitude of contrac-
tion increases with the increasing magnetic field. The crawler can 
achieve a contraction of about 30% under the 40-mT magnetic field.
The magnetic actuation permits a well-regulated torque distri-
bution that enables an effective in-plane contraction of the Kresling 
crawler. To use the friction with the ground for forward motion, we 
design two feet with anisotropic friction to the front and rear of the 
crawler. The foot design has a high-friction portion and a low-friction 
portion, which are made by polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and acetate tape, respectively (see the Supplementary Materials for more 
details). Their friction coefficients are measured and shown in fig. 
S8. The directional friction converts the contraction/recovery de-
formations of the crawler into translational motion, as shown in 
Fig. 3A. During the contraction phase, the rear foot moves forward, 
while the front foot stays stationary, as low-friction and high-friction 
portions of the rear and front feet contact the substrate, respectively. 
During the recovery phase, the rear foot has larger friction, and only 
the front foot moves forward (movie S2). After one cycle of 
contraction and recovery, the crawler can move forward along the 
x axis with a distance, which is defined as the stride length. Con-
tinuous crawling motion can be obtained by cyclically applying and 
removing the magnetic field (movie S2), which is realized by repeat-
ing the magnetic field profile shown in fig. S9. The crawling speed 
can be easily tuned by changing applied magnetic field magnitude 
and frequency.
The strides and speeds of the crawler are characterized under 
magnetic fields with different magnitudes and frequencies, as shown 
in Fig.  3  (B  and  C,  respectively). The magnetic field magnitudes 
range from 0 to 40 mT with a 5-mT interval, and the frequencies are 
set as 1.67, 2.5, or 5 Hz. As shown in Fig. 3B, there is no locomotion 
when the magnetic field magnitude is smaller than 15 mT, because 
the magnetic field is insufficient to overcome the friction between 
feet and substrate. Then, the stride length increases with a stronger 
magnetic field and achieves a maximum value of 3 mm under a 
40-mT magnetic field. Increasing the magnetic field frequency 
while keeping the same magnitude does not influence the stride 
length much. However, the crawling speed can be enhanced by in-
creasing either magnitude or frequency of the applied magnetic field, 
as evidenced in Fig. 3C. The crawling speed reaches 13.2 mm s−1 
when the magnitude and frequency of the magnetic field are 40 mT 
and 5 Hz, respectively. Notice that the crawling speed can be further 
Fig. 3. Crawling mechanism of the Kresling robot. ( A) Single stride of the Kresling 
crawler under a magnetic field of 40 mT. Scale bar, 5 mm. (B ) Stride and (C ) speed 
characterization of crawling motion at various magnetic field magnitudes and 
frequencies.
Ze et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabm7834 (2022)     30 March 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE6 of 9enhanced by increasing the magnitude and frequency of the mag-
netic field. A comparison between the Kresling crawler here and 
some existing crawlers in terms of their actuation mechanisms, size, 
weight, and crawling speed can be found in table S1.
In addition to the locomotion along a straight line, the steering 
capability is crucial for robots to navigate in complex environments. 
Compared to some crawlers with other actuation methods (3 , 16, 38), 
the magnetically actuated Kresling crawler in this paper shows ad-
vantages in navigation with multiple degrees of freedom, which do 
not require extra mechanism design or actuators (44–46). As shown 
in Fig. 4A, the crawler has a net magnetization M net along the local 
y axis of the crawler due to the specially designed magnetization 
distribution. Because the net magnetization always tends to align 
with the applied magnetic field, the crawler can instantaneously 
steer by rigid body rotation upon the change of external magnetic 
field direction in the global XY plane. In Fig. 4A, the crawler is ini-
tially positioned with its local coordinate coinciding with the global 
coordinate. When we change the angle between the magnetic field 
and the Y axis CCW to 60°, 120°, 180°, 240°, and 300° in sequence, 
the crawler can immediately rotate to the corresponding directions 
to align its net magnetization direction with the external magnetic 
field direction (movie S3). Here, a 10-mT magnetic field is enough 
for the rigid body rotation of the crawler.
Figure 4B demonstrates the crawler navigation with a “Z” path, 
consisting of three discrete straight segments (movie S3). Segments 1 and 3 are along the X axis. Segment 2 is 130° CW from the X axis. 
In each segment, the magnetic field of 40 mT is cyclically applied 
and removed along the net magnetization direction of the crawler 
for it to crawl along the local x axis. The transition from segment 1 
to segment 2 or from segment 2 to segment 3 requires the crawler to 
pause and then steer to the new crawling direction by applying a 
10-mT magnetic field along the desired direction, which is 130° CW 
or CCW from the current net magnetization direction, respectively.
The crawler can also change moving direction during crawling. 
For instance, Fig. 4C demonstrates the navigation of the crawler 
about an “O” crawling path by continuously changing the angle be-
tween the magnetic field direction and the Y axis from 0° to 360° 
CW over time (movie S3). Because the net magnetization direction 
of the crawler always tends to align with the external magnetic field 
direction, the crawler can keep changing its crawling direction to 
follow the desired circular path. The magnitude of the magnetic 
field for crawling in this demonstration is 40 mT. These two paths 
show the precise maneuverability and omnidirectional locomotion 
capability of the Kresling crawler.
In biomedical environments, the large resistance from the con-
tact between tissues and organs can hinder the motion and function 
of soft machines because of their low material and structure stiffness 
(47, 48). The Kresling crawler has a unique anisotropic stiffness that 
is important to promote crawling motion and maintain the integri-
ty and function of the crawler in confined spaces. In addition, the 
Fig. 4. Steering and navigation of the Kresling crawler. (A) The steering mechanism. (X and Y) and (x and y) refer to the global and local (deformed) configurations, 
respectively. The crawler always tends to align its net magnetization M net with the applied magnetic field direction. (B) The “Z” crawling path (three straight segments) at 
selected times. (C) The “O” crawling path (continuous angular changes) at selected times. Scale bars, 5 mm.
Ze et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabm7834 (2022)     30 March 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE7 of 9magnetic field can tune the crawler structure stiffness along its axial 
direction for enhanced crawling performance. When we compress 
the crawler along its axial and lateral directions, as shown in Fig. 5A 
(see fig. S10 for experimental setup), a considerable stiffness differ-
ence is observed, regardless of whether a magnetic field is applied or 
not. Figure 5 (B and C) shows the stress-strain curves from the axial 
and lateral compression tests, respectively. When no magnetic field 
is applied, the low axial stiffness of 8.2 kPa (measured at 10% strain 
from the lightest blue curve in Fig. 5B) enables easy contraction 
under relatively small magnetic fields for effective locomotion. On 
the contrary, the stiffness in the lateral direction is as high as 93 kPa, even at a small strain of 5% (Fig. 5C). Once reaching complete contact 
under increasing compression (from 6% strain), its lateral stiffness 
increases greatly to 970 kPa, preventing potential structural damage 
from the high lateral resistance. Furthermore, the mechanical be -
havior of the crawler in its axial direction is tunable when applying 
a magnetic field opposite to the net magnetization direction of the 
crawler, stretching and stiffening the structure from its initial stress-
free configuration. The stiffness (measured at 10% strain) can be rein -
forced to 11.5, 12.5, and 14.1 kPa under −10-, −20-, and −30-mT 
magnetic fields, respectively. These results demonstrate the tun -
able structure stiffness to help the crawler overcome the resistance 
Fig. 5. Anisotropic and magnetically reinforced structure stiffness of the Kresling crawler. (A) Schematic of the compression tests along axial and lateral directions 
of the crawler. Compressive stress-strain curves for the crawler (B) along the axial direction under different magnetic fields and (C) along the lateral direction. The negative 
value of the magnetic field indicates that the magnetic field has the opposite direction with the net magnetization of the Kresling crawler, tending to stretch the crawler. 
(D) Schematic of crawling in a confined space and corresponding magnetic field profile. (E) The crawler gradually cracks the open front space and moves forward in a 
timely fashion. Scale bar, 5 mm.
Fig. 6. Conceptual scheme for drug storage and release using the Kresling crawler. (A) Exploded view and assembly of the modified Kresling crawler with a through 
hole. The internal cavity of the front Kresling unit is used for pill storage. (B) Pill positions at initial and contracted states of the Kresling crawler. The crawler contracts 
without interfering with the cylindrical pill. (C) Pill gradually dissolves in water as indicated by the intensity of the blue dye for 4 min. Scale bar, 5 mm.
Ze et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabm7834 (2022)     30 March 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE8 of 9from the axial direction during the crawling motion. We remark 
that the lateral stiffness of the crawler is also tunable by the magnet-
ic field, as shown in fig. S11. When the negative magnetic field is 
applied, the crawler is stretched, and its lateral stiffness is almost 
unchanged. When the positive magnetic field is applied, the crawler 
contracts, and its lateral stiffness is enhanced with an increasing 
magnetic field.
The crawler is sandwiched between a PDMS substrate and a 
PDMS film to demonstrate that the anisotropic stiffness and mag-
netically assisted reinforcement of the crawler allow it to move in 
severely confined spaces (Fig. 5D). For the magnetic field profile in 
Fig. 5D, the positive 40-mT magnetic field is for the crawler con-
traction, and the negative 20-mT field is for the reinforced axial 
stiffness to help stretch the crawler. During the crawling motion, as 
shown in Fig. 5E, the crawler moves forward by effectively cracking 
open the contact area at the interface of the substrate and film. 
Meanwhile, its deployment under the negative magnetic field gen-
erates a large pushing force, which is essential to open and extend 
the crack front at the substrate-film interface (movie S4). The stride 
length in Fig. 5E is comparable to that of crawling motion in open 
spaces (~3 mm in Fig. 3B), indicating the capability of the crawler to 
move in confined spaces.
With the capability to agilely crawl and steer under precise mag-
netic control and move in confined spaces, the miniaturized Kresling 
crawler could potentially be used for biomedical applications like 
endoscopy, biopsy, or on-demand drug release. Components such as 
mini cameras, forceps, or drug pills can be integrated into the system 
to enable these functions. Note that the Kresling unit is a thin shell 
structure whose inner cavity permits the loading of functional com-
ponents without increasing the overall dimension of the system, 
which is especially favored for environments with limited space. In 
Fig. 6, we demonstrate the drug storage and release of the Kresling 
crawler. As shown in Fig. 6A, to use the Kresling origami inner cavity 
as storage, the crawler is modified with a through hole in its axial 
direction by assembling Kresling units and magnetic plates with holes. 
Then, a cylinder-shaped pill is inserted into the crawler for drug storage. 
Here, the pill has a length equal to the total thickness of two magnetic 
plates and one Kresling unit, illustrated by the cross-sectional view of 
the crawler (Fig. 6B). The pill is fixed to the rightmost magnetic plate, 
having a diameter slightly smaller than the diameter of the through 
hole. When the crawler contracts, the pill can be pushed into the 
adjacent unit without influencing the crawling motion, as illustrated 
in Fig. 6B. Although the internal space of the Kresling unit shrinks 
during the contracting process, the triangular panels do not interfere 
with the central cylindrical pill. To illustrate the on-demand drug 
release capability of the crawler, we fabricate the pill by encapsulat-
ing blue dye inside the cylindrical water-soluble paper. Once the 
crawler reaches the target position, water is poured to surround the 
crawler (movie S4). Then, the pill gradually dissolves in the water 
environment, as indicated by the intensity of the blue dye for 4 min 
(Fig. 6C). On the basis of various applications, alternative drug re-
lease mechanisms are also available such as using pH-responsive or 
protein-sensitive materials in further works.
DISCUSSION
In this work, we have demonstrated a magnetically actuated small-
scale Kresling crawler for effective in-plane crawling motion in 
confined spaces. The Kresling dipole is introduced as the building block of the crawler, canceling out the relative rotation between the 
two ends of the crawler for contraction-only motion. Rationally de-
signed torque distribution for simultaneous contraction of the 
Kresling units is implemented by magnetic actuation for crawling. 
Magnetic actuation also provides the capability of steering by driv-
ing the rigid body rotation of the crawler. In addition, the anisotro-
pic and magnetically tunable structure stiffness helps the crawler 
effectively overcome the large resistance from severely confined 
spaces during crawling. Last, we demonstrate the drug storage and 
release capabilities of the crawler by using the inherent internal cav-
ity of the Kresling unit. To expand the work, advanced fabrication 
methods, such as small-scale three-dimensional printing (49), stress-  
controlled folding (50), and mechanically guided assembly (51), can 
further downsize the origami crawler, bringing forth potential 
applications in more narrow and confined environments. Highly 
autonomous biomedical robots based on the presented design are 
promising for future disease diagnoses and treatment by integrating 
the functionalities of sensing, vision, computing, and drug storage 
into the Kresling origami internal cavity.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Fabrication of the Kresling crawler
The four-unit Kresling crawler is fabricated by assembling Kresling 
units, magnetic plates, and feet with anisotropic friction. The Kresling 
unit is folded from the designed Kresling pattern (fig. S1) using 
polyethylene film (0.05 mm thick). Hexagonal Mylar plates (0.127 mm 
thick) are attached to the top and bottom planes of the unit to provide 
high stiffness. Hexagonal magnetic plate (edge length of 3.9 mm 
and thickness of 1.4 mm) is made of Ecoflex 00-30 silicone (Smooth-
On Inc., USA) embedded with 40 volume % hard magnetic particles 
(NdFeB, average size of 100  m; Magnequench, Singapore). The feet 
are molded by PDMS (base to curing agent in a ratio of 5:1; Sylgard 
184, Dow Corning, USA) with dimensions shown in fig. S8A. Acetate 
tape is attached to the inclined surface of the feet to provide lower 
friction than PDMS.
Finite element analysis
The commercial software Abaqus 2020 (Dassault Systèmes, France) 
is used for the FEA of the Kresling crawler contraction. Linear elas-
tic material models are used for hexagonal bases, triangular panels, 
and hinges connecting the panels with the C3D8 element for the 
whole model discretization. More details about sample fabrication, 
FEA, material characterization, and experimental setup are provided 
in the Supplementary Materials.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Supplementary material for this article is available at https://science.org/doi/10.1126/
sciadv.abm7834
REFERENCES AND NOTES
 1. N. Saga, T. Nakamura, Development of a peristaltic crawling robot using magnetic fluid 
on the basis of the locomotion mechanism of the earthworm. Smart Mater. Struct. 13, 
566–569 (2004).
 2. S. Chen, Y. Cao, M. Sarparast, H. Yuan, L. Dong, X. Tan, C. Cao, Soft crawling robots: 
Design, actuation, and locomotion. Adv. Mater. Technol. 5, 1900837 (2020).
 3. G. Gu, J. Zou, R. Zhao, X. Zhao, X. Zhu, Soft wall-climbing robots. Sci. Robot. 3, eaat2874 
(2018).
 4. H. Omori, T. Murakami, H. Nagai, T. Nakamura, T. Kubota, Development of a novel 
bio-inspired planetary subsurface explorer: Initial experimental study by prototype 
Ze et al., Sci. Adv. 8, eabm7834 (2022)     30 March 2022
SCIENCE ADVANCES | RESEARCH ARTICLE9 of 9excavator with propulsion and excavation units. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 18, 
459–470 (2013).
 5. M. M. Coad, L. H. Blumenschein, S. Cutler, J. A. R. Zepeda, N. D. Naclerio, H. El-Hussieny, 
U. Mehmood, J.-H. Ryu, E. W. Hawkes, A. M. Okamura, Vine robots: Design, teleoperation, 
and deployment for navigation and exploration. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag. 27, 120–132 
(2020).
 6. M. Kamata, S. Yamazaki, Y. Tanise, Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, Morphological change 
in peristaltic crawling motion of a narrow pipe inspection robot inspired by earthworm’s 
locomotion. Adv. Robot. 32, 386–397 (2018).
 7. C.-Y. Yeh, C.-Y. Chen, J.-Y. Juang, Soft hopping and crawling robot for in-pipe traveling. 
Extreme Mech. Lett. 39, 100854 (2020).
 8. T. Nakamura, Y. Hidaka, M. Yokojima, K. Adachi, Development of peristaltic crawling 
robot with artificial rubber muscles attached to large intestine endoscope. Adv. Robot. 
26, 1161–1182 (2012).
 9. M. Runciman, A. Darzi, G. P. Mylonas, Soft robotics in minimally invasive surgery. Soft 
Robot. 6, 423–443 (2019).
 10. S. Seok, C. D. Onal, K.-J. Cho, R. J. Wood, D. Rus, S. Kim, Meshworm: A peristaltic soft robot 
with antagonistic nickel titanium coil actuators. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 18, 
1485–1497 (2013).
 11. A. Rafsanjani, Y. Zhang, B. Liu, S. M. Rubinstein, K. Bertoldi, Kirigami skins make a simple 
soft actuator crawl. Sci. Robot. 3, eaar7555 (2018).
 12. S. Wu, Q. Ze, R. Zhang, N. Hu, Y. Cheng, F. Yang, R. Zhao, Symmetry-breaking actuation 
mechanism for soft robotics and active metamaterials. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11, 
41649–41658 (2019).
 13. S. Wu, C. M. Hamel, Q. Ze, F. Yang, H. J. Qi, R. Zhao, Evolutionary algorithm-guided 
voxel-encoding printing of functional hard-magnetic soft active materials. Adv. Intell. 
Syst. 2, 2000060 (2020).
 14. M. Calisti, G. Picardi, C. Laschi, Fundamentals of soft robot locomotion. J. R. Soc. Interface 
14, 20170101 (2017).
 15. M. S. Verma, A. Ainla, D. Yang, D. Harburg, G. M. Whitesides, A soft tube-climbing robot. 
Soft Robot. 5, 133–137 (2018).
 16. J.-S. Koh, K.-J. Cho, Omega-shaped inchworm-inspired crawling robot with large-index-
and-pitch (LIP) SMA spring actuators. IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron. 18, 419–429 (2013).
 17. M. Rogóż, H. Zeng, C. Xuan, D. S. Wiersma, P. Wasylczyk, Light-driven soft robot mimics 
caterpillar locomotion in natural scale. Adv. Opt. Mater. 4, 1689–1694 (2016).
 18. X. Qian, Q. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Xu, Z. Li, Z. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Wei, Y. Ji, Untethered recyclable 
tubular actuators with versatile locomotion for soft continuum robots. Adv. Mater. 30, 
1801103 (2018).
 19. R. F. Shepherd, F. Ilievski, W. Choi, S. A. Morin, A. A. Stokes, A. D. Mazzeo, X. Chen, M. Wang, 
G. M. Whitesides, Multigait soft robot. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 20400–20403 (2011).
 20. P. Rothemund, A. Ainla, L. Belding, D. J. Preston, S. Kurihara, Z. Suo, G. M. Whitesides, A soft, 
bistable valve for autonomous control of soft actuators. Sci. Robot. 3, eaar7986 (2018).
 21. Z. G. Joey, A. A. Calderón, L. Chang, N. O. Pérez-Arancibia, An earthworm-inspired 
friction-controlled soft robot capable of bidirectional locomotion. Bioinspir. Biomim. 14, 
036004 (2019).
 22. J. E. Bernth, A. Arezzo, H. Liu, A novel robotic meshworm with segment-bending 
anchoring for colonoscopy. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 2, 1718–1724 (2017).
 23. A. Kandhari, Y. Wang, H. J. Chiel, R. D. Quinn, K. A. Daltorio, An analysis of peristaltic 
locomotion for maximizing velocity or minimizing cost of transport of earthworm-like 
robots. Soft Robot. 4, 485–505 (2020).
 24. J. Zou, Y. Lin, C. Ji, H. Yang, A reconfigurable omnidirectional soft robot based 
on caterpillar locomotion. Soft Robot. 5, 164–174 (2018).
 25. Y. Y. Xiao, Z. C. Jiang, X. Tong, Y. Zhao, Biomimetic locomotion of electrically powered 
“Janus” soft robots using a liquid crystal polymer. Adv. Mater. 31, 1903452 (2019).
 26. Y. Wu, J. K. Yim, J. Liang, Z. Shao, M. Qi, J. Zhong, Z. Luo, X. Yan, M. Zhang, X. Wang, Insect-
scale fast moving and ultrarobust soft robot. Sci. Robot. 4, eaax1594 (2019).
 27. W. Hu, G. Z. Lum, M. Mastrangeli, M. Sitti, Small-scale soft-bodied robot with multimodal 
locomotion. Nature 554, 81–85 (2018).
 28. H. Lu, M. Zhang, Y. Yang, Q. Huang, T. Fukuda, Z. Wang, Y. Shen, A bioinspired 
multilegged soft millirobot that functions in both dry and wet conditions. Nat. Commun. 
9, 3944 (2018).
 29. C. D. Onal, R. J. Wood, D. Rus, An origami-inspired approach to worm robots. IEEE/ASME 
Trans. Mechatron. 18, 430–438 (2013).
 30. H. Banerjee, N. Pusalkar, H. Ren, Single-motor controlled tendon-driven peristaltic soft 
origami robot. J. Mech. Robot. 10, 064501 (2018).
 31. W. Kim, J. Byun, J.-K. Kim, W.-Y. Choi, K. Jakobsen, J. Jakobsen, D.-Y. Lee, K.-J. Cho, 
Bioinspired dual-morphing stretchable origami. Sci. Robot. 4, eaay3493 (2019). 32. E. T. Filipov, T. Tachi, G. H. Paulino, Origami tubes assembled into stiff, yet reconfigurable 
structures and metamaterials. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112, 12321–12326 (2015).
 33. H. Fang, Y. Zhang, K. Wang, Origami-based earthworm-like locomotion robots. Bioinspir. 
Biomim. 12, 065003 (2017).
 34. L. S. Novelino, Q. Ze, S. Wu, G. H. Paulino, R. Zhao, Untethered control of functional 
origami microrobots with distributed actuation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117, 24096–24101 
(2020).
 35. Z. Li, N. Kidambi, L. Wang, K.-W. Wang, Uncovering rotational multifunctionalities 
of coupled Kresling modular structures. Extreme Mech. Lett. 39, 100795 (2020).
 36. J. Kaufmann, P. Bhovad, S. Li, Harnessing the multistability of kresling origami 
for reconfigurable articulation in soft robotic arms. Soft Robot. (2021).
 37. P. Bhovad, J. Kaufmann, S. Li, Peristaltic locomotion without digital controllers: Exploiting 
multi-stability in origami to coordinate robotic motion. Extreme Mech. Lett. 32, 100552 
(2019).
 38. A. Pagano, T. Yan, B. Chien, A. Wissa, S. Tawfick, A crawling robot driven by multi-stable 
origami. Smart Mater. Struct. 26, 094007 (2017).
 39. K. Gustafson, O. Angatkina, A. Wissa, Model-based design of a multistable origami-
enabled crawling robot. Smart Mater. Struct. 29, 015013 (2020).
 40. L. Qin, X. Liang, H. Huang, C. K. Chui, R. C.-H. Yeow, J. Zhu, A versatile soft crawling robot 
with rapid locomotion. Soft Robot. 6, 455–467 (2019).
 41. T. Li, Z. Zou, G. Mao, X. Yang, Y. Liang, C. Li, S. Qu, Z. Suo, W. Yang, Agile and resilient 
insect-scale robot. Soft Robot. 6, 133–141 (2019).
 42. N. Nayakanti, S. H. Tawfick, A. J. Hart, Twist-coupled kirigami cells and mechanisms. 
Extreme Mech. Lett. 21, 17–24 (2018).
 43. S. Wu, Q. Ze, J. Dai, N. Udipi, G. H. Paulino, R. Zhao, Stretchable origami robotic arm 
with omnidirectional bending and twisting. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 118, e2110023118 
(2021).
 44. E. B. Joyee, Y. Pan, A fully three-dimensional printed inchworm-inspired soft robot 
with magnetic actuation. Soft Robot. 6, 333–345 (2019).
 45. J. Zhang, E. Diller, Untethered miniature soft robots: Modeling and design of a millimeter-
scale swimming magnetic sheet. Soft Robot. 5, 761–776 (2018).
 46. X. Kuang, S. Wu, Q. Ze, L. Yue, Y. Jin, S. M. Montgomery, F. Yang, H. J. Qi, R. Zhao, Magnetic 
dynamic polymers for modular assembling and reconfigurable morphing architectures. 
Adv. Mater. 33, 2102113 (2021).
 47. M. Sitti, H. Ceylan, W. Hu, J. Giltinan, M. Turan, S. Yim, E. Diller, Biomedical applications 
of untethered mobile milli/microrobots. Proc. IEEE 103, 205–224 (2015).
 48. E. W. Hawkes, L. H. Blumenschein, J. D. Greer, A. M. Okamura, A soft robot that navigates 
its environment through growth. Sci. Robot. 2, eaan3028 (2017).
 49. Z. Lin, L. S. Novelino, H. Wei, N. A. Alderete, G. H. Paulino, H. D. Espinosa, S. Krishnaswamy, 
Folding at the microscale: Enabling multifunctional 3D origami-architected 
metamaterials. Small 16, 2002229 (2020).
 50. J. H. Na, A. A. Evans, J. Bae, M. C. Chiappelli, C. D. Santangelo, R. J. Lang, T. C. Hull, 
R. C. Hayward, Programming reversibly self-folding origami with micropatterned 
photo-crosslinkable polymer trilayers. Adv. Mater. 27, 79–85 (2015).
 51. S. Xu, Z. Yan, K.-I. Jang, W. Huang, H. Fu, J. Kim, Z. Wei, M. Flavin, J. McCracken, R. Wang, 
Assembly of micro/nanomaterials into complex, three-dimensional architectures by 
compressive buckling. Science 347, 154–159 (2015).
Acknowledgments 
Funding: This work was supported by National Science Foundation (NSF) Career Award, 
CMMI-2145601 (R.R.Z., Q.Z., S.W., J.N., J.D., Y.S., S.L., and C.Z.); NSF Award, CMMI-2142789 
(R.R.Z., Q.Z., S.W., J.N., J.D., Y.S., S.L., and C.Z.); and NSF Award, CMMI-1538830 (G.H.P. and 
L.S.N.). Endowment was provided by the Raymond Allen Jones Chair at the Georgia Institute  
of Technology (G.H.P. and L.S.N.). This work was also supported by the Brazilian National 
Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq), project 235104/2014-0 (L.S.N.) 
Author contributions: Conceptualization: R.R.Z., Q.Z., and S.W. Methodology: R.R.Z., Q.Z.,  
S.W., and J.N. Investigation: Q.Z., S.W., J.N., Y.S., S.L., and C.Z. Visualization: S.W., J.D., and 
L.S.N. Funding acquisition: R.R.Z. Project administration: R.R.Z. Supervision: R.R.Z. Writing 
(original draft): Q.Z., S.W., and R.R.Z. Writing (review and editing): R.R.Z., G.H.P., Q.Z., S.W., J.D., 
S.L., and C.Z. Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the 
paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 11 October 2021
Accepted 8 February 2022
Published 30 March 2022
10.1126/sciadv.abm7834
