Citation: Alam, G.M. Sustainable
Education and Sustainability in
Education: The Reality in the Era of
Internationalisation and
Commodiﬁcation in Education—Is
Higher Education Different?
Sustainability 2023 ,15, 1315. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su15021315
Received: 4 January 2023
Accepted: 9 January 2023
Published: 10 January 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
sustainability
Editorial
Sustainable Education and Sustainability in Education: The
Reality in the Era of Internationalisation and Commodiﬁcation
in Education—Is Higher Education Different?
Gazi Mahabubul Alam1,2
1College of Overseas Education, Chengdu University, Chengdu 610106, China; gazi.mahabubul@upm.edu.my
2Department of Foundation of Education, Faculty of Educational Studies, University Putra Malaysia,
Serdang 43300, Malaysia
1. Introduction
Sustainable education refers to knowledge delivery that ensures a balanced national
development which encompasses both economic and social development as well as a
human needs perspective [ 1]. In the era of globalisation, international education, par-
ticularly education in the West, dominates the globe, which subsequently contributes to
international development by developing a “dependency theory” for the East to follow [ 2].
Hence, national development remains a by-product, while international development is
always the central focus to which education primarily contributes [ 3]. Under such a climate,
sustainable education for an emerging nation is merely a theory that stays far from the
reality [4].
While local education is unable to compete in the era of globalisation, local elites often
skim the cream off the top in education [ 1–3]. Hence, education has become one of the
powerful tools that the elites can use to deprive underprivileged groups by introducing
a “free market-driven theory” in education. This market-driven theory facilitates the
development of a specialized, differentiated, and elite education program for the privileged
group to widen the gap between the elite and poor, as the need for standardised or uniﬁed
education is often denied by the policymakers and legislators in the emerging nations [ 4].
Poor people in emerging nations are often required to put in signiﬁcant effort from an
adverse and uneven condition to even access a free education locally available [5]. Hence,
free education is also referred to as public education, which is the only shelter for the
poor people and is becoming less effective over time. Under these circumstances, whether
sustainable education in the era of internationalisation and commodiﬁcation is a reality or
an international political marvel is a question that needs to be addressed in the near future.
Sustainability in education either refers to those education programs that are capable
of protecting the environment and ensuring the cautious usage of natural resources, or to
the settings of educational institutes and their research arrangements with the alignment of
the protection of the environment and natural resources [ 6]. In general, scientiﬁc-ism and
modernisation are often blamed for damaging the genesis of the sustainability of nature,
which will cause a grave adverse impact in the long run [6].
Institutions of education have expanded dramatically over the last two decades [ 5,6].
Hence, they are forced to adopt a market-responsive theory in order to survive in the era
of modernisation and commodiﬁcation [ 6]. The adoption of a market-responsive theory
would surely halt the institutions of education to retain within the genesis of education
philosophy. Consequently, sustainability in education might be another “lollipop” to
keep the education system busy developing a big market for business without making a
meaningful impact—a discourse which is yet to be explored.
Sustainability 2023 ,15, 1315. https://doi.org/10.3390/su15021315 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2023 ,15, 1315 2 of 7
2. Undeniable Fact: Internationalisation and Commodiﬁcation in Education
The tuition fees of a student studying in an international school in many parts of the
globe (such as China, Malaysia, Korea, Hong Kong, UAE) are almost the same as a profes-
sor’s salary in those countries [ 3]. The position of professor in an academic atmosphere.
In order to reach a professorial stage, one not only has to show an exemplary success in
his/her student life but also must display an illuminating performance in their academic
career. Hence, a number of questions are generated: whom are the students studying
in these schools? What are the aims and ambitions of these children after completion of
their studentship career? How much money are these children are going to make after
their education, and how will they make it? Would these children consider education as a
philosophical program required for sustainable national development, or do they believe
education is a commodity that they can use as a weapon to “kill” others for their own
personal gain [1–3].
Moreover, the underprivileged students who cannot receive such an education might
be inclined to take revenge if the scope arises [ 3]. In such a case, if someone from an
underprivileged community became educated and reached an elite position in public
service by overcoming inexplicable pains, might they be extremely corrupted to earn money
to ensure the future of the children [ 1]. Hence, the following questions are generated: is
this internationalisation and commodiﬁcation in education an ally or enemy for sustainable
national development? Should we label this as sustainable education even if it may bring a
very specialised prospect for the elites?
Having said that, we may also need to note one of the important connotations—such
international education delivered in China, Malaysia, UAE, and Korea is a national product
of either USA, UK or Australia. Children in the USA, UK and Australia procure this
education program as part of their national education program, which is free of cost. While
this kind of education is very expensive in one part of the globe, the other supplies this free
of cost. This may suggest that local education in the former countries may experience a
huge “educational inﬂation” compared to the latter, thus leading to very high demand for
international education within the local community of the former [2,3].
The above discussion might raise a graver concern regarding sustainable education,
which subsequently has an implication for the sustainability in education. Under this
climate, poor students would go to public schools that offer free education and that lack
decent governance and regulatory control mechanism. Such a lack of governance and regu-
latory control not only interrupt the delivery of substantial education but also contribute to
the misuse of resources such as water, electricity and land, which can be considered as a
threat to sustainability in education [7,8].
This may add unnecessary expenses in education from the public exchequer. On the
other hand, private schools might adopt a luxury theory in education which may ensure
greater use of supplementary and complementary items in education (such as a swimming
pool, theatre, amusement park, etc.) by squeezing the fundamental elements needed for
sustainable education. This approach may help them to sell the education at a far higher
cost compared to the production cost. However, this neither supports sustainable education
nor ensures sustainability in education. The above discussions have highlighted the generic
facts, so let us now focus on the issue of internationalisation and commodiﬁcation in
particular, with reference to higher education.
Internationalisation and Commodiﬁcation in Higher Education
The generic effect of internationalisation and commodiﬁcation exclusively helps the
elites of emerging nations to access specialised/differentiated higher education for private
interests and beneﬁts by exploiting public gains. Ideally, higher education should shape
the primary and secondary provisions as sustainable providers through its research and
innovation—a common tenet suggests that it is not the elite-driven but merit-driven higher
education system that support the concept of sustainable development in education. Hav-
Sustainability 2023 ,15, 1315 3 of 7
ing said that, higher education provision predominantly experiences a number of graver
concerns in connection to internationalisation and commodiﬁcation.
Firstly, most of the universities in developing countries are yet to be hubs for research,
innovation and knowledge discovery. Hence, they are reliant on the knowledge discovery
made in their Western counterparts; subsequently, the courses curricula, expertise and
delivery methods used in these Eastern universities are borrowed from their Western
counterparts. This borrowing model, which is commonly known as internationalisation in
higher education, has become entirely one-way trafﬁc and trade, forcing higher education
in emerging nations to assume the role of agent that serves the interests of the principal
counterpart. Hence, whereas a university in the East supports local development in its
function as an agent, its main role is to ensure the beneﬁts of the West to a greater extent.
Hence, studying in a local university does not necessarily mean that it will ensure exclusive
local beneﬁts. Consequently, internationalisation in higher education following one-way
trafﬁc may not result in a sustainable education system.
Secondly, the Sino–foreign cooperative model in higher education is well-evidently
expanding with the prevailing local and international policy support. This international
cooperation in higher education also suggests that the export and trade barrier in higher
education is only removed for Western counterparts, as the higher education in the Eastern
part of the globe has failed to take advantage of the GATS (General Agreement of Trade
and Services) verdict that allows higher education as an international commodity.
Thirdly, a signiﬁcant portion of students from developing nations often travels to the
West to further their study, which may incur a direct loss of foreign currency. However, a
decent lifestyle in the West, talent-based migration and social policy, and a true essence
of internationalisation support the “push and pull theory”, which motivates the talent
to migrate to the West and to serve the interests of the destined location at the cost of
his earned education by using the funds of the origin country. The portion of students
who may return to their origin country after education may also serve as an agent of
international development. Hence, internationalisation and commodiﬁcation in higher
education deserves much more attention in the era of sustainable education or sustainability
in education.
3. A New Glimpse for Sustainable and Sustainability in Education
A signiﬁcant number of specialised and differentiated studies has been conducted
covering a wider spectrum in education (such as curriculum and instructional technology,
teacher education, technology and innovation in education, school settings, education
policy, best practice in education, international education and development, educational
segmentation) to enrich the discourse of sustainable education and sustainability in educa-
tion since their inception. All of these studies [ 7–11] claimed that the respective models
are substantially helpful for sustainable education and sustainability in education. It is
therefore acceptable to consider that these models have offered signiﬁcant help to the
development of education.
Despite these claims, education generally helps developed countries to rule over
their developing counterparts, while on the other hand, the elites in developing coun-
tries skim the cream off the top in the era of internationalisation and commodiﬁcation
in education—this is an undeniable fact that receives less attention in the discourse of
sustainable education [ 2,3,7]. The proposition that follows does not fundamentally propose
a comprehensive solution for the problem raised; rather, it provides a glimpse so that future
studies in this area can cover them broadly to present an extensive resolution.
Firstly, we propose that the standardisation of national education programs is the
foremost need that the country has to plan. This standardisation should be determined in
the alignment of a nation’s economic and social developmental goals as well as a human
needs perspective. Standardised education should be very competitive to challenge the
international benchmark. Furthermore, standardised education must be homogeneous
and uniﬁed to all students. Students’ merits are the sole parameter for the selection of
Sustainability 2023 ,15, 1315 4 of 7
education, not their socioeconomic status. All institutes of education are obliged to follow
the concept of standardised education.
Secondly, the production cost of standardised education should be determined by
scientiﬁcally calculating for each program, level, and type; subsequently, a selling price
will be dogged by ensuring a minimum proﬁt so that the educational institute is able to
survive. The production cost of education should not be driven by the budget but should
be determined by the standard of education targeted by the nation.
The budget for standardised education is to be ensured following the production cost
that is determined by scientiﬁc calculation. All entities (public, private) of education should
follow this principle regardless of the demands made by their customers. An increased
or an artiﬁcial demand for education and, subsequently, an ampliﬁed but unproductive
budget (both formal and informal) to meet such demand inevitably create a huge inﬂation
for both investment in education and the qualiﬁcations provided.
Thirdly, the free school concept needs to be remodiﬁed and re-deﬁned. Currently,
the concept of free and paid education is determined by the entity/type of school (such
as private, public, semi-public). Following this concept, an educational institute is no
longer a common place for all children regardless of their SES; rather, a particular entity is
designated for a speciﬁc economic cluster of children.
The free school concept should be re-deﬁned, whereby education will be free for the
“needy” based on their needs. Education expenses include both direct and indirect costs.
Moreover, some ultra-poor groups (especially those who are bound to be the child labour
needed to survive) need additional support to continue their education, which should
be labelled as 100% + free education. Some students might not need additional support
but do need the support for both direct and indirect costs, which is to be called 100% free.
Hence, both 100% +/  free concept and 100% +/  paid concept are to be introduced
and reinforced.
This concept will not be implemented by the school entity but by the SES of the
students. Here, the government subsidy will be provided to the children according to the
SES through a voucher-based system or any other considerable method(s) based on further
research. The students would be able to use this voucher regardless of their school entity.
The ﬁnancially able students need to pay regardless of the type/entity of school that they
may attend. This is how a substantial investment model based on a particular nation’s
educational needs is to be incorporated for the collective and public interest.
Fourthly, both the public and private return from education needs to be re-mechanised.
Upon employment of graduates, a differentiated and specialised taxation mechanism
should be in place so that the government can cover the subsidy that has already been used
for a particular group’s education. Hence, two graduates (i.e., one graduate with a subsidy
and one without) having the same kind of qualiﬁcation and same level of income range
should pay differentiated tax so that the underprivileged students (who enjoy 100% +/  
free education) do not have much leverage to consider that the subsidy is granted forever.
While the above agenda is generally applicable for the education system as a whole, the
next paragraph spotlights a specialised item for higher education.
In order to improve the efﬁcacy of higher education, an industry-driven system is
acutely needed as higher education supplies its graduates to the industry. Meaningful
industry participation for both curriculum development process and delivery as well as
assessment of higher education needs to be ensured. A substantial and scientiﬁcally well
regulated industry levy system may ensure signiﬁcant industry participation in higher
education. Students should not just enjoy a scope of pre-paid tuition fees but may be able to
use a post-paid fees mechanism where the university would collect the fees directly from the
employing industry on behalf of its employed graduates. This approach would oblige both
demand and supply sides to invest a collaborative effort in order to ensure a sustainable
higher education which is capable of contributing to both public and private beneﬁts.
This approach would force them not to be lethargic in the competition of education.
On the other hand, introducing a 100% +/  fees model for ﬁnancially able students will de-
Sustainability 2023 ,15, 1315 5 of 7
motivate them (i.e., those students who are less academically capable) and not to disbalance
the education system, since this revised education system would allow the ﬁnancially poor
but academically able students to defeat the less academically capable students in the entire
journey of education. If both the investments in education and returns from education are
not regulated as public goods and in the interest of the public, sustainable education would
remain a nightmare for the emerging nation and exist only in theory. In the absence of
sustainable education, resources in education should typically experience huge wastage or
misuse and would thereby contribute to educational inﬂation. Consequently, sustainable
education serves as the prerequisite for sustainability in education.
4. Thematic Highlights from the SI’s Papers: Concluding Remark
Before summarising the substance of this SI, let us highlight some collective themes
from the different clusters of the published papers. Of the published papers, ﬁve [9,11–13]
have explored academic and teacher education perspectives. Each paper develops its
rationale by accepting that academic excellence is not up to the mark in emerging nations.
In solving such a crisis, Refs. [ 9,11] suggested that academics should abide by the philos-
ophy of education, particularly higher education, while [ 12,13] advocated in favour of
the adaptation of technology in teaching and learning affairs and the provision of policy
preference for such interventions.
Five papers [ 8,14–16] have explored the issue of sustainable innovation in higher
education. One of the common issues faced in rationalising the study, as each paper has
acknowledged, is that a signiﬁcant space for innovation has remained vacated. In offering
a resolution, refs. [ 8,14] have argued that the institutes of higher education have to be the
role model in implementing sustainable innovation before they are able to transmit this
into their own society, while [ 14,15] advocated that sustainable innovation is a collective
effort that must be driven by all of the stakeholders involved.
Five papers [ 7,10,14,17,18] have explored the role of public and private provisions
in delivering sustainable higher education by comparing the strength and weaknesses of
each counterpart. One of the common propositions suggests that public system misuses
the budgets via different forms of corruption, while their private counterparts squeeze the
resources for proﬁts. A scientiﬁc model to resolve such problems for private counterparts
is suggested by [ 7], while [ 10,14,17,18] advocated that both public and private provisions
must understand the reality that higher education experiences in the 21st century without
compromising the philosophy of higher education. Having said that, each paper, regardless
of its context, argued that universities in emerging nations are lagging behind in the
international ranking league table of sustainable higher education, and the prescription
provided in the study would support the push to improve the position of these universities
in the international competition league.
The successful submissions in this Special Issue have not just covered a narrow ﬁeld in
the area of sustainable education and sustainability in education. Rather, the publications
have covered various angles and aspects related to the theme. These publications suggest
that innovation and technology are not sufﬁcient to combat the challenges involved in sus-
tainable education and sustainability in education unless the root causes are identiﬁed and
preventative measures are subsequently taken. We also realised that although sustainability
in education and sustainable education are two different concepts, the distinction between
them is not often acknowledged.
A misleading distinction, without identifying the root causes, is also occasionally made
to deﬁne and to demarcate sustainable education and sustainability in education. Moreover,
research is lacking in the discovery of the connecting point between sustainable education
and sustainability in education. Hence, to have focused attention, a new Special Issue
entitled “Sustainable Education and Sustainability in Education: Policy and Implementation
Direction in the Era of SDGs” is developed under the section of “Sustainable Education
and Approaches“ in Sustainability , where new submissions are welcomed.
Sustainability 2023 ,15, 1315 6 of 7
5. Further Readings
1. Special Issue “Sustainable Education and Sustainability in Education: Policy and
Implementation Direction in the Era of SDGs”. Available online: https://www.
mdpi.com/journal/sustainability/special_issues/Q462Y110A0 (accessed on 25 De-
cember 2022).
2. Special Issue “Approach and Policy in Higher Education for Sustainability”. Avail-
able online: https://www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability/special_issues/Higher_
Education_Sustainability (accessed on 25 December 2022).
Acknowledgments: I would like to express my sincere thanks to my doctoral students, namely, Zhou
Lei, Gao Zhuoyuan Grace, Mahfuzur Rahman, Karima Bashir, Gui Pingping, Romana Kader and Wei
Jin for their kind support in preparing this editorial by clustering the published papers in this SI and
reading them to produce a short summary. I also owe my heartfelt gratitude to Morsheda Parvin for
reading this editorial.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The author declares no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Sterling, S. Sustainable Education Revisioning Learning and Change, Schumacher Brieﬁng no6. In Schumacher Society/Green Books ;
Dartington: Totnes, UK, 2001.
2. Alam, G.M. Does online technology provide sustainable HE or aggravate diploma disease? Evidence from Bangladesh—A
comparison of conditions before and during COVID-19. Technol. Soc. 2021 ,66, 101677. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Alam, G.M.; Forhad, M.A.R.; Ismi, A. Can education as an ‘International Commodity’ be the backbone or cane of a nation in the
era of fourth industrial revolution?—A Comparative study. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2020 ,159, 120184. [CrossRef]
4. Niu, D.; Jiang, D.; Li, F. Higher education for sustainable development in China. Int. J. Sustain. High. Educ. 2010 ,11, 153–162.
[CrossRef]
5. Alam, G.M.; Parvin, M. Three parameters of urban K-8 education during pre- and post-covid-19 restrictions: Comparison of
students of slums, tin-sheds and ﬂats in Bangladesh. Educ. Urban Soc. 2022 , 00131245221086277. [CrossRef]
6. Dale, A.; Newman, L. Sustainable development, education and literacy. Int. J. Sustain. High. Educ. 2005 ,6, 351–362. [CrossRef]
7. Alam, G.M. The Relationship between Figureheads and Managerial Leaders in the Private University Sector: A Decentralised,
Competency-Based Leadership Model for Sustainable Higher Education. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 12279. [CrossRef]
8. Grigoryeva, M.; Dmitrevskaya, I.; Belopukhov, S.; Osipova, A. The Chemical Training of Agrarian Specialists: From the
Chemicalization of Agriculture to Green Technologies. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 8062. [CrossRef]
9. Ma, X.; Gryshova, I.; Koshkalda, I.; Suska, A.; Gryshova, R.; Riasnianska, A.; Tupchii, O. Necessity of Post-War Renewal of
University Teachers’ Potential in Terms of Sustainable Development in Ukraine. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 12598. [CrossRef]
10. Li, J.; Xue, E. Pursuing Sustainable Higher Education Admission Policy Reform: Evidence from Stakeholders’ Perceptions in
China’s Pilot Provinces. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 11936. [CrossRef]
11. Chen, S.; Wang, R.; Wang, T.; Zhou, W. The Impact of Student-Teacher Policy Perception on Employment Intentions in Rural
Schools for Educational Sustainable Development Based on Push–Pull Theory: An Empirical Study from China. Sustainability
2022 ,14, 6639. [CrossRef]
12. Uaciquete, A.S.; Valcke, M. Strengthening the Teaching and Research Nexus (TRN) in Higher Education (HE): Systematic Review
of Reviews. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 15317. [CrossRef]
13. Ma, G.; Shi, W.; Hou, P . Exploring University Teacher Construction for Higher Education Sustainability in China: Perspective
from Policy Instruments. Sustainability 2023 ,15, 362. [CrossRef]
14. Li, J.; Xue, E. A Social Networking Analysis of Education Policies of Creating World-Class Universities for Higher Education
Sustainability in China. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 10243. [CrossRef]
15. Ong, A.K.S. A Machine Learning Ensemble Approach for Predicting Factors Affecting STEM Students’ Future Intention to Enroll
in Chemistry-Related Courses. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 16041. [CrossRef]
16. Damico, A.B.; Masi, M.; Aulicino, J.M.; Vecchio, Y.; Di Pasquale, J. The Knowledge and Perception of Sustainability in Livestock
Systems: Evidence from Future Professionals in Italy and Argentina. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 16042. [CrossRef]
17. Forhad, M.A.R.; Alam, G.M.; Rashid, M.; Haque, A.; Khan, M.S. Sustainable Development in Higher Engineering Education: A
Comparative Study between Private and Public Polytechnics. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 8094. [CrossRef]
18. Yu, L.; Yan, Y.; Li, M. Does Interdisciplinary Research Lead to Higher Faculty Performance? Evidence from an Accelerated
Research University in China. Sustainability 2022 ,14, 13977. [CrossRef]
Sustainability 2023 ,15, 1315 7 of 7
Short Biography of Author
Professor Gazi Mahabubul Alam , PhD, FRSA is an internationally recognized Public Policy Analyst with a particular
focus on Higher Education. Countries of his work experience include Malaysia, Bangladesh, UK and the USA. He
works for both the institute of Higher Education and Partner for Development. Before he moved to the University Putra
Malaysia, he was a professor at the University of Malaya and East West University. Further to his postgraduate degree in
Business Administration, Alam acquired an MA in International Education and Development from the University of
Sussex and a PhD from the University of Nottingham. He received a distinguished fellowship from the Royal Society
of Arts. He has published a number of papers, and they received a notable number of citations in the Scopus and ISI
indexed. His paper on private Higher Education received the Best Citation award from the Web of Science.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
Reproduced with permission of copyright owner. Further reproduction
prohibited without permission.
