Modern Women Home Newsletter About
LIFE
Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I
Made It My Propellant
The subtle ways in which patriarchy keeps women behind
Gayathri Thiyyadimadom·Follow
Published inModern Women·11 min read·6 days ago
2.4K 36Get unlimited access to the best of Medium for less than $1/week.Become a member
Open in app
Search Write
3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 1/17
3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 2/17
Photo by Annie Spratt on Unsplash
commemoration of International Women’s Day 2025, Deutsche
Welle ran an article on the husband tax. Based on pension
insurance data in Germany, the income difference between men and women
increased by up to 20% after marriage, without including the impact of
childbirth.
The article made me reflect on my own financial journey, which was
strongly shaped by societal expectations. As a daughter of patriarchy, I was
raised to embrace femininity and home-making. Yet as a modern woman, I
also value my liberty and autonomy. The early days of my marriage were a
tension between these two forces.
When I married my husband, I worked in a technology sweatshop, making a
tenth of what he earned at BigTech. A decade later, our pay gap had
dwindled to nothing. The article made me mull over the familial and societal
norms that had influenced my financial independence.
A few months after our marriage, I returned to my in-laws’ home after work
at 8.35 pm. I worked in a company at the edge of Bangalore in those days,
and my husband’s parents lived on the other edge. The commute time with
light traffic was two hours.
I walked in hungry, exhausted from the long day, and tired from riding a
rickety bus across the gnarly traffic of Indian roads for over two hours. As
In3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 3/17
soon as I removed my shoes and crossed the living room, my mother-in-law
called for me from the kitchen. “Dear, I need your help in the kitchen. Can
you come and cut these vegetables?” She had already made dinner and
needed help with the salad.
My father-in-law, who had just picked me up, returned to watching cricket
on TV. My husband had been back at 7 p.m. and was scrunched in his
beanbag, engrossed in his sitcom. Too tired to hide my annoyance, I
gestured at him, “Hey, your mom needs help. Can you please cut some
vegetables?”
“Oh, why would you disturb him? He’s resting after a day’s work. I can cut the
fruits myself,” my mother-in-law responded.
She was a proud mom who wasn’t reluctant to politely tell people how lucky I
was to have married her son. He worked in Bigtech and I, in an obscure tech
company that offered outsourcing services to international clients, earning a
pittance of $190 a month.
It didn’t matter to her at all whether I had a job or a career. To her, my
primary role was as a wife, and my job was tolerated as long as it didn’t
interfere.
“Well, I’m also back from a day’s work, and I just walked in,” I snapped,
unable to suppress my fury at the hypocrisy.3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 4/17
My mother-in-law’s expectations weren’t unusual. Given her surroundings, I
might even consider her benevolence for letting me work. All the married
women in the family had either left their jobs or switched to part-time ones.
In her generation, she was the only woman who was employed while all of
her sisters-in-law stayed at home.
Growing up, I knew just two women in my family who were employed. One
was my mom, who also held a job, but not a career. The other was my aunt,
who had a bustling career as an agricultural officer. My aunt had a full-time
maid and a healthy mother-in-law to help with the chores. As family gossip
and politics go, the stories were never flattering for my aunt. People found
her haughty, bossy, and headstrong.
The rest of my aunts were stay-at-home moms. Their homes were spotless.
They cooked delicious meals and snacks for my cousins when they returned
from school. And they often pointed out how my mom maintained a less-
than-immaculate household because she always had to rush to work.
So, even when I graduated as an Electronics engineer with multiple job
offers, I stayed on the fence about my career aspirations. I wanted to be
independent. The thought of asking anyone for money to buy a bra was
unthinkable. But I wasn’t yet committed to a career. I was earnest about my
job but wasn’t driven enough to upskill myself. I hadn’t even updated my
resume when my husband got an offer to move to Seattle less than a year
into our marriage.
“I’m worried if I’ll find a job soon,” I mumbled one day to my in-laws.3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 5/17
“Well, it’s ok even if you don’t find a job. Just prepare yourself for a family,”
my mother-in-law responded earnestly. I’m sure she believed her words were
reassuring, while in reality, they poured a buttload of salt on my wound. Was
she giddy with joy, I wondered.
A few days later, while packing for the move, my mother-in-law told my
husband at my earshot, “I want to see you as a CEO of some company. And
once you move to Seattle, don’t let her work. This tech job isn’t meant for
women; it is time-consuming and stressful. Who will take care of the kids if
all her time goes to work? If she wants, she could be a school teacher like I
was.”
My mother-in-law is an intelligent and smart woman. She was even sharper
at 19 as a potential university topper who held the hopes of her Convent
nuns. ‘She will bring us the trophy,’ the nuns whispered. But when her dad
arranged her marriage to a man she barely knew from childhood, the nuns
begged him to wait until she graduated.
In the graduation exams that were held a week before her marriage, she
ranked fourth highest in the state. I doubt if she ever dreamt of any career,
although she still laments the lost opportunity for a PhD in Mathematics.
The 19-year-old girl married to a strange man found herself in an even
stranger land that spoke a foreign language. In less than a year, she had a
baby on her hip. When the baby no longer stayed on her hip, she learned the
language and found a job at the neighboring primary school as a teacher.
That job was what she recommended that I take.3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 6/17
“Mom, she will do whatever she wants. If she wants to work in tech or at a
school or if she wants to go to school, it’s up to her. It is her life. I won’t say
anything and won’t let you either,” responded my husband.
During our first meetup in a carefully orchestrated arranged marriage, this
had been one of my questions to him. Would he let me work? “Why should I
let you? Whether you work or not is up to you. It’s your life,” he had
responded. Later, when he knew I wanted to keep working, he encouraged
me to find a better job than the sweatshop in which I was employed.
I was a naive 24-year-old who hadn’t considered child-rearing as a choice.
Everyone around me had kids. Like the punch card in a factory, they had
their first child within two years of marriage and the second one a few years
later. The very few who didn’t were objects of social pity. So, much like my
mother-in-law, childcare was on my mind.
But I might have felt differently, and even found them wise, had my mom
made those comments. Coming from my mother-in-law — who was herself
denied career opportunities — made me furious.
I had the same qualifications as her son did. My parents had toiled hard to
educate me just as she did for her son. While she dreamed of her son
becoming a CEO, she wanted me to throw all of my life’s efforts in the gutter.
I had the same promising career as she must have had. But instead of
turning a leaf with the next generation, she seemed to be propagating the
same patriarchy that once quashed her dreams.
Her words made me furious; the fury ignited something in me. I refused to
treat my career as an afterthought. Determined to prove myself, I spent3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 7/17
weeks learning the basics of computer science and programming as if my
future depended on it. And in some ways it did.
Finally, when I was hired by the same FAANG company in Seattle where my
husband was employed, it felt like a delicious dish served ice-cold. I
suddenly discovered a self-worth that extended beyond my household.
The extent of my achievement was no longer just how spotless my home was
or how well-behaved my future kids would be. I was no longer just an
accessory, the wife of someone, whose pursuits were all anchored around
her husband’s career. When we later bought a car and a house, it wasn’t just
with my husband’s money. I became an equal in our relationship.
“Oh dear, congratulations! You were promoted so quickly. I’m so proud of
you!” my mother-in-law responded when I told her about my promotion,
which put me at the same level as my husband a year later. Without skipping
a beat, she chided my husband, “When are you getting promoted? Haven’t
you been at that level for some time?”
As I swallowed the sting of her words, I mentally made a note to never invite
her to my promotion parties. I stopped informing her of my promotions or
move to management. So, it had been a few years of no discussions about
work when she asked how our stress levels were after moving to Berlin.
I had forgotten her snide remarks and let my guard down. “Well, both of our
roles are different. Since he’s an engineer, he has very limited interactions3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 8/17
with other teams. So his stress is much lower in Berlin. I’m a manager, so I
still have a lot of stressful meetings.”
My response to my mother-in-law was only intended to highlight the
workplace differences between an individual contributor and a manager. But
with the visceral reaction of a tiger mom, she asked instantly, “You are a
manager? When did that happen? Did you get promoted? What about him?
Why isn’t he promoted? So does that mean you earn more than him?”
To say she was tactless would be an understatement. Listening to her
graceless questions felt like someone had stirred up my bile with a sharp
spike. It unleashed all the patriarchal demons that I’d long buried when I left
India several years ago. We had been married for over a decade, and she was
still fixated on her son being the more successful person between us.
At each crossroads of my career, whether it’s about finding a new job,
working towards a promotion, or being willing to tackle new challenges, my
first wave of emotion is insecurity. What if I failed? But at moments like
these, when the fury at her words transforms everything else into white
noise, I wonder — what is the worst that would happen if I tried and failed?
What made me driven was my fury against stereotypical and belittling
comments. That drive allowed me to narrow the income gap between my
husband and me. But what helped me alongside my drive was my husband’s
contentment.3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 9/17
While I received demeaning comments, the ones towards my husband were
aimed at drumming up his masculinity. When my mother-in-law shared her
hopes of him becoming a CEO or chided him for delayed promotions, she
was imposing the traditional expectations that a man who wasn’t the
primary breadwinner was emasculated. And my mother-in-law wasn’t alone
in that.
Less than four years after I was hired, I was promoted to a senior role at my
company, once again putting me on par with my husband. When my dad met
us a year later, he asked my husband, “Are you still a senior? But Gayu already
became one last year, right?”
Just like my mother-in-law, my dad implicitly imposed his expectations that
the son-in-law had to be successful and worthy of his daughter. Instead of
feeling happy that his daughter was married to a supportive husband who
didn’t hesitate to take a backseat when needed, my dad was putting his
patriarchal thumb on the scale.
My dad was also a victim of patriarchy. As the only brother to three sisters,
he was expected to marry them off with a dowry. Even when he married my
mom, an employed woman, my parents played traditional gender roles
without ever providing support to each other outside of their respective
lanes. Yet, he couldn’t recognize the irony of the situation when he expected
my husband to be more successful than me.
My husband could slow down when we escaped the toxicity of Indian
competition. He no longer had to answer people’s blatant questions on
promotions and salaries. There were no longer shameless uncles or nosy
aunties or cocky cousins who poked around at his finances. He pursued3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 10/17
work that excited him. Work became an end in itself instead of a means to
social approbation.
In the first 13 months of our marriage in India, my husband never helped me
with any chores. We had a maid who cleaned. And I did the rest while he
remained scrunched up in his beanbag. With our society oozing with
patriarchy, he hadn’t met a single man who did any chores in their
household. And just as my mother-in-law responded, society actively
discouraged men from helping at all.
When we left India and the associated comforts of a maid, it became
instantly apparent that the chores didn’t do themselves. So, he started
helping out. When I cooked, he cleaned. If I did the laundry, he took the
trash out. He took care of the investments while I filed our taxes. Together,
we could handle the onslaught of work stress without overloading each
other.
What had made me so complacent at the beginning of my career was my
patriarchal upbringing. I valued a job, money, and independence. But that
didn’t stretch far enough to also cover growth and enrichment. I didn’t have
any aspirations for a career. Patriarchy had wrecked my career even before it
took off. Later, what catalyzed the transformation was also my fury at
patriarchy. Had I not been enraged at my mother-in-law’s disparaging
comments, I doubt if I’d have the firepower for change.
But what also helped me was my husband’s companionship. Instead of
looking at me as his competition, the way the patriarchal setup expects him3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 11/17
to, he developed a supportive and symbiotic relationship in our marriage.
With the privilege of his gender, he held a majority of the cards for the
change, and he played it well.
Often, when we speak of the gender wage gap and career growth for women,
we ignore the micro-aggressions of their own families against them. We
dump most of the blame on the biases in hiring and growth. While those
external biases contribute to the problem, family expectations and cultural
norms can be just as limiting.
We need to foster a supportive environment at home where the woman’s
employment success is celebrated, and the man is encouraged to support
her without feeling threatened. Until then — 131 years from now, as Forbes
estimates —the weight of cultural expectations will continue to tip the scales.
The change begins in our homes, in the quiet battle we fight against our
ingrained biases and norms. Those battles, however personal and
minuscule, have the power to change the course of the future.
Published in Modern Women
9.5K Followers·Last published 9 hours ago
Heartfelt, down-to-earth and real stories by women for women. Support our
lovely Modern Women editing team @ ko-fi.com/modernwomenFollowPatriarchy Feminism Equality Culture Society
3/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 12/17
Written by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom
961 Followers·27 Following
Perpetually curious and forever cynical who loves to read, write and travel.Follow
Responses (36)
Ashley caceres Pagan
Makarenko Roman
4 days ago
Reflecting on the societal pressures around women’s roles, I realized how patriarchy shaped my career 
journey. From being expected to conform to traditional norms to fighting for my independence, the struggle 
has fueled my growth.
1 reply Reply
Lekha Royshe/her
3 days ago
With the privilege of his gender, he held a majority of the cards for the change,
and he played it well.
I shouldn't feel so happy just to hear about a husband being a good husband! But we all know how rare this is. 
You are so blessed 🥰
2 replies Reply
What are your thoughts?
88
923/29/25, 6:20 PM Patriarchy Burned My Career. Then I Made It My Propellant | by Gayathri Thiyyadimadom | Modern Women | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/modern-women/patriarchy-burned-my-career-then-i-made-it-my-propellant-c6288dadf396 13/17
