arXiv:2504.02662v1  [cs.LG]  3 Apr 2025Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action
Masking in Reinforcement Learning for Operations
Research
Mirko Stappert ·Bernhard Lutz ·Niklas Goby ·Dirk Neumann
April 3, 2025
Abstract Reinforcement learning (RL) provides a powerful method to ad-
dressproblemsinoperationsresearch.However,itsreal-worldap plicationoften
fails due to a lack of user acceptance and trust. A possible remedy is to pro-
vide managers with the possibility of altering the RL policy by incorpora ting
human expert knowledge. In this study, we analyze the beneﬁts an d caveats of
including human knowledge via action masking. While action masking has s o
farbeenusedtoexcludeinvalidactions,itsabilitytointegratehuman expertise
remains underexplored. Human knowledge is often encapsulated in h euristics,
which suggest reasonable,near-optimal actions in certain situatio ns. Enforcing
such actions should hence increase trust among the human workfo rce to rely
onthe model’s decisions.Yet, astrictenforcementofheuristic act ionsmayalso
restrict the policy from exploring superior actions, thereby leading to overall
lower performance. We analyze the eﬀects of action masking based on three
problems with diﬀerent characteristics, namely, paint shop schedu ling, peak
load management, and inventory management. Our ﬁndings demons trate that
incorporating human knowledge through action masking can achieve substan-
tial improvements over policies trained without action masking. In ad dition,
we ﬁnd that action masking is crucial for learning eﬀective policies in co n-
strained action spaces, where certain actions can only be perform ed a limited
number of times. Finally, we highlight the potential for suboptimal ou tcomes
when action masks are overly restrictive.
Keywords Reinforcement Learning ·Action Masking ·Human Domain
Knowledge ·Human-AI Collaboration
M. Stappert, B. Lutz, N. Goby, D. Neumann
University of Freiburg, Rempartstr. 16, 79098 Freiburg, Ge rmany
E-mail: mirko.stappert@is.uni-freiburg.de, bernhard.l utz@is.uni-freiburg.de,
niklas.goby@googlemail.com, dirk.neumann@is.uni-frei burg.de
2 Stappert et al.
1 Introduction
Reinforcement Learning (RL), a branch of machine learning, has be en success-
fully applied to solve complex problems such as the games of Chess and Go
by self-play only [34, 35]. The resulting performance even surpasse s the skills
of human experts by signiﬁcant amounts. In RL, an agent interact s with an
environment to maximize the expected reward [36]. The environmen t presents
a numerical representation of the current state to the agent, w ho then decides
upon the action to perform next. After receiving an action, the en vironment
transforms to the next state and emits a numerical reward to the agent. Ad-
vances in deep reinforcement learning (DRL) allowed researchers t o solve the
problem of the exploding state space as the mapping of states to Q- values or
action probabilities is now approximated by neural networks [23].
Over the past few years, RL has also been increasingly used as a pow erful
tool for addressing complex problems in operations research (OR) . The con-
sidered problem areas include production planning and control [14, 2 6, 43],
supply chain management and inventory management [31], machine sc hedul-
ing [20], machine maintenance planning [25], and quality control [28], am ong
many others. A major advantage of RL over traditional solution me thods (e.g.,
hand-crafted rules, heuristics, mathematical solvers) is that a t rained RL pol-
icy presents a fast and adaptive solution method. Businesses ofte n encounter
similar decision problems where the parameters follow known distribut ions
like package delivery problems in the same district [e.g., 2, 32], or seque ncing
problems with similar demand plans [e.g., 7, 8]. A RL policy can be trained
in a simulated environment and subsequently transfer knowledge fr om prior
learning experiences to unseen problem instances [37]. By contrast , the afore-
mentioned traditional solution methods are designed to solve each p roblem
instance individually without relying on prior experience. In addition, R L can
be trained to accountfor the uncertainty in real-worldoperations regardingde-
liverytimesorcustomerdemand.TheparadigmofRLhencealignspar ticularly
well with the goals of Industry 4.0, where adaptive and fast decision -making
under uncertainty are crucial [10, 42].
A major challenge of implementing RL in real-world operations is the tas k
of converting the problem presumably formulated as a mixed-intege r linear
programming (MILP) problem to a Markov decision process, including states,
actions, and reward function, that is suitable for RL policy learning [3 6]. Here,
businesses need to ensure that i) the policy generates valid solution s, and
that ii) a (near-)optimal policy of the MDP also generates (near-)o ptimal
solutions of the actual MILP problem. A common approach to guiding the RL
policy towards generating only valid solutions is given by returning the same
state and penalizing invalid actions with large negative rewards [e.g., 8, 38].
While this method generally achieves the desired outcome, the policy w ill still
perform invalid actions during the training process, thereby increa sing the
time required for learning eﬀective policies. An alternative is given by a ction
masking [e.g., 17, 22, 41], a technique in RL that constrains the action space
by limiting the set of available actions in speciﬁc states.
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 3
In addition to these technical challenges, the implementation of RL, like
other AI-based solution methods, often fails in real-world operatio ns due to a
lack of human trust and acceptance of AI decisions [11, 21]. Althoug h prob-
lems from OR are often considered as repetitive low-stake problems [24], hu-
man decision-makers still want to be able to make appropriate adjus tments,
particularly when models are wrong [12]. Therefore, a possible remed y to in-
crease trust and user acceptance is given by allowing managers to m odify the
RL policy by including human domain knowledge. Human knowledge can pr e-
scribe reasonable heuristic actions in certain states, or even prov ably optimal
actions. By ensuring that a policy incorporates human knowledge, t he work-
force should be less likely to suﬀer from algorithm aversion and instea d rely
on the model’s decisions.
In this study, we analyze the inclusion of human domain knowledge via
action masking. While traditionally used to prevent invalid actions, its p o-
tential for enforcing heuristic-suggested or provably optimal ac tions remains
unexplored. Although a RL policy could, in theory, learn the actions s uggested
by the action mask implicitly after suﬃcient training time, there is no su ch
guarantee in DRL due to the “deadly triad” of function approximatio n, boot-
strapping, and oﬀ-policy learning [36, 39]. Unlike tabular-based Q-lea rning,
where convergence to a global maximum is theoretically guaranteed [36], DRL
approximates the values of states using a neural network, introd ucing function
approximation errors. In fact, an update of the network’s weight s inﬂuences
several states instead of only a single state-action entry of the Q -value ta-
ble. In addition, policy updates depend on previous estimates (boot strapping)
and are often applied to past experience (oﬀ-policy learning), ther eby possi-
bly amplifying approximation errors. Including action masks in the tra ining
process could hence lead to considerably superior policies. At the sa me time,
action masks might also restrict the ﬂexibility of the policy, preventin g it from
reaching particular optima.
We examine the beneﬁts and caveats of action masking based on thr ee
OR problems with diﬀerent characteristics (paint shop scheduling, p eak load
management, inventory management). In particular, we outline th e eﬀects of
action masking when incorporating diﬀerent types of human knowled ge re-
garding heuristic and provably optimal actions. Our evaluation yields several
important insights. First, we ﬁnd that action masking can lead to con sider-
able increases in the performance of a trained RL policy. Enforcing h euristic
actions in a paint shop scheduling problem yields considerably better p olicies
than omitting action masking. Second, we observe that, for proble ms with
constrained action spaces, applying action masking can even be nec essary to
learn eﬀective policies. The considered peak load management only allo ws a
limited number of turn-oﬀ operations. If the policy is not guided using human
knowledge, it never learned to eﬀectively manage the load. Third, we acknowl-
edge that action masking should be applied with caution as the enforc ement
of non-optimal heuristics may also harm the resulting performance .
Our study contributes to the literature by analyzing the eﬀects of incor-
porating human domain knowledge into the training and application of R L
4 Stappert et al.
policies via action masking. Alternatives to action masking include imitat ion
learning [19] and inverse RL [1], allowing the policy to learn from observ ing
human actions. However, it may not often be possible to learn from h uman ac-
tions due to labor shortage or the problem is simply too complex for a h uman
to solve optimally. Other approaches employ reward shaping [9] or tr ansfer
learning [4]. Yet, these methods still do not allow human decision-make rs to
enforce or disallow actions in certain situations. While our study is limite d
to oﬄine learning, where a policy is pretrained in a simulated environmen t,
action masking may also help to counter the cold start problem that o ccurs
when RL is trained directly in real-world applications. Here, action mas king
can be used to prevent the execution of clearly unreasonable actio ns, as, e.g.,
reordering stock when the current inventory is full, which would res ult in con-
siderable losses. We thus hope to pave the way for future studies t hat develop
RL-based solution methods for OR problems.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 desc ribes
the methodological framework by introducing deﬁnitions of Markov decision
processes and detailing how human domain knowledge can be included v ia
actionmasking.Section3presentsthe paint shopschedulingproble m,utilizing
action masking to implement multiple heuristics. Section 4 explores the peak
load management problem with constrained actions. Section 5 examin es an
inventory management problem with stochastic demands and deliver y times.
Section 6 discusses our ﬁndings and provides an outlook on future r esearch.
2 Methodological Framework
2.1 Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement learning is a type of machine learning where an agent in teracts
with an environment to learn a policy, which speciﬁes the optimal actio n(s)
in a given state. Most real-world decision problems with known parame ters
and a ﬁnite number of actions can be transferred to a problem from RL. RL
problems are formally modeled as a Markov decision process [36].
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Markov decision process) A Markov decision process
(MDP) is a tuple ( S,A,T,R,s 0,γ) with state space S, action space A, tran-
sition function T(st+1|a,st)∈[0,1], reward function R(rt|a,st)∈[0,1],
initial state s0and discount factor γ∈[0,1].
The state st∈Sreﬂects the current situation of the environment. The
action space Adenotes all possible decision options (e.g., ordering supplies,
producing a certain item). The transition function T(st+1|a,st) speciﬁes
how the environment evolves from one state to another if a particu lar action
is performed. The transition function can be deterministic (e.g., in pr oduc-
tion scheduling problems with ﬁxed processing times) or stochastic ( e.g., in
inventory management problems with demand uncertainty). In the general
stochastic case, T(st+1|a,st) denotes the probability that st+1followsst
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 5
given that action ais performed. The reward function can also be stochastic,
so thatR(rt|a,st) speciﬁes the probability of receiving reward rtwhen ac-
tionais performed in state st. The reward function should be designed in a
way that assigns positive rewards to actions that are eﬀective in ac hieving the
overarching goal (e.g., fulﬁlling demand while minimizing storage costs) and
negative rewards to ineﬀective and sub-optimal actions.
The goal of RL is to ﬁnd a policy πθ(a|st), which maximizes the expected
total sum of discounted rewards J=Eπθ/bracketleftBig/summationtextH
t=0γtrt/bracketrightBig
. Speciﬁcally, πθ(a|st)
denotestheprobabilityofperformingaction ainstatest.Indeepreinforcement
learning,a neuralnetworkreceivesthe stateas input andoutput s aprobability
distribution over the action space. The policy parameters θdenote the weights
of the neural network, which must be learned during the training pr ocess. The
training process alternates between generating experience in the form of state-
action-reward tuples s0,a0,r0,...,s T,aT,rTby sampling from the policy and
using this experience to update the policy parameters θ.
So far, it is assumed that the action space is constant in every stat e, i.e.,
each action can alwaysbe performed. However,in real-worldapplica tions, only
a subset of all actions are admissible in each speciﬁc state. Invalid ac tions are
oftenexcludedbyintroducing A(st)asthesetofadmissibleactionsin st.While
introducing A(st) is theoretically feasible, there are practical limitations. In
fact, the policy networks employed in deep RL have a ﬁxed number of output
neurons, which cannot be adjusted dynamically during the training p rocess.
Consequently, invalid actions must be handled manually during the tra ining
process and real-world application. A common approach is to mask inv alid
actions by setting their probability to zero and sampling from the rem aining
(admissible) actions.
While action masking is an obvious step in the application of a trained
policy, it also aﬀects the training process in general. First, action ma sking
prevents the exploration of invalid actions, which increases the eﬃc iency of
the training process. Second, action masking inﬂuences learning by updating
the policy parameters according to an adjusted policy gradient [17]. Third,
action masking provides an early guideline for an untrained RL policy so that
it suﬀers lessfrom the coldstart problem,whereobviouslynon-opt imalactions
are explored in the early learning episodes. From an implementation vie w,
action masking has recently been implemented as part of the popular RL
framework “Stable Baselines3” [30] based on the implementation of [1 7].
2.2 Integrating Human Domain Knowledge via Action Masking
An action mask mis a function m:S×A→ {0,1}that reduces the set of
actions in a given state [17]. By evaluating m(a,st) for all actions, we obtain
A(st) ={a∈A|m(a,st) = 1}. (1)
Action masking can hence be used to reduce the set of admissible act ions in
reinforcement learning. In addition to excluding invalid actions, the f unction-
6 Stappert et al.
ality of action masking can be employed to include human domain knowled ge,
namely, (i) prescribe heuristic rules and, more strictly, (ii) enforce provably
optimal actions.
To exclude invalid actions, we simply set m(a,st) = 0 ifais invalid in st
[3, 17, 40]
m(a,st) =/braceleftBigg
1 ifais valid in st
0 else.(2)
To the best of our knowledge, action masking has so far only been us ed to
exclude invalid actions [e.g., 3, 17, 40]. In fact, the term “action mask ing” is
often used in combination with “invalid” like in the title “A Closer Look at I n-
valid Action Masking in Policy Gradient Algorithms” by Huang and Onta˜ n ´ on
[17]. Nevertheless, the application of action masking is equally suited t o guid-
ing the policy towards heuristic actions as to enforcing valid actions.
Prescribing Domain Heuristics
For many problems from operations research, there are certain h euristics that
can be used to restrict the action space. For instance, in an invent ory man-
agement problem, there might be knowledge that we should produce at most
twice the demand of the previous period. While producing more is still p ossi-
ble, we know that many of the products will not be sold in the next per iod.
Therefore, the heuristic suggests that the action space is restr icted to actions
that order less than twice the demand of the previous period.
Leth(st) denote the action suggested by the given heuristic in state st.
We do not strictly enforce a heuristic, as this would make the policy eq ual to
the heuristic.Instead,weaimto approximatelyprescribethe heur istic,thereby
impartingknowledgetotheRLagentbutalsogivingittheﬂexibilitytode viate
from the action suggested by the heuristic.
Prescribingaheuristicwhileprovidingthe RLpolicywithalimited amount
ofﬂexibilityis, in particular,possible ifthe actionspacehasa certains tructure
that allows us to rank actions based on a reasonable order. For inst ance, in
inventory management problems, this corresponds to the quantit y of items to
be produced in the next period. Given such an order of actions, we c an restrict
the action space to the action suggested by the heuristic and the a ctions close
toh(st) according to a given threshold M
m(a,st) =/braceleftBigg
1 if|h(st)−a|≤M
0 else.(3)
Similarly, the action space can be restricted to actions greater or s maller
than the action suggested by the heuristic
m(a,st) =/braceleftBigg
1 ifa≥h(st) (conversely a≤h(st))
0 else.(4)
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 7
Note that the speciﬁc selection of the action mask depends on the p articular
problem characteristics.
Enforcing Optimal Actions
The strictest approach of incorporating human domain knowledge is given by
enforcing provably optimal actions. An action a∗is optimal in state stif there
is an action sequence that maximizes cumulative reward in stand starts with
a∗. Due to their optimality, these actions should be enforced while disallo wing
all non-optimal actions. However, we generally know the optimal ac tions only
for a small subset of states S′⊂S. We thus set m(a∗,st) = 1 for all optimal
actionsa∗andm(a,st) = 0 for all non-optimal actions in all states st∈S′. For
all other states st∈S\S′, where optimal actions are not known, we simply
allow all actions. Taken together, we get
m(a,st) =

1 ifst∈S′andais optimal in st
0 ifst∈S′andais not optimal in st
1 ifst∈S\S′.(5)
Combining Action Masks
So far, we only discussed individual action masks. However, there m ight be
situations where several reasonable action masks should be combin ed. There-
fore, we outline two approaches to combine action masks. First, we deﬁne the
conjunction operation m1⊕m2, which only allows action ato be performed
in statest, if both masks allow a
(m1⊕m2)(a,st) =/braceleftBigg
1 ifm1(a,st) = 1 and m2(a,st) = 1
0 else.(6)
Thesecondoperation m1/ogreaterthanm2appliestwoactionmasksinasequentialway,
while assigning higher priority to m1. This approach is particularly relevant if
we want to prioritize one mask over another. m1/ogreaterthanm2thus applies m1ifm1
isactiveinst, i.e.,m1forbids at least one action, and m2otherwise
(m1/ogreaterthanm2)(a,st) =/braceleftBigg
m1(a,st) if∃a′∈A:m1(a′,st) = 0
m2(a,st) else.(7)
Policy Gradient Calculations with Action Masking
TheimplementationofactionmaskingbyHuangandOnta˜ n´ on[17]bu ildsupon
the policy gradient method. The objective of maximizing the expecte d sum
of discounted rewards J=Eπθ/bracketleftBig/summationtextH
t=0γtrt/bracketrightBig
is achieved by applying gradient
ascent optimization to the function Jwith respect to the policy parameters
8 Stappert et al.
θ. The calculation of the policy gradient is enabled by the policy gradient
theorem [36]
∇θJ=Eπθ/bracketleftBiggH/summationdisplay
t=0∇θlogπθ(a|st)Gt/bracketrightBigg
, (8)
whereGt=/summationtextH
k=0γkrt+kis the sum of discounted rewards starting at time
stept. The gradient ∇θJcan be estimated by sampling trajectories from the
policyπθand averaging the resulting values inside the expectation operator .
The action probabilities arecalculated via the softmax function from the logits
lθ(a|st) as
πθ(a|st) = [softmax( lθ(·|st))]a=exp(lθ(a|st))/summationtext
a′∈Aexp(lθ(a′|st))(9)
Given an action mask m, one proceeds as follows. First, the logits are
updated by setting actions with m(a,st) = 0 to negative inﬁnity
lm
θ(a|st) =/braceleftBigg
lθ(a|st) ifm(a,st) = 1
−∞ ifm(a,st) = 0.(10)
Second, the action probabilities are recalculated based on the adju sted logits
πm
θ(a|st) = [softmax( lm
θ(·|st))]a. (11)
The eﬀect of action masking can easily be shown on a small example. Le t the
logits of state stbe given as [ lθ(a0|st),lθ(a1|st),lθ(a2|st)] = [1,1,1]. The three
actionsa0,a1,a2are thus performed with equal probability of1
3. Given an
action mask mthat disallows action a2inst, the resulting probabilities based
on the adjusted logits are πm
θ(a0|st) =πm
θ(a1|st) =1
2andπm
θ(a2|st) = 0.
Finally, the modiﬁed policy gradient ∇m
θJis calculated using the updated
action probabilities of πm
θ(a|st)
∇m
θJ=Eπθ/bracketleftBiggH/summationdisplay
t=0∇θlogπm
θ(a|st)Gt/bracketrightBigg
. (12)
An action mask is thus not only enforced by hand but also incorporat ed
into the learning process itself by performing gradient ascent step s with an
adjusted policy gradient.
3 Problem 1: Paint Shop Scheduling
The paint shop scheduling problem deals with minimizing the number of co lor
changes in the painting procedure of the automotive manufacturin g process.
Therefore, an incoming sequence of unordered cars with assigned colors has to
be reshuﬄed using a multi-lane buﬀer system that allows storage and retrieval
operations.
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 9
color of outgo-
ing sequence
... et,1 et,2
Incoming sequence
Bt,4,1Bt,3,1Bt,2,1Bt,1,1
Bt,4,2Bt,3,2Bt,2,2Bt,1,2
Bt,4,3Bt,3,3Bt,2,3Bt,1,3
Bt,4,4Bt,3,4Bt,2,4Bt,1,4
Bt,4,5Bt,3,5Bt,2,5Bt,1,5Bt,1,5 Bt,1,4 Bt,1,3 Bt,1,2
Bt,2,5 Bt,2,4
Bt,3,5 Bt,3,4 Bt,3,3
Bt,4,5
BuﬀerFIFO queue
Storage RetrievalBt,4,5=pt⇒no color change... pt
Outgoing sequence
Fig. 1: Paint shop problem with a 4x5 buﬀer (four lanes of width ﬁve). The
system retrieves from lane 4 without causing a color change.
3.1 Environment
At each time step, the next car of the incoming sequence can be sto red in the
rightmost free position of a buﬀer lane or the rightmost car of a buﬀ er lane
can be retrieved and added to the last position of the outgoing sequ ence. The
buﬀer consists of Llanes, each of width W. The action space hence consists
of 2Lactions
APS={1,...,L/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
Retrieve
actions,L+1,...,2L/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
Store
actions}. (13)
We deﬁne the state to contain the entire buﬀer content, the next K= 5 colors
of the incoming sequence, and the current color of the outgoing se quence
sPS
t= (Bt,1,1,...,B t,L,W/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft /bracehtipupright
Buﬀer content, et,1,...,e t,K/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
K next incoming cars
of input sequence, p t/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
Current
painting color). (14)
Each value (0 ,1,...,C) is one-hot encoded and either denotes an empty posi-
tion or a color 1 ,...,C.
The reward function penalizes invalid actions and retrieve actions ca using
a color change. Invalid actions yield a reward of −10. Valid store actions and
retrieve actions that cause a color change receive no reward. How ever, valid
retrieve actions not causing a color change are assigned a positive r eward of 1.
10 Stappert et al.
RPS(a,st) =

0a≤L, Bt,a,W/\e}atio\slash= 0, Bt,a,W/\e}atio\slash=pt
(valid retrieval with color change)
1a≤L, Bt,a,W/\e}atio\slash= 0, Bt,a,W=pt
(valid retrieval without color change)
−10a≤L, Bt,a,W= 0 (invalid retrieval)
0a > L, B t,a−L,1= 0, et,1/\e}atio\slash= 0 (valid store)
−10a > L, B t,a−L,1/\e}atio\slash= 0 oret,1= 0 (invalid store)(15)
We implement the environment in the RL framework “Stable Baselines3 ” [30].
The method for policy learning is proximalpolicy optimization [PPO, 33]. T he
hyperparameters of PPO (e.g., size of policy network and PPO coeﬃc ients)
are provided in Appendix A.
3.2 Action Masking
We consider four action masks as illustrated in Figure 2. The ﬁrst act ion mask
mINVexcludes invalid actions, i.e., storing in a full lane or retrieving from an
empty lane
mINV(a,st) =

1 ifa∈ {1,...,L}andBt,a,W/\e}atio\slash= 0
1 ifa∈ {L+1,...,2L}andBt,a−L,1= 0 and et,1/\e}atio\slash= 0
0 else.(16)
Adding this action mask hence waives the need to penalize invalid action s
with negative rewards. Thus, the learning episodes can also be expe cted to be
shorter, resulting in a more eﬃcient learning process overall.
The next two action masks mGRandmFTenforce so called greedy retrieval
andfast-track . These provably optimal actions are not possible in every state.
We thus deﬁne two action masks that enforce these actions whene ver they
are possible, following the general procedure of enforcing optimal actions (see
Section 2.2). An action is called greedy retrieval if it retrieves a car from the
rightmost position of a buﬀer lane that has the same color as the cur rent color
of the outgoing sequence. The greedy retrieval mask mGR(a,st) is given as
mGR(a,st) =

1 ifa∈ {1,...,L}andpt=Bt,a,W
1 ifpt/\e}atio\slash=Bt,i,W∀i= 1,...,L
0 else.(17)
We refer to fast-track as storing a car in an empty buﬀer lane in order
to directly retrieve in the next step without causing a color change. The fast-
track mask mFTenforces store actions to empty lanes if a subsequent greedy
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 11
retrieval from this lane is possible. Otherwise, the mask allows all act ions if
fast-track is not possible
mFT(a,st) =

1 ifa∈ {L+1,...,2L}andBt,a−L,1= 0 and pt=et,1
1 ifpt/\e}atio\slash=et,1orBt,i,1/\e}atio\slash= 0,∀i= 1,...,L
0 else.(18)
color of next
incoming carcurrent color
(a) Invalid action mask: Only storing in
lane 1 or 3 and retrieving from lane 1 or 2
is allowed.color of next
incoming carcurrent color
(b) Greedy retrieval action mask: Only
retrieving from lane 1 or 2 is allowed.
color of next
incoming carcurrent color
(c) Fast track action mask: Only storing in
lane 3 is allowed.color of next
incoming carcurrent color
(d) Greedy storage action mask: Only
storing in lane 1 or 2 is allowed.
Fig. 2: Illustration of the four considered action masks.
Finally, we consider greedy storage , i.e., storing the current car from the
incoming sequence in a buﬀer lane, where the leftmost car is of the sa me color.
While we cannot prove that the heuristic is indeed optimal, it still prese nts a
reasonable heuristic. However, our action space does not posses s any structure
that follows a reasonable order as colors are uniquely diﬀerent. We t herefore
cannot follow Equation (3) or Equation (4) to approximately prescr ibe the
heuristic. Nevertheless, we still evaluate a fourth action mask mGS(a,st) that
enforces greedy storage
mGS(a,st) =

1 ifa∈ {L+1,...,2L}and∃j∈ {2,...,W}:
et,1=Bt,a−L,j,Bt,a−L,j−1= 0
1 if∄i∈ {1,...,L},j∈ {2,...,W}:
et,1=Bt,i,j,Bt,i,j−1= 0
0 else.(19)
12 Stappert et al.
Note that employing the aforementioned action masks does not solv e the
paint shop problem. In fact, greedy retrieval, greedy storage, a nd fast-track
actions are often not possible. Therefore, an eﬀective solution po licy still needs
to perform several optimal storage and retrieval actions.
So far, we considered several action masks independently. Howev er, we can
combine multiple action masks and perform our evaluations using the p roce-
dure for combining action masks deﬁned in Equation (6) and Equation (7).
We give the least priority to mGS, as we do not know whether greedy storage
is indeed optimal
–mINV⊕/parenleftbig/parenleftbig
mGR/ogreaterthanmFT/parenrightbig
/ogreaterthanmGS/parenrightbig
(all action masks)
–mINV⊕/parenleftbig
mGR/ogreaterthanmFT/parenrightbig
(invalid + greedy retrieval + fast-track)
–mINV⊕mGR(invalid + greedy retrieval)
–mINV(invalid)
2 3 4102030405060708090
Buﬀer sizeColor changes
(a) Instances with 5 colors.2 3 4 5 6 7 8102030405060708090
Buﬀer sizeColor changes
(b) Instances with 10 colors.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8102030405060708090
Buﬀer sizeColor changes
(c) Instances with 15 colors.
RL (all masks) RL (invalid + greedy retrieval + fast-track mask)
RL (invalid mask) RL (invalid + greedy retrieval mask)
RL (no mask) Greedy heuristic
Fig. 3: Evaluation results (color changes) for all RL approaches an d Greedy
heuristic.
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 13
3.3 Results
We compare the number of color changes for RL combined with all act ion
masks against the greedy heuristic. This heuristic simply applies the a ctions
suggested by greedy retrieval, fast-track, and greedy storag e. If none of these
arepossible,it performsarandompossibleaction. We varythe buﬀe r size from
2x2to 8x8and number ofcolorsas C= 5,10,15.Foreachbuﬀer size, wegener-
ate ten random incoming sequences of length 100. Each sequence is randomly
generated by sampling the color at each sequence position independ ently and
with equal probability.
TheresultsareshowninFigure3.Weﬁndthatcombiningagreaternu mber
of action masks generally decreases the number of color changes. Furthermore,
we observe that this improvement depends on the buﬀer size. For s mall 2x2
buﬀers, the beneﬁt is almost negligible, while the performance increa se is more
signiﬁcant for larger buﬀers. For 8x8 buﬀers in particular, RL with t he com-
bination of all action masks causes approximately half the number of color
changes compared to RL without any action masking.
0 2 4 6 8 1002040
Timesteps (millions)Reward
(a) No action mask.0 2 4 6 8 1002040
Timesteps (millions)Reward
(b) Invalid mask.0 2 4 6 8 1002040
Timesteps (millions)Reward
(c) Invalid + greedy
retrieval mask.
0 2 4 6 8 1002040
Timesteps (millions)Reward
(d) Invalid + greedy
retrieval + fast-track mask.0 2 4 6 8 1002040
Timesteps (millions)Reward
(e) All action masks.
Fig.4:LearningcurvesforRLmodelswith10colorsand4x4buﬀeran dvarying
action masks.
We also analyze the learning curves for a problem instance with 10 colo rs,
4x4 buﬀer, and all evaluated combinations of action masks, as show n in Fig-
14 Stappert et al.
ure 4. The plots show that the RL policies trained with more action mas ks
convergeto agreaterreward.Furthermore,the learningproce ssis considerably
fasterifmoreactionmasksareadded topolicylearning.Speciﬁcally, the model
without action masking only reaches positive rewards after 500,000 time steps.
Conversely, including the invalid mask ensures positive rewards from the ﬁrst
learning episode. Increasing the number of action masks leads to a h igher ini-
tial reward over the ﬁrst learning episodes. Therefore, action ma sking not only
leads to higher overall rewards but also mitigates the “cold start” p roblem of
an untrained RL policy.
4 Problem 2: Peak Load Management
A peak load management system (LMS) needs to decide when to turn oﬀ
electric devices with high energy consumption to keep the peak load b elow a
given threshold [13, 27]. Violations of this threshold must be avoided a t any
time point as they entail large payments to the energy supplier.
4.1 Environment
The company can turn oﬀ large energy consumers like air conditioning to
reduce the peak load. Hence, the action space consists of only two actions:
turning oﬀ air conditioning and leaving it on
ALMS={oﬀ, on}. (20)
If the air conditioning is turned oﬀ, energy consumption is considera bly re-
duced during the next time period.
We consider a time horizon of one day, while one period lasts 15 minutes .
This yields a ﬁnite time horizon of T= 24×4 = 96 time steps. However,
due to legal requirements, executing action offto turn oﬀ air conditioning
is constrained to a total of three executions per day. Therefore , actionoff
should only be performed when a high peak load occurs.
0 50 1000.000.250.500.751.001.251.50
Time stepLoad
Fig. 5: Load curve for load management system over 96 timesteps.
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 15
The system’s load curve is illustrated in Figure 5. While this curve remain s
constant throughout the study, it is initially unknown to the reinfor cement
learning policy and must be discovered during training. We do not evalu ate
diﬀerent or changing curves, as the setup with a ﬁxed curve and no isy fore-
casts already creates suﬃcient complexity for analyzing the policy’s learning
capabilities.
The state of the LMS is given by the actual consumption ct−1of the last
time period, the estimated consumption /hatwidectof the next time period, and how
often the action offcan still be performed, denoted by n
sLMS
t= (ct−1,/hatwidect,n). (21)
The estimated consumption is given by a predictive model /hatwidect=ct+εwith
normally distributed error ε∼ N(0,σ) and standard deviation σ.
The goal of the LMS problem is to keep the maximum load over all time
steps below a given threshold ζ. The RL policy’s actions to reduce the peak
load are successful if the maximum load c∗= maxT−1
t=0{ct|at= on}over all
T= 96 time steps is lower than the peak load threshold of ζ= 1.24. Therefore,
whether or not the RL policy was successful in managing the peak loa d can
only be determined at the end of the time horizon. Accordingly, we de ﬁne the
following reward function
RLMS(a,st) =

1 ift=T−1∧c∗< ζ
−1 ift=T−1∧c∗≥ζ
0 ift < T−1.(22)
4.2 Action Masking
We consider action masks that restrict the execution of action off. Given that
offcan only be performed a limited number of times due to legal constrain ts,
it seems reasonable to perform it only, if the estimate of the next pe riod/hatwidectis
suﬃciently high. Therefore, we deﬁne the mask with respect to /hatwidect, so thatoff
can only be performed if the predicted consumption is above a given t hreshold
θLMS
m(a,st) =

1 if/hatwidect≥θLMSanda= oﬀ
1 ifa= on
0 else.(23)
We consider multiple masks with varying θLMSbetween 0 and 1.20. Setting
θLMS= 0 corresponds to excluding action masking. The action masks beco me
more restrictive for higher values of θLMS.
16 Stappert et al.
4.3 Results
In our evaluation, we vary the parameters σandθLMS. For each parameter
setting, we train an RL policy for one million time steps and then report
the number of successfully solved instances out of 100 evaluations to account
for randomness in /hatwidect. The results are presented in Table 1. We present the
fractionofinstancesthatcouldbesuccessfullysolved(i.e.,thepea kloadalways
remained below the threshold ζ). We ﬁnd that RL without action masking
(see column “none”) is not able to learn an eﬀective policy, irrespect ive of
the noise level. The same results can be observed for the lower value sθLMS=
0.20,0.40,0.60.However,if θLMS≥0.80,the trained policies manageto solve
considerable fractions of the problem instances, depending on the noise level.
Note that apart from the setting with perfect load forecasts (no ise level=none,
/hatwidect=ct), we do not expect to consistently succeed due the randomness o f/hatwidect
and the general diﬃculty of the problem.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1−1−0.50
Timesteps (millions)Reward
(a)σ= 0.20 andθLMS= 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1−1−0.50
Timesteps (millions)Reward
(b)σ= 0.20 andθLMS= 0.40.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1−1−0.50
Timesteps (millions)Reward
(c)σ= 0.20 andθLMS= 0.80.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1−1−0.50
Timesteps (millions)Reward
(d)σ= 0.20 andθLMS= 1.20.
Fig. 6: Learning curves for RL models with σ= 0.20 and thresholds θLMS=
0, 0.40, 0.80, 1.20.
We also consider the learning curves for the noise level σ= 0.20 shown
in Figure 6. The RL models with θLMS= 0.00 andθLMS= 0.40 are not
able to learn an eﬀective policy. However, the RL models with θLMS= 0.80
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 17
andθLMS= 1.20 converge to an average reward of roughly −0.50 and a
slightly positive reward, respectively. Note that a reward of −0.50 corresponds
to solving 25 % of the problem instances.
Table 1: Fraction of solved instances from 100 episodes after policy learning
for one million time steps for diﬀerent action mask thresholds and nois e levels.
action mask threshold θLMS
noise level σnone 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00 1.20
none 0 % 0 % 0 % 0 % 56 % 100 % 100 %
0.10 0 % 0 % 0 % 0 % 46 % 74 % 85 %
0.20 0 % 0 % 0 % 0 % 23 % 31 % 61 %
0.30 0 % 0 % 0 % 0 % 17 % 23 % 48 %
0.40 0 % 0 % 0 % 0 % 0 % 17 % 34 %
5 Problem 3: Inventory Management
The objective of the inventory management problem is to minimize the cost
of operating an inventory [e.g., 6, 16]. At each time step, a stochast ic demand
is realized and the operating agent places an order to replenish the in ventory.
However, orders do not arrive instantly as they are delayed by the lead time,
which can be either stochastic or deterministic. The total costs of operating
the inventory are the sum of inventory and lost sales costs.1
Table 2: Overview of parameters and variables.
Parameters
c= 1 Holding cost
p∈ {1,4} Lost sales cost
N∈ {4,8} Maximum lead time: N= 4 (deterministic) or N= 8 (stochastic)
λ= 5 Mean demand of Poisson distribution
H= 5000 Time horizon
∆= 10 Discretization value of action space
Variables
It Inventory at time t
Qt,i Pipeline vector at time tand position i∈ {1,...N}
dt Demand at time t
Lt Lead time at time t: deterministic ( Lt=N) or stochastic Lt∼
Unif(1,N)
1We consider the lost sales setting instead of backlogged sys tems since it is more chal-
lenging and interesting. In fact, the so called base-stock p olicy is proven to be optimal for
backlogged systems [44].
18 Stappert et al.
In addition, there is a trade-oﬀ between minimizing losing sales and mini-
mizing inventory holding costs. One major challenge of the inventory problem
is to learn the distribution of demand and lead times. However, due to its in-
tensive study, several useful heuristics were developed in prior w orks [29, 44],
which we consider for action masking.
5.1 Environment
We adopt the RL formalization of the inventory management problem by Gi-
jsbrechts et al. [15] and adjust it to include stochastic lead times. A n overview
of all parameters and variables is provided in Table 2. The state of th e system
is given by the current inventory and the pipeline vector of incoming o rders
sIM
t= (It/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
Current
inventory, Qt,1,...Qt,N/bracehtipupleft/bracehtipdownright/bracehtipdownleft/bracehtipupright
Pipeline vector of
incoming orders). (24)
The pipeline vector has length N, denoting the maximum lead time.
The actions specify the amount of items to be reordered. We discre tize the
action space by only allowing quantities given as multiples of ∆= 10
AIM={0,∆,2∆,...,10∆}. (25)
After a certain quantity is ordered, the next incoming order is adde d to
the inventory level and the orders of the pipeline vector are shifte d one step
forward
I′
t=It+Qt,1, Q′
t,i=Qt,i+1, Qt,N= 0. (26)
Next, the demand dtis drawn from a Poisson distribution Pois( λ) and sub-
tracted from the inventory level. If the demand is greater than th e inventory
level, the inventory is set to zero and the remaining demand causes lo st sales
costs
It+1= (It+Qt,1−dt)+. (27)
Lastly, the selected action ais executed by sampling a lead time Ltfrom
the discrete uniform distribution and adding the ordered quantity ato the
pipeline vector at the respective lead time. We also evaluate determin istic
lead times with Lt=N
Lt∼Unif(1,N) (28)
Qt+1,i=/braceleftBigg
Q′
t,i+aifi=Lt
Q′
t,ielse.(29)
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 19
The reward function depends on whether or not sales are lost. If o rders
cannot be met, the agent receives a penalty proportionate to the number of
lost sales. Otherwise, holding costs are charged proportionate to the inventory
RIM(a,st) =/braceleftBigg
−c(It+Qt,1−dt) ifIt+Qt,1−dt≥0
p(It+Qt,1−dt) else.(30)
Therefore, maximizing the cumulative reward over the given time hor izonH
is equivalent to minimizing the total cost.
5.2 Action Masking
Our action masks are informed by the base stock heuristic that was frequently
used in prior studies [e.g., 5, 18, 44]. This heuristic depends on a param eter
S, thebase-stock level and it chooses the action h(st) =S−It−/summationtext
iQt,i, i.e.,
the action that sets the sum of inventory and pipeline to the base-s tock level.
The heuristic is employed independently of the lost sales costs p. However, for
p→ ∞it converges to the optimal policy [18]. Consequently, we primarily
consider smaller values of p.
We derive two action masks based on this heuristic, mINTandmTHR. The
ﬁrst action mask mINTallows actions that order a similar quantity as the
prescribed action
mINT(a,st) =/braceleftBigg
1 if|a−(S−It−/summationtext
iQt,i)| ≤∆
0 else.(31)
The second action mask mTHRuses the prescribed action h(st) as a thresh-
old and allows all actions that order at least as much
mTHR(a,st) =/braceleftBigg
1 ifa+It+/summationtext
iQt,i≥S
0 else.(32)
For a given instance of the inventory problem, the optimal base-st ock level
Scan be determined by a search algorithm. The optimal values have alr eady
beencomputedformanyrelevantsituationsandcanbefoundinsev eralsources
[e.g., 18]. In our setting, the optimal values are given as S= 18 for p= 1 and
S= 25 for p= 4.
5.3 Results
Wecomparetheaverageinventorycostforthethreeactionmask smINT,mTHR
and no action mask. We consider the scenariosof deterministic/sto chastic lead
times and lost sales costs of p= 1 and p= 4 with ﬁxed holding costs c= 1.
For each scenario, we train an RL policy for 1 million time steps and aver age
20 Stappert et al.
its inventory cost over 100 evaluations. The time horizon for each e valuation
is set to H= 5000.
Table3providestheresults.For p= 1,weobservethattheRLpolicieswith
no actionmaskingactually providethe lowestaverageinventorycos t. However,
if the lost sales costs increase, the RL policies with action masking yield lower
inventory costs. This ﬁnding holds for both deterministic and stoch astic lead
times. In summary, we note that action masking using heuristics gen erally
improves the resulting performances. Yet, as the base-stock level heuristic is
not optimal for p= 1, we observe that omitting action masking leads to lower
inventory costs.
Table 3: Results of inventory problem.
Lost sales cost pLead time Action mask Avg. costs
1 Deterministic none 2.112
1 Deterministic mINT2.186
1 Deterministic mTHR2.198
1 Stochastic none 3.266
1 Stochastic mINT3.560
1 Stochastic mTHR3.791
4 Deterministic none 5.330
4 Deterministic mINT5.058
4 Deterministic mTHR5.155
4 Stochastic none 8.311
4 Stochastic mINT7.933
4 Stochastic mTHR8.105
We also present the learning curves for stochastic lead times in Figur e 7.
The ﬁrst row shows models with low lost sales cost ( p= 1). We observe that
the RL model without action masking smoothly reaches the highest r eward,
outperformingthemodelswithactionmask.Forthehigherlostsales costs(p=
4) shown in the second row, we ﬁnd the opposite results, namely, th at action
masking is necessary to achieve a reward of roughly −40.000, corresponding
to an average inventory cost of eight.
Note that the learning curves for the inventory optimization proble m tend
to be much smoother compared to those for the paint shop and load manage-
ment problems. This can be attributed to the more predictable dyna mics of
the inventory optimization problem. In the load management problem , only a
single non-zerorewardis given at the end ofeach episode, and its va lue reﬂects
the cumulative eﬀect of all previous actions. A small change in any ac tion can
have a signiﬁcant impact on the ﬁnal reward, leading to more ﬂuctua tions in
the reward. Similarly, in the paint shop problem, individual actions can have
persistent long-term eﬀects; for example, a poor storage opera tion can block a
buﬀer lane for many timesteps with detrimental eﬀects on subsequ ent actions.
By contrast, in the inventory management problem, the total rew ard is more
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 21
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1-40-20
Timesteps (millions)Reward/parenleftbig
×103/parenrightbig
(a)p= 1, no mask.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1-40-20
Timesteps (millions)Reward/parenleftbig×103/parenrightbig
(b)p= 1 and mTHR.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1-40-20
Timesteps (millions)Reward/parenleftbig×103/parenrightbig
(c)p= 1 and mINT.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1-40
-60
Timesteps (millions)Reward/parenleftbig×103/parenrightbig
(d)p= 4, no mask.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1-40
-60
Timesteps (millions)Reward/parenleftbig
×103/parenrightbig
(e)p= 4 and mTHR.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1-40
-60
Timesteps (millions)Reward/parenleftbig
×103/parenrightbig
(f)p= 4 and mINT.
Fig. 7: Learning curves for RL models with stochastic lead times, p= 1 (ﬁrst
row),p= 4 (second row).
gradually aﬀected by individual actions. For instance, ordering 70 u nits in-
stead of 60 causes only a small change to the total reward over th e entire time
horizon, leading to a smoother reward function and, consequently , smoother
learning curves.
6 Conclusion
We proposed the integration of human domain knowledge into reinfor cement
learning via action masking. Based on three OR problems, we showed t hat in
addition to excluding invalid actions, action masking can also be employe d to
(i) prescribe heuristics and (ii) enforce provably optimal actions. I n particular,
our results suggest that the training process and the resulting pe rformance of
the trained policy can be improved considerably. Given that DRL does not
provide any guarantees regarding convergence to a global optimu m [36], em-
ployingactionmaskingtoenforceprovablyoptimalactionsincertain statesled
to considerable performance increases. For problems with constr ained action
spaces, action masking can even be necessary to learn eﬀective po licies that
manageto solvea problem.Actionmaskingcanthus help todisallowunr eason-
able executions of the constrained action. As such, action masking presents an
important ingredient for a successful implementation of RL in real-w orld op-
erations. However, at the same time, we found that action masking might also
decrease the performance if prescribing overly strict non-optima l heuristics,
which prevent the learning of optimal policies.
22 Stappert et al.
Our study adds to the literature that focuses on solving OR problem s
with RL. Speciﬁcally, we propose action masking as a method to integr ate
human domain knowledge to increase trust and the resulting solution qual-
ity. So far, related works employed action masking to disallow invalid ac tions
[e.g., 17, 22, 41]. We go beyond excluding invalid actions by guiding the po licy
towards near-optimal heuristic actions. From a theoretical view, a suﬃcient
amount of training time should yield the same policy despite the lack of a c-
tion masking. However, we found considerable diﬀerences in the solu tion qual-
ity between policies with and without action masking, even after millions of
timesteps. While a randomly initialized policy ﬁrst needs to learn the bas ic
rules of the environment, action masking led to superior performan ce partic-
ularly in the early stages of learning. Action masking ensures that th e policy
follows human domain knowledge from the ﬁrst learning episode. Altho ugh
problemsfromdaily operationsareoften consideredaslow-staked ecisionprob-
lems [24], ensuring that AI models always operate as intended increas es trust
and user acceptance, which ultimately results in greater usage and reliance on
the model [21].
An alternative to action masking is given by reward shaping [9]. Here, t he
reward function can be deﬁned in a way that guides the RL policy towa rds
heuristic actions. Reward shaping is less restrictive regarding how t he policy
evolves. An action receiving a large positive reward might not even be chosen
if the policy never explores it. In addition, the higher reward for an a ction
might not reach an overall higher cumulative reward over the entire learning
episode.Conversely,actionmaskingdirectlyenforcesthesugges tedaction(s)in
speciﬁc states, which restricts the policy from exploring potential alternatives.
We therefore encourage future studies to look deeper into the pr os and cons
of action masking vs. reward shaping.
The use of action masks can enhance the safety and trustworthin ess of
RL systems in real-world applications. By constraining the agent’s ac tions to
safe and permissible options, organizations can ensure that the sy stem oper-
ates within predeﬁned boundaries, reducing the risk of unintended or harmful
behaviors [24]. This is particularly important in safety-critical doma ins, such
as autonomous driving, banking, and healthcare, where trustwor thiness and
reliability are paramount. In addition, employing action masking can lea d to
faster convergence and reduced training times, ultimately resultin g in quicker
implementation and deployment of RL-based solutions.
Furthermore, businesses can rely on action masking for post hoc p olicy
adjustments. If human experts identify non-optimal actions tha t should be
included or excluded, they simply need to deﬁne a novel action mask a nd
apply it to a trained policy instead of retraining the policy. Businesses could
also deﬁne separate action masks for diﬀerent departments, pro ducts, and
factories, further increasing the utility of a trained RL policy.
Action masking presents a promising approach to embedding heurist ics
within RL systems. However, it is not without limitations. One signiﬁcan t
challenge arises when the heuristics themselves are imperfect or inc omplete.
In such cases, action masks may inadvertently constrain the agen t too much,
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 23
preventing it from exploring potentially better actions outside the s cope of
the provided heuristics. This can lead to suboptimal performance a s we saw
in the case of the base stock policy for inventory optimization with low lost
sales costs. Future research should explore methods to dynamica lly adjust or
reﬁne action masks as the agent learns, ensuring that the masks d o not overly
restrict the agent’s exploration while still guiding it eﬀectively.
Furthermore, the comparison between action masking and traditio nal re-
ward shaping highlights another area for further investigation. Wh ile action
masking provides a direct way to control the agent’s behavior by limit ing
its action space, reward shaping inﬂuences the learning process ind irectly by
modifying the reward signal. Each method has its strengths and wea knesses;
action masking may provide faster convergence but at the potent ial cost of
ﬂexibility, whereas reward shaping allows for more nuanced guidance but can
be more challenging to design eﬀectively. Future research could foc us on hy-
brid approaches that combine action masking with other RL enhance ments,
such as exploration rewards or traditional reward shaping techniq ues. Such a
dual approach could leverage the strengths of both methods, pr omoting ro-
bust learning by both restricting irrelevant actions and encouragin g desirable
behaviors through carefully designed rewardsignals. This could help overcome
some of the limitations associated with each method when applied in isola tion,
ultimately leading to more versatile and eﬀective RL systems.
24 Stappert et al.
Declaration of interests: The authorsdeclarethat they havenoknown com-
peting ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could hav e appeared
to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
References
1. Arora S, Doshi P (2021) A survey of inverse reinforcement lear ning: Chal-
lenges, methods and progress. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 297:103,500
2. Bengio Y, Lodi A, Prouvost A (2021) Machine learning for combina to-
rial optimization: A methodological tour d’horizon. European Journ al of
Operational Research 290:405–421
3. Berner C, Brockman G, Chan B, Cheung V, Debiak P, Denni-
son C, Farhi D, Fischer Q, Hashme S, Hesse C, et al. (2019)
Dota 2 with large scale deep reinforcement learning. Available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.06680
4. Bianchi RA, Celiberto Jr LA, Santos PE, Matsuura JP, De Mantar as RL
(2015) Transferring knowledge as heuristics in reinforcement lear ning: A
case-based approach. Artiﬁcial Intelligence 226:102–121
5. Bijvank M, Vis IF (2011) Lost-salesinventory theory: A review. European
Journal of Operational Research 215:1–13
6. BouteRN, GijsbrechtsJ,VanJaarsveldW, VanvuchelenN(2022 )Deep re-
inforcement learning for inventory control: A roadmap. European Journal
of Operational Research 298:401–412
7. Brammer J, Lutz B, Neumann D (2022) Permutation ﬂow shop sch edul-
ing with multiple lines and demand plans using reinforcement learning.
European Journal of Operational Research 299:75–86
8. Brammer J, Lutz B, Neumann D (2022) Stochastic mixed model se quenc-
ing with multiple stations using reinforcement learning and probability
quantiles. OR Spectrum 44:29–56
9. Cheng CA, Kolobov A, Swaminathan A (2021) Heuristic-guided rein -
forcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing S ystems
34:13,550–13,563
10. Choi TM, Kumar S, Yue X, Chan HL (2022) Disruptive technologie s and
operations management in the industry 4.0 era and beyond. Produc tion
and Operations Management 31:9–31
11. Dietvorst BJ, Simmons JP, Massey C (2015) Algorithm aversion: people
erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err. Journal of Ex perimen-
tal Psychology: General 144:114–126
12. Dietvorst BJ, Simmons JP, Massey C (2018) Overcoming algorith m aver-
sion:Peoplewilluseimperfectalgorithmsiftheycan(evenslightly)mo dify
them. Management Science 64:1155–1170
13. DongC, NgCT,ChengT (2017)Electricitytime-of-usetariﬀwith stochas-
tic demand. Production and Operations Management 26:64–79
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 25
14. Esteso A, Peidro D, Mula J, D´ ıaz-Madro˜ nero M (2023) Reinfor cement
learningapplied toproductionplanning andcontrol. InternationalJ ournal
of Production Research 61:5772–5789
15. Gijsbrechts J, Boute RN, Van Mieghem JA, Zhang DJ (2022) Can deep
reinforcement learning improve inventory management? Performa nce on
lost sales, dual-sourcing, and multi-echelon problems. Manufactur ing &
Service Operations Management 24:1349–1368
16. Heger J, Klein R (2024) Assortment optimization: A systematic lit erature
review. OR Spectrum 46:1099–1161
17. Huang S, Onta˜ n´ on S (2022) A closer look at invalid action maskin g in
policy gradient algorithms. In: The International FLAIRS Confere nce
Proceedings, vol. 35
18. Huh WT, Janakiraman G, Muckstadt JA, Rusmevichientong P (20 09)
Asymptotic optimality of order-up-to policies in lost sales inventory s ys-
tems. Management Science 55:404–420
19. Hussein A, Gaber MM, Elyan E, Jayne C (2017) Imitation learning: A
survey of learning methods. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 50:1–3 5
20. Kayhan BM, Yildiz G (2023) Reinforcement learning applications to ma-
chine scheduling problems: A comprehensive literature review. Jour nal of
Intelligent Manufacturing 34:905–929
21. Lehmann CA, Haubitz CB, F¨ ugener A, Thonemann UW (2022) Th e risk
of algorithm transparency: How algorithm complexity drives the eﬀe cts on
the use of advice. Production and Operations Management 31:3419 –3434
22. Luo PC, Xiong HQ, ZhangBW, PengJY, Xiong ZF (2022) Multi-reso urce
constrained dynamic workshop scheduling based on proximal policy o pti-
misation. International Journal of Production Research 60:5937 –5955
23. Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu AA, Veness J, Bellemare MG,
Graves A, Riedmiller M, Fidjeland AK, Ostrovski G, et al. (2015) Huma n-
LevelControlThroughDeepReinforcementLearning. Nature51 8:529–533
24. Notz PM, Pibernik R (2024) Explainable subgradient tree boostin g for
prescriptive analytics in operations management. European Journ al of
Operational Research 312:1119–1133
25. Ogunfowora O, Najjaran H (2023) Reinforcement and deep re inforcement
learning-based solutions for machine maintenance planning, schedu ling
policies, and optimization. Journal of Manufacturing Systems 70:24 4–263
26. PanzerM, BenderB (2022)Deep reinforcementlearningin prod uction sys-
tems: A systematic literature review. International Journal of P roduction
Research 60:4316–4341
27. Papier F (2016) Managing electricity peak loads in make-to-stoc k manu-
facturing lines. Production and Operations Management 25:1709–1 726
28. Paraschos PD, Koulouriotis DE (2024) Learning-based produc tion, main-
tenance,and qualityoptimizationin smartmanufacturingsystems: Aliter-
ature review and trends. Computers & Industrial Engineering 198 :110,656
29. Perera SC, Sethi SP (2023) A survey of stochastic inventory models with
ﬁxedcosts:Optimalityof(s,S)and(s,S)-typepolicies—discrete- timecase.
Production and Operations Management 32:131–153
26 Stappert et al.
30. Raﬃn A, Hill A, Gleave A, Kanervisto A, Ernestus M, Dormann N (2 021)
Stable-baselines3: Reliable reinforcement learning implementations. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research 22:1–8
31. Rolf B, Jackson I, M¨ uller M, Lang S, Reggelin T, Ivanov D (2023) A
review on reinforcement learning algorithms and applications in supply
chainmanagement. InternationalJournalofProductionResear ch61:7151–
7179
32. Schiewe P, Stinzend¨ orfer M (2024) Optimizing combined tours: The truck-
and-cargo-bike case. OR Spectrum 46:545–587
33. Schulman J, Wolski F, Dhariwal P, Radford A, Klimov O
(2017) Proximal policy optimization algorithms. Available at
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1707.06347
34. SilverD, Hubert T, SchrittwieserJ, AntonoglouI, LaiM, Guez A , Lanctot
M, Sifre L, Kumaran D, Graepel T, et al. (2018) A general reinforc ement
learning algorithm that masters Chess, Shogi, and Go through self- play.
Science 362:1140–1144
35. Silver D, Schrittwieser J, Simonyan K, Antonoglou I, Huang A, Gu ez A,
Hubert T, Baker L, Lai M, Bolton A, et al. (2017) Mastering the gam e of
Go without human knowledge. Nature 550:354–359
36. Sutton RS, Barto AG, et al. (2018) Introduction to Reinforce ment Learn-
ing (2nd edition). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA
37. Taylor ME, Stone P (2009) Transfer learning for reinforcemen t learning
domains: A survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research 10:1633 –1685
38. ValetA,Altenm¨ ullerT,WaschneckB,MayMC,KuhnleA,LanzaG( 2022)
Opportunistic maintenance scheduling with deep reinforcement lear ning.
Journal of Manufacturing Systems 64:518–534
39. Van Hasselt H, Doron Y, Strub F, Hessel M, Sonnerat N, Moday il J (2018)
Deepreinforcementlearningandthedeadlytriad. ArXivpreprintav ailable
athttps://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02648
40. Vinyals O, Ewalds T, Bartunov S, Georgiev P, Vezhnevets AS, Ye o
M, Makhzani A, K¨ uttler H, Agapiou J, Schrittwieser J, et al. (2017 )
Starcraft ii: A new challenge for reinforcement learning. Available at
https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.04782
41. Wang X, Zhang L, Liu Y, Laili Y (2024) An improved deep reinforce ment
learning-based scheduling approach for dynamic task scheduling in c loud
manufacturing. International Journal of Production Research 62:4014–
4030
42. Weckenborg C, Schumacher P, Thies C, Spengler TS (2024) Flex ibility in
manufacturing system design: A review of recent approaches fro m opera-
tions research. European journal of operational research 315 :413–441
43. Zhang X, Zhu GY (2024) A literature review of reinforcement lea rning
methods applied to job-shop scheduling problems. Computers & Ope ra-
tions Research p. 106929
44. Zipkin P (2008) Old and new methods for lost-sales inventory sys tems.
Operations Research 56:1256–1263
Integrating Human Knowledge Through Action Masking in RL 27
Appendix A: Details on Implementation and Hyperparameters
Table A.1 presents the hyperparameter settings of PPO for all stu dies. We
implement the PPO algorithm from the RL framework “Stable Baselines 3”
version 1.5.0 [30]. All parameters are set to their default values.
Table A.1: Hyperparameters of proximal policy optimization.
Hyperparameter Value
Size of hidden layer 64
Number of hidden layers 2
Horizon 2048
Clipping parameter ( ε) 0.20
State-value estimate coeﬃcient ( c1) 0.50
Entropy coeﬃcient ( c2) 0.00
Number of epochs 10
Adam stepsize 0.0003
Minibatch size 64
Discount factor ( γ) 0.99
Generalized advantage estimate (GAE) parameter ( λ) 0.95
