Learning and criticality in a self-organizing model of
connectome growth
Michelle T. Cirunay1,*, Rene C. Batac2,3, and G ´eza ´Odor1
1Institute of Technical Physics and Materials Science, HUN-REN Centre for Energy Research, P .O. Box 49, H-1525,
Budapest, H-1525, Hungary
2Department of Physics, College of Science, De La Salle University, 2401 Taft Ave., Manila, 0922, Philippines
3Dr. Andrew L. Tan Data Science Institute, De La Salle University, 2401 Taft Ave., Manila, 0922, Philippines
*michelle.cirunay@ek.hun-ren.hu
The exploration of brain networks has reached an important milestone as relatively large and reliable information has
been gathered for connectomes of different species. Analyses of connectome data sets reveal that the structural
length1and the distributions of in- and out-node strengths2,3follow heavy-tailed lognormal statistics, while the
functional network properties exhibit powerlaw tails4, suggesting that the brain operates close to a critical point
where computational capabilities5and sensitivity to stimulus is optimal6. Because these universal network features
emerge from bottom-up (self-)organization, one can pose the question of whether they can be modeled via a common
framework, particularly through the lens of criticality of statistical physical systems. Here, we simultaneously
reproduce the powerlaw statistics of connectome edge weights and the lognormal distributions of node strengths
from an avalanche-type model with learning that operates on baseline networks that mimic the neuronal circuitry. We
observe that the avalanches created by a sandpile-like model7on simulated neurons connected by a hierarchical
modular network (HMN)8,9produce robust powerlaw avalanche size distributions with critical exponents of 3/2
characteristic of neuronal systems10. Introducing Hebbian learning, wherein neurons that ‘fire together, wire together,’
recovers the powerlaw distribution of edge weights and the lognormal distributions of node degrees, comparable
to those obtained from connectome data3. Our results strengthen the notion of a critical brain, one whose local
interactions drive connectivity and learning without a need for external intervention and precise tuning11.
The association between form and function in the complex neuronal circuitry continues to be an open and exciting problem,
one that is now being pursued with the aid of empirical data on actual connectome networks. Recently, global weight
distributions of the human white matter12and neuronal-level fruit fly brain13have been found to exhibit powerlaw (PL) tails.
A more detailed network analysis, involving more full or partial brain networks3has strengthened this PL tail observation
for global weights, in contrast with node strength (degree) distributions, which can be best fitted by heavy-tailed, typically
lognormal (LN) functions. The existence of robust PL statistics raises the possibility of analyzing these systems from the lens
of statistical physics, particularly through a criticality framework.
The global weight distribution can be the consequence of the neuron dynamics via the Hebbian learning of long-term
synaptic (LTS) mechanism. In a previous work3, a possible scaling argument has been proposed to describe the observed
connectome weight PL distribution via the “firing together and wiring together” mechanism. In particular, the universally
observed exponent 3 decay can be derived by a relation to the mean-field criticality of simple models of statistical physics. Here,
as a plausible framework for modeling the observed universal statistics, we provide a critical system, a self-organized one, which
has extensively been used as a toy model to support brain criticality. The brain criticality hypothesis4, 14has been observed in
experiments10, 15and supported by many theoretical models16. From a discrete modeling perspective, critical behavior is often
associated with the avalanche-like dynamics characteristic of self-organized criticality (SOC)7, 17, 18, the paradigm model of
which is the sandpile. In a sandpile model, local relaxations lead to cascades of nearest-neighbor redistributions. Previous
models replicated empirical time signatures of neuronal activity using nearest-neighbor avalanches similar to the sandpile
operating in lattice and small-world networks19.
Many of the previous approaches, however, operate on lattice geometries that are too simplified to mimic the aforementioned
complexity of neural circuitry20. For one, neural connections are inherently directed and weighted, precluding the use of
undirected regular networks commonly used in sandpile model implementations. More importantly, brain networks are
known to exhibit hierarchical structures with modular effective functioning units21. Kaiser and Hilgetag8utilized this fact to
create hierarchical modular networks (HMNs) with small-world characteristics embedded in 2d substrates that represent brain
connectivity on a large/mesoscopic scale, where the nodes represent cortical columns rather than individual neurons. They used
1arXiv:2504.01565v1  [physics.bio-ph]  2 Apr 2025
this model to investigate topological effects on limited-sustained activity. Ódor et. al.9used a variant of this and showed that
Griffiths Phases (GP)22may emerge by a simple threshold model dynamics. The fact that pure topological inhomogeneity
may result in GP in finite-dimensional networks23, or in Griffiths effects24in infinite dimensions, was confirmed by brain
experiments15. GP is suggested be a good candidate mechanism for explaining working memory in the brain25. Additionally,
GP provides an alternative mechanistic explanation for dynamical critical-like behavior observed without fine-tuning, consistent
with the criticality hypothesis9, 12, 26, 27.
In addition to the use of more realistic network architectures, the models should also incorporate learning, the strengthening
of network links through correlated neuronal activity and the corresponding weakening of unused pathways. Learning in critical
state brain models was patterned after neuroscience modeling of empirical connectomes28. However, in these early approaches,
the role of random weakening mechanisms in learning and system criticality has not yet been studied in detail. Recent results
on connectome database analysis3and magnetoencephalography and tractography suggest that this is the driving mechanism
for the complexity of real connectomes29.
To address these research gaps, we revisit here the avalanche perspective on cortical dynamics and introduce refinements to
the sandpile-based model of neural criticality. First, we use graph-dimension-controllable HMN structures for implementation,
which are denser than the commonly used random networks in literature and are deemed to be more representative of the
actual structure and dynamics of the brain9. Secondly, while keeping the avalanche dynamics similar to the sandpile rules,
we introduce different rates of activation and inhibition mechanisms in the Hebbian learning. In particular, the rate of new
link creation is deemed to be instantaneous for all sites reaching criticality over a single avalanche cycle; on the other hand,
random weakenings of unused pathways are gradual, following an exponential decay over time. By modifying the proposed
model’s update rules to incorporate Hebbian learning, we show by extensive simulations that it can generate global PL weight
distributions and LN ones for the degrees and node strengths. We provide finite-size scaling collapses and provide numerical
evidence for this. We also investigate the effect of initial conditions by running simulations on HMN networks with different
graph dimensions. Finally, to test the validity of the model, we provide comparisons with the actual edge weight distributions
found in empirical connectome data.
Results
In the following, we present the results of extensive simulations that run the locally conservative sandpile model with Hebbian
learning on hierarchical modular networks (HMNs) where each node represents a neuron. For the baseline HMNs used, the
number of nodes N=4lmax, are varied, with lmax={5,6,7,8}. The edges are weighted and directed, simulating synaptic
connectivity. The average edge count per node, ⟨k0⟩, is the total number of edges E0of the initial HMN divided by the number
of nodes N. We tested for ⟨k0⟩ ≃ { 7.6,11.8,13.9}, and most of the results presented are for ⟨k0⟩=11.8[see Supplementary
Information: Effect of Initial Link Density for details]. Finally, we also looked at the effect of long-range connectivity: Starting
from a single connected two-dimensional base lattice, long-range links are added among levels of the HMN whose probabilities
of connectivity decay with Euclidean distance via p(R)∼ ⟨k0⟩R−s; here, we considered cases where s=3ands=4[see
Methods: Hierarchical Modular Networks (HMNs)]. Dynamical activity is then introduced into the baseline HMN through a
locally conservative sandpile model [Methods: Sandpile Model Implementation], while network evolution is imposed through
correlated link creation and random link weakening/removal [Methods: Hebbian Learning]. The state of the system is analyzed
at the instant when the network achieves maximal connectivity [Supplementary Information: Network Evolution]. Analysis of
the resulting avalanches and the network connectivity reveal strong indications of critical behavior, reminiscent of those found
in actual connectomes.
Avalanche size distributions
The first indication of critical behavior is the emergence of PL distributions of characteristic avalanche sizes similar to those
obtained for the non-adaptive SOC models like the original sandpile model7and other models with static rules in undirected
lattice geometries30, 31. For the specific case of neuronal criticality, the PL exponents of 3/2obtained from experiments11are
recovered “for the high-dimensional, directed mean-field conserved sandpile universality class"32, 33with the upper critical
dimension dc=3. Here, we report robust PL distributions that span several orders of magnitude for various measures of
avalanche sizes, one of which manifests the 3 /2 exponent of neuronal criticality.
In the implementation used here, individual sites contain continuous-valued “grains”, which, for simplicity, reach a threshold
value at unity. Continuous driving of the grid at random node sites results in avalanches when the threshold value is reached
or exceeded at random node locations. We measure the extent of the avalanche in the network of nodes using three metrics.
One is the simple count of the nodes that changed state during an avalanche event; in keeping with the literature on grid
implementations, we call it the area,A. Another is the count of the actual number of individual toppling and receiving events,
in which nodes can be counted more than once based on their repeated participation in the entire avalanche; we call this the
activation ,V, consistent with other previous works34. Finally, we also investigate the toppled sites count C, which is the
2/18
Figure 1. Avalanche size distributions . (a) The area distributions show powerlaw tails that follow P(A)∼A−τA, where
τA=1.55(4). The tails of the distribution show increased occurrences of A=N, making the tails significantly deviate from the
initial decaying trend. (b) The activation distributions follow P(V)∼V−τV, where τV=1.38(3). (c) The toppled sites count
distributions follow P(C)∼C−τC, where τC=1.50(2)consistent with the mean field universality scaling and electrode
experimental results in the human brain10. Initial HMN graph parameters are displayed by the legends.
number of sites that exceeded their threshold states and toppled, redistributing the “grains” to their direct outward connections.
This metric is inspired by the actual measurements done in neural connections, which only account for the total number of
active nodes within an avalanche including multiple activations of the same nodes35, 36. The A,V, and Cmeasures of avalanche
magnitudes exhibit PL tails, indicating that they are just different characterizations of the same critical behavior operating
within the network [see Supplementary Information: Scaling Behavior of Avalanche Metrics for details].
Interestingly, despite the highly dynamic nature of the rules, specifically those that govern the network evolution, we found
very robust PL tails for areas, P(A), activations, P(V), and toppled sites, P(C). Fig. 1(a) show the tails of the area distributions
that follow a linear trend on a double logarithmic scale: starting from the modal value ˆA=10, the tails obey a PL distribution
P(A)∼A−τA, where τA=1.55(4). It should be noted that the tails of P(A)show spikes due to the repeated occurrences of
avalanches of size A=N(i.e. spreading to all nodes), especially for very many iterations (an iteration refers to one instance of
dropping a grain of sand), when the network becomes very densely connected. This highlights the limitations of the measure A
in capturing the extent of the activity in the network: the network of nodes can manifest spatiotemporal activities several orders
of magnitude greater than the node count N, which Acannot measure.
As such, the dynamical features of the network are better captured by the activation V, which is the spatiotemporal measure
of each node’s participation (both as a receiving or a toppling site) in the avalanche. The distribution of site activations, Fig. 1(b),
follow PL tails P(V)∼V−τV, with τV=1.38(3), starting from the mode ˆV=10. Unlike the area A, the activation Vextends
beyond the physical limit of the number of nodes in the network, capturing individual toppling and redistribution of “grains”
within the network. It is worth noting that the tails of the P(V)distributions show a tapering at the tails, indicating the expected
finite-size limitations on the activity of the network. The decrease in the powerlaw slope for P(V)can be explained by the
increased incidence of larger avalanches caused by the reactivations of ancestor nodes10.
Finally, the distribution of toppled site counts, Fig. 1(c), show PL tails that obey P(C)∼C−τC, with τC=1.50(2). By
counting only the sites that toppled during an avalanche event, regardless of whether they are initially directly connected or not,
the model recovers similar statistics as those obtained from the local field potential measurements of electrodes on brain slices,
replicating the well-known critical PL exponents of 3/2 for the neuronal avalanches as reported by Beggs and Plenz10and in
other brain experiments37. Also, this avalanche universality occurs in directed models of firms33among others.
It is important to note that the obtained PL distributions are not sensitive to the sizes of the original HMN, N=4lmax, for the
broad range of lmax={5,6,7,8}considered. Furthermore, there is very little effect of the other control parameters of the HMN.
This suggests a mean-field-type of critical behavior, despite the variability of the network architecture. An explanation for this
could be related to the rapid long-range interactions generated by the avalanches. We will show further evidence of scaling
behavior via finite-size scaling.
Edge weight distributions
Unlike previous sandpile-based implementations that preserve the structure of the grid, the instantaneous link creation during
avalanche events and the gradual decay of randomly selected links during stasis times (i.e. time instances with no avalanche
events) produces a dynamic network that is deemed to better represent the interacting functional brain units. The state of the
network at its peak connectivity, that is, when it has reached the maximum number of links, can be described by the distribution
of edge weights wi j, displayed in Fig. 2.
3/18
Figure 2. Global edge weight distributions. [Top panels: Results for various lmaxandsvalues for ⟨k0⟩=11.8;Bottom panels:
Time evolution of the representative case lmax=8,s=4,⟨k0⟩=11.8.] (a) The P(wi j)show two PL regimes that are better
observed upon finite-size scaling: (b) the s=3distributions collapse into a universal curve upon rescaling by N1.09; and (c) for
thes=4 distributions, N0.474. For both (b) and (c), the rescaled curves show an intermediate regime with a gentle PL trend
P(wij)∼w−δ
i j, where δ=0.57(4), and a tail with steeper PL, P(wij)∼w−α
i j, where α=2.91(5). (d) For the case of lmax=8,
s=4, representative snapshots of the network for various instances of time show the gradual evolution of the P(wi j),
particularly the evolution of the PL regimes. (e) A detailed examination of the first 90 million iterations show the strong
approach towards steeper tails P(wi j)∼w−α
i j, with⟨α⟩=2.91; the PL trend with this exponent is shown by the gray guides to
the eye in (b) and (c).
For a sufficiently large number of iterations and before the network becomes fragmented, Fig. 2(a) shows the general trends
in the distribution of wi jforlmax={5,6,7,8}ands={3,4}, of the original HMNs with an average edge count per node
⟨k0⟩=11.8. The regime of the smallest edge weights, appearing as unimodal bumps for the smallest wi j, is deemed to be an
artifact of the original HMN construction. In particular, it is worth noting that these peaks are close to the tolerance value
wtol=10−2, which is the threshold for pruning links out of the network. These features of the distributions are changed, if
not completely lost, upon the temporal evolution of the network. What follows is a “middle” region, which, especially for the
largest baseline HMNs, show a slow PL decay. Above a certain knee value of wi j, the distributions cross over to steep PL
tails, with a common decay trend. These regimes, unlike those for smaller wi j, are robust and continue to manifest for longer
iteration times.
In Fig. 2(b) and (c), the results for s=3ands=4, respectively, show data collapses upon finite-size scaling (FSS). In
Fig. 2(b), the s=3data shows data collapse upon rescaling by N1.090; on the other hand, in Fig. 2(c), the s=4data shows
the same collapse upon rescaling by N0.474. The different FSS exponents suggest that the s=3ands=4weight distributions
belong to different finite-size scalings. Note, that there is no indication for different avalanche size scaling behaviors in these
cases. The case of s=3in Fig. 2(b) shows FSS with N1.090∼N, corresponding to d≃4.7[see dimensions in Fig. 7(b) under
Methods: Heirarchical Modular Networks (HMNs)]; on the other hand, in Fig. 2(c), the s=4case with FSS factor of N0.474is
related to d≃2.7 topological dimension version of the graph.
In both cases, however, the strong data collapse further highlight the gentle middle PL and the sharp tail PL. Fig. 2(b) and
(c) shows the best-fit PL exponents for the middle regime [dashed gray lines] and the tails [thick gray lines]. The gentle PL
decay in the middle regions follows P(wi j)∼w−δ
i j, with δ=0.57(4). The tails collapse to a PL P(wi j)∼w−α
i j, characterized
byα=2.91(5). To further illustrate the emergence of these regimes, Fig. 2(d) shows the representative case for one of the
largest baseline HMNs considered, for lmax=8,s=4, and⟨k0⟩=11.8, tracked for various time snapshots. From the original
HMN with an exponential distribution of edge weights, the P(wi j)gradually evolve to produce the clear distinction between the
two PL regimes. In particular, from around t=80Miterations, the middle and tail PL regions of P(wi j)begin to overlap, until
4/18
Figure 3. Edge weight distributions: Model comparisons with data. The model captures the distribution of edge weights from
connectome data (arranged here in increasing levels of complexity): (a) fruit fly (larva) (b) fruit fly (adult) (c) H01 Human
1mm3(d) human KKI-18 and (e) human KKI-113.
the point of maximum connectivity at around t=174M; in Fig. 2(d), the case of t=100Mandt=150Mare shown.
The distinction between the middle and tail regimes of P(wi j)is further investigated by statistical tests for PL behavior.
Using the largest network lmax=8fors=4, the snapshots of the network are obtained for every 1 million iterations and their
corresponding P(wi j)are obtained. For each of these time snapshots, the last two orders of magnitude of the set of wi jare
taken and tested for PL trends using the powerlaw Python package38that is based on the Kolmogorov-Smirnoff statistics39.
The use of the last two orders of magnitude of the data makes it a good approximation for the tail regions. The algorithm tests
forP(wi j)∼w−α
i j, where αis computed along with the minimum value of wi jthat best recovers the PL fit. In Fig. 2(e), the
computed γ2of the tails are plotted with the time snapshot t, showing a sharp transition at around 35 million iterations. The
insets of Fig. 2(e) show the actual P(wi j)plots, along with the chosen regions of PL from the algorithm.
For iteration times t<35M, the distributions P(wi j)exhibit tails showing no distinction between the two PL regimes and
are thus qualitatively not best represented by PL. In the green shaded region of Fig. 2(e), the insets show the relative range of
values chosen by the powerlaw algorithm to be the best approximation of the PL regimes. The lack of “true” PL regimes
results in low computed αvalues for these runs. However, shortly after the t=35Miterations, the middle region with a gentle
PL slope begins to emerge. At this point in the learning, the short ranged correlations of the base lattice build up, resulting in
the middle PL and a crossover to the tail PL scaling behavior. As such, the powerlaw algorithm determined the “true” tails,
resulting in the jump to the larger αvalues from this point onwards. The blue shaded region and the corresponding insets show
the range of PL considered by the algorithm, which corresponds to the region beyond the knee. Finally, for the orange shaded
region in Fig. 2(e), the tails (and, in turn, the middle region) are now well-defined, resulting in the continuous recovery of large
α. These regimes are the result of the gradual emergence of long-range correlated weight structured networks via learning.
From this point onwards, the tail PLs show αvalues close to 3; the average of the runs from t=36Mtot=90Mis⟨α⟩ ≈2.91,
which is also shown as the guides to the eye for Fig. 2(b) and (c).
Extensive and long-time simulations point to the strong convergence towards the αPLs at the tails. Interestingly, the
values of αobtained by the model are close to the PL tails of the empirical connectome data. The top panels of Fig. 3
presents comparisons of the PL tails edge weight distributions of the model (normalized with their corresponding mean values)
with those measured from connectome datasets of fruit fly [larva, Fig. 3(a); and adult, Fig. 3(b)] and humans [H01 1 mm3,
Fig. 3(c); KKI-18, Fig. 3(d); and KKI-113, Fig. 3(e)], also rescaled with their respective average values. The model-generated
distributions, regardless of network size and long-range connectivity, show remarkable correspondence with the empirical data,
regardless of brain complexity.
5/18
Node degree and strength distributions
Fig. 4 shows the distribution of the in-degree kin, out-degree kout, and total k=kin+koutdegree for the case of maximum
network connectivity [see Supplementary Information: Network Evolution for details]. In Fig. 4(a)-(c), the node strength values
are best fitted with lognormal (LN) distributions, here shown by the lines corresponding to the mean and standard deviation of
the simulation results, with different shape and scale parameters resulting from different network sizes. A simple rescaling by
the mean, however, shows a strong data collapse into a common lognormal trend, as shown in Fig. 4(d)-(f).
Figure 4. Node degree distributions [colored symbols are model results; LN fits are lines: solid lines for s=3, dashed lines
fors=4]. The (a) P(kin), (b)P(kout), and (c) P(k)are best fitted with lognormals, with characteristic (modal) values related to
the original network size. (d)-(f) Rescaling with the mean results in a collapse into a common lognormal trend.
The recovery of LN node strength distributions strongly agrees with recent empirical observations on actual connectome
data3. While other authors empirically describe only the tails of the node strength distributions, approximating them as decaying
PLs40, there are good reasons to believe that the LN distributions obtained by the model is also the one manifested by real
neuronal networks. In particular, the intrinsic restrictions imposed by basic spatial and metabolic constraints21on the density
and number of connections that may be maintained at any given node may make it seem difficult for geographically embedded
networks to demonstrate a pure scale-free activity, resulting in LN distributions with a characteristic mode and decaying trends
at the upper tail.
Additionally, the local nature of the node degree that results in LN distributions stands in sharp contrast with the global
distributions of edge weights, which follow PL trends. For this model, these statistical manifestations are the result of Hebbian
learning that is strongly predicated upon the critical avalanche mechanisms. Larger avalanches produce more unstable sites over
broader swaths of the network, producing more new outward directed links from the origin of the avalanche event. Furthermore,
the strength of these new connections is proportional to the avalanche size (specifically, the activation), making these new
connections less prone to the random pruning mechanisms. These aggressive mechanisms of strong link creations produce the
broad tails of the strength distributions, particularly the P(kout). It is therefore unsurprising that the presence of a characteristic
modal values followed by heavy tails in the distributions of node strengths strongly aligns with previous works that show
lognormal distributions in connectome data3.
In Fig. 5, we present a comparison among the normalized model results with the same empirical connectome data sets
presented in Fig. 3. The strict unimodal distributions of the model replicates some features of the simpler connectome strength
distributions, particularly those of the fruit fly larva [Fig. 5(a)], adult fruit fly [Fig. 5(b)], and the H01 human 1 mm3[Fig. 5(c)].
However, one clearly sees that the empirical data has a preponderance of smaller degree values; in fact, for more complex
connectomes such as in the KKI-18 [Fig. 5(d)] and KKI-113 [Fig. 5(e)], these small k/⟨k⟩values dominate, such that the
modes of the degree distributions are shifted left. The mismatch between the degree distributions of the complex connectomes
is deemed to be a result of the lengthening of the tails of the empirical data: real neurons are more dynamic at creating new
connections. The lengthening of the P(k)tails of the data result in the mean being shifted rightward from the mode, which then
shifts the mode of the data leftward from that of the model.
In Fig. 6, we present the comparison for the P(kin)[Fig. 6(a)-(e)] and P(kout)[Fig. 6(f)-(j)] between our model and the same
6/18
Figure 5. Node degree distributions: Model comparisons with data. (a) Fruit fly larva (b) Adult fruit fly (c) H01 Human (1
mm3) (d) KKI-18 (e) KKI-113. The unimodal behavior of the model recovers some features of the simpler and smaller
connectomes: (a) fruit fly larva (b) adult fruit fly (c) H01 Human (1mm3). All empirical results show a preponderance of small
k/⟨k⟩values.
Figure 6. Comparison of the in- and out- node strength distributions between data and model. Top panels: The P(kin)of the
model fails to capture the high occurrences of smaller kinvalues of the data. Bottom panels: The tails of the P(kout)of the
model and the data follow comparable decay trends.
set of empirical data as in Fig. 5. Similar to the observed behavior in Figure 5, the model shows comparable P(kin)distributions
as the smaller and simpler connectomes, particularly those of the fruit fly larva [Fig. 6(a)], adult fruit fly [Fig. 6(b)], and the
human H01 1 mm3[Fig. 6(c)]. The more complex connectomes KKI-18 [Fig. 6(d)] and KKI-113 [Fig. 6(e)] show higher
probabilities of small kinvalues that is not captured by the unimodal trends of the model. On the other hand, we observe that the
P(kout)distributions from both empirical data and the model follow matching decay trends with tails that span several orders of
magnitude as the mean. The mechanism of instantaneous link creation among firing nodes allows the model to recover the
heavy-tailed distributions P(kout).
Discussion
In summary, we have presented here an implementation of a continuous sandpile model on a highly dynamic network topology.
In previous works, sandpiles have been implemented on various network architectures41–43, some of which are based on
7/18
real-world33, 44. The novelty of the model presented here lies on the use of a baseline network that is inspired by the complex
neural connectivity9, and the introduction of a network edge weight recalibrations, also inspired by the presumed dynamics of
functional brain connectomes.
One of the most striking results is the recovery of robust broad-tailed distributions of avalanche sizes [Fig. 1], a key
signature of critical behavior. By probing the area, activation, and toppled-site measures for a wide range of parameter values
and network reconfigurations, we have shown robust PL tails across all network sizes and initial HMN wiring probabilities
tested. In particular, the number of toppled sites during a single avalanche event shows PL distributions best-fitted with the 3/2
decaying exponent characteristic of local field potential electrode experiment neuronal avalanches10. This result is deemed to
be remarkable, given the highly dynamic nature of reconnections among the individual nodes in the network, which strongly
affect the avalanching behavior of the system. The robustness of the avalanche-size distributions can be considered to be the
manifestation of SOC mean-field universality, which occurs for d>dc=3 for this model.
The model also reproduces the observed statistics of global edge weight distributions, whose tails can be fitted with decaying
PLs with scaling exponents close to 3 in empirical data3, 12, 13. The tails of the edge weight distributions are found to be robust
across all the parameter sets tested [Fig. 2], and manifest remarkable comparisons with those obtained from actual connectomes
[Fig. 3]. An explanation for this can be given by the instantaneous avalanche propagation in mature networks close to maximal
connectivity, which creates effective long-range interactions and smoothens out the spatio-temporal fluctuation effects. Under
such conditions, a mean-field-like behavior emerges, explaining the emergence of the exponent 3 that closely matches that of
the heuristic derivation for mean-field models in a previous work3. Furthermore, this scaling, with some exponent variations
within error margins, can also be the related to the heterogeneous HMN structure, which enhances rare-region effects in the
modules. This means that even when the system is slightly super- (or sub-) critical, there can be arbitrarily large domains
persisting in the opposite phase for long times, causing Griffiths effects, i.e. dynamical scale-free behavior in an extended
parameter space. Our preliminary simulation results on homogeneous 4D lattices do not provide clear PLs as we see here
for HMNs, strengthening the view that the network modularity plays an important role [see Robustness of Edge Weight Tail
Distributions for details].
Remarkably, the model also shows robust LN statistics for the node degree [Fig. 4], which is also in agreement with the
simpler connectome structures from empirical data [Fig. 5].
The model therefore simultaneously replicates the critical behavior of the brain from two distinct but related perspectives:
(i) through the dynamic measures of brain activity10, 18, and (ii) through the static physical networks of neurons obtained
from the connectome data3, 12, 13. The latter is of particular importance; other discrete models only capture the criticality of
neuronal avalanches, but not the statistics of the actual neuronal network structure. Here, the model we presented captures
both the PL distributions of global edge weights and the LN distributions of local node degrees and sheds light on the adaptive
structure-function relation in the brain29. The model does so by incorporating key details that are not considered in other works,
namely, (i) the baseline HMN, and (ii) the adaptive strengthening [weakening] of nodal connections through correlated activity
[inactivity].
In our view, the approach presented here provides a balanced modeling perspective. On one hand, critical behavior has been
traditionally captured by the simplest models that self-organize and require no fine-tuning and specificity7; but directly applying
these approaches without proper context may lead to misleading or incorrect description of neuronal dynamics. On the other
hand, the brain is perhaps one of the most complex and adaptive systems, whose associated functions are not yet completely
attributed to structure and form; it is impossible to provide a complete description of the brain, as we are just starting to probe
deeper into its physical intricacies. Our approach therefore has used the straightforward rules of discrete self-organizing models,
while also incorporating the realistic conditions learned from recent physical investigations of the brain. The success of the
model in recovering the signatures of neuronal activity and the physical network structure of the brain itself is predicated on
two crucial components: (i) the retention of the criticality from the sandpile model; and (ii) the realistic depiction of learning on
a hierarchical and modular network baseline that is inspired by the actual brain structure and dynamics.
The model may benefit from further details that mimic the realistic conditions in cortical dynamics. On the modeling
side, additional factors such as local dissipation via ohmic losses, random fluctuations, and oscillatory mechanisms, among
others, are not incorporated in the continuous sandpile used here. Moreover, subsequent implementations may benefit from
incorporating some other features of neuronal dynamics; in particular, there could be reciprocity in link creation, which, when
added to the model, could address the recovery of heavier tails of the degree distributions of more complex connectome
empirical data [Fig. 5]. We believe that these attributes can easily be implemented for a more nuanced description. The rich
dynamics and these hints of similarities with real systems further signify the emergence of complex behavior from simple rules,
resulting in robust statistical regularities.
8/18
Methods
Hierarchical Modular Networks (HMNs)
To mimic the complex network connectivity of the brain in the modeling, we utilized a variant of HMNs, introduced by Kaiser
and Hilgetag8and modified by Ódor et.al9to guarantee simple connectedness of nodes on the base level. This is constructed
from nodes embedded on a square lattice with additional long links between randomly selected pairs, by an iterative rewiring
algorithm of the following steps.
To generate the HMN we define lmaxlevels in the same set of N=4lmaxnodes. At every level, 4lmodules are defined. Each
module is split into four equal-sized modules on the next level, as if they were embedded in a regular, two-dimensional (2d)
lattice. This is done because HMNs in 2d base lattices are closer to the real topology of cortical networks9. The probability
plthat an edge connects two nodes follows pl≈b2−slwhere lis the greatest integer such that the two nodes are in the same
module on level landbis related to the average node degree via b=⟨k0⟩/2. To illustrate, Fig. 7(a) shows a representative
3-level HMN2d hierarchical network construction. Here, the network is expanded to show how modules are defined on every
level.
Figure 7. HMN construction and characterization. (a) Illustrating a two-dimensional HMN (HMN2d) with lmax=3. Nodes
at the bottom level l=1 are fully connected. Four bottom modules are grouped on the next hierarchical level to form one
upper-level module and so on. R1(solid lines) denotes the randomly chosen connections among the bottom level; R2(dashed
lines) and R3(dotted lines) denote the connection to the second level, and third level respectively. (b) Characterizing HMN:
Average number of shortest path, chemical distances between nodes of lmax=7 level HMNs, for s=3,⟨k⟩ ∼11.8 and s=4,
⟨k⟩ ∼7.6 before [hollow symbols] and after [crosses, plus signs] the learning. Lines show powerlaw fits before saturation of
the curves, describing the topological (graph) dimensions, defined by Eq. (3), similarly as in9.
The addition of long-range graph links provides connections beyond the nearest-neighbor ones of the 2d substrate to mimic
brain. Taking these into account, the HMN2d being utilized contains short links connecting nearest neighbors and long links,
whose probability decays algebraically with Euclidean distance R,
p(R)∼R−s(1)
which makes it an instance of a Benjamini-Berger (BB) networks45. In this work, we consider a modified BB network in which
the long links are added level by level, from top to bottom8. The levels: l=1,..., lmaxare numbered from bottom to top. The
size of domains, i.e., the number of nodes in a level, grows as Nl=4lin the 4-module construction, related to a tiling of the
two-dimensional base lattice. Due to the approximate distance-level relation, R∼2l, the long-link connection probability on
level lis:
p(R) =b1
2sl
(2)
where bis related to the average degree of the node. Here, we consider two-dimensional HMNs of different sizes lmax=
{5,6,7,8}, where, again, N=4lmax. We also used with different svalues, s={3,4}by providing single-connectedness on the
base lattice.
We define ras the shortest path (chemical) distance and the average number of nodes within this distance ⟨N(r)⟩is measured
by the Breadth First Search algorithm46emanating from all nodes of the graph. The topological (graph) dimension ( d), can be
9/18
defined as
⟨N(r)⟩∝rd(3)
This is infinite for s=3asN→∞, which appears to be d=4.3(3)in Fig. 7(b), in case of a finite graph with lmax=8levels1
In case of s=4(forN→∞) one can obtain finite dimensions with ⟨k0⟩initial degree dependent values. In Fig. 7(b) one can fit
d=2.74(1)fors=4,⟨k0⟩=7.6, which is below the upper critical dimension of this directed sandpile model ( dc=3).
We can observe that the learning does not seem to change the graph dimension (the shortest path lengths between nodes);
instead, it only increases the average degree and the in/out strengths of nodes. This also means the lack of synaptogenesis in
our model, which really happens in adult animals, only the synaptic weights increase.
One possible explanation for why the topological dimension of the HMNs does not change after imposing the model is the
modular structure of the HMNs. Modularity aids in maintaining the overall structure of the network. During an avalanche,
the span of the cascade may occur only within a module unless the avalanche is too big. As such, only the local connectivity
is improved but does not dramatically change the topological properties of a modular network resulting to an unchanged
dimension. In addition to this, the edge weight reinforcement rule includes a factor of 1/rwhich accounts for the realistic
setting where the creation and maintenance of synapses in neural connectomes is accompanied by wiring cost3, 47, 48[see
Methods: Hebbian Learning for details]; this appears to suppress the creation of very long links within the network.
Sandpile Model Implementation
The cellular automata (CA) model of the sandpile is composed of a network of nodes, each representing a functional unit in
the neural circuitry. Each node iis characterized by its state zi, a measure of its activity; in actual neurons, this can represent
the action potential that spikes during firing. Because neuronal sections can only accommodate a finite potential, we set
zi∈[0,zmax), where zmaxis set to unity. The threshold state zmax, when reached or exceeded by the node, triggers the relaxation
of the site through the redistribution of stress to its direct neighbors. Finally, to also mimic the physical structure of the brain,
the nodes are given physical site locations (xi,yi)in a two-dimensional square-lattice grid.
Figure 8. Avalanches and Hebbian learning. The participation of the nodes in the original toppling event is measured as A,V,
orC. During avalanche events, sites that toppled as a result of the original toppling event (at the avalanche origin) receives
reinforced (or entirely new) connections based on Eqn. 7. When there is no avalanche event, a random link is weakened (or
entirely pruned) based on Eqn. 8.
The network structure is introduced through a hierarchical modular network (HMN) [see previous section Methods:
Hierarchical Modular Networks (HMNs)]. The directed connections between nodes i(origin) and j(destination) are represented
by the edges ei j, which is characterized by its weight wi j, a proxy for the relative strength of synaptic connectivity between two
brain sections. Mathematically, the HMN2d can now be represented as a graph G={V,E}, where the set of nodes V={i}
hasNelements, while E={ei j}contains Enumber of connections; here, majority of the results are ⟨k0⟩=E0/N≃11.8
1By increasing the size this effective dimension estimate would diverge.
10/18
for the original HMN2d. Upon defining the network structure, the individual nodes inow have a set of neighbors ni={j},
where jare the out-degree connections or downlines of i. Whereas in simple grid implementations, the edges are bidirectional,
uniformly weighted, and fixed to the discrete (usually, von Neumann) nearest neighbors in a grid, the HMN construction results
in connections that are asymmetric ei j∈Edoes not guarantee that eji∈E, i.e. wi j̸=wji.
In this context, it is also instructive to define the peripheral nodes of the network {ip}. These nodes form the topological
“margins” for “overflow” during avalanche events. In an actual grid setting, the periphery is the literal margins of the grid,
whose states are zeroed out every iteration. Upon using HMNs as baseline networks, however, the notion of physical extremity
is lost because of the structure of the network. Therefore, to be able to assign the nodes of egress, we used the betweenness
centrality as a measure of periphery49. The states of the nodes with zero betweenness centrality are designated to be {ip}and
zeroed out zi→0at every instant when they receive grains from the external driving or from the redistributions from their
connections in the network. The egress of “grains” at the {ip}nodes ensure that, every time step, all the nodes in the network
will “relax” to have finite and below-threshold values of the states.
During initialization, the nodes are given random states zi∈[0,zmax)drawn from a uniform distribution. Dynamic activity is
represented by the introduction of a trigger to random nodes every time step, akin to the continuous reception of a background
stimulus in actual neural activity. Here, the trigger strength ∆z=10−4zmaxincreases the state ziof the randomly chosen node i
at an iteration time t,
zt
i←zt−1
i+∆z (4)
where the temporal index is placed at the superscript. Needless to say, repeated triggerings may result in the approach to the
marginally stable state; such a site iwill be driven to zt
i=¯z≥zmax. When such an event occurs, time is frozen (i.e. no new ∆z
is added to the system) while this above-threshold state is “toppling,” i.e. its above-threshold state ¯zis being redistributed to its
downline neighborhood in the network, ni={j}. Each downline neighbor receives a fraction of ¯zthat is proportional to the
ratio of the individual edge weight wi jit receives from iover the total out-degree edge weight of the neighborhood, Wn=∑wj:
zj←zj+wi j
Wn¯z; such that, (5)
zi←0 (6)
The redistribution and relaxation rules, Eqn. (5) and (6) are repeated until all the nodes in the HMN have states below zmax.
Repeated redistributions affect portions of the network, resulting in one distinct avalanche event for the same instance of the
initial triggering at t. Here, we consider two measures of avalanches used in traditional sandpile studies: the raw count of
all the unique affected sites is called the area At(the name being inspired by the extent of the avalanche in the usual 2D grid
implementations); the number of multiple activations, counting multiple relaxations and/or receiving of redistributed states for
all affected sites, is denoted by Vt. Furthermore, the individual toppled sites during a single triggering event is counted and
labeled as C, corresponding to the measures of activated sites in actual experimental protocols10. A representative example of
an avalanche event and the corresponding avalanche measures is shown in Fig. 8.
Hebbian Learning
During initialization, the starting HMN has discrete-valued i.e. wi j∈[0,...N]edge weights corresponding to the number of
links between two nodes. To dynamically alter the network architecture, we added rules that strengthen and weaken the existing
links based on measures of correlated activity and inactivity, respectively. These two mechanisms are guided by different
mechanisms, and thus have different characteristic rates. On one hand, firing neurons tend to form stronger links within shorter
time frames; on the other hand, less favored pathways tend to progressively decay in strength over extended periods of time.
These foundational principles of Hebbian learning in the brain are simulated in the model through separate mechanisms of link
creations and weakenings during avalanche and stasis periods, respectively.
After an avalanche event originating from iat time t, all the other sites kthat reached zk≥zmaxare tracked as candidate
sites that will receive new connections eikfrom i. The weight wikof this new synaptic connection should reflect the mechanisms
that enhance and hinder the connectivity of these functional units. Here, we impose that this weight be proportional to the
avalanche measure, particularly the activation V; stronger connections are expected for multiple repetitions of correlated
firings. Meanwhile, in a realistic setting, the connectivity is hindered by physical distance; here we use the simple distance
rik=p
(xk−xi)2+(yk−yi)2based on their locations on the square grid. With these assumptions, new links are created from i
to all knodes, with weights computed as
wt+1
ik←wt
ik+Vt/rik (7)
11/18
This rule instantaneously updates the neighborhood (downlines) of ifor the next time step t+1, with the nodes know joining the
neighborhood ni={j}and new connections eikare added to E. The ratio Vt/rikis deemed to be the simplest representation of
the effect of the avalanche and the separation distance on connection strength; increasing powers of rik(say, 1/r2) significantly
decreases the strength and spatial extent of new connectivity, especially for larger networks.
What happens to the grid during periods of stasis? Here, we impose weakenings of random edges, albeit at a significantly
slower rate; in reality, we don’t expect neural connections to be severed instantaneously. The simplest assumption for the decay
in edge weight is an exponential decay, wherein the subsequent (weakened) value is proportional to the current value. Therefore,
for every time step with no avalanche event, a randomly chosen node mand one of its neighbors n, originally connected by an
edge emnwith weight wt
mnat time t, will have an updated connection weight,
wt+1
mn←βwt
mn (8)
where, here, β<1is the decay rate. The repeated reinforcement [weakening] of the edges results in the edge weights being
continuous valued. Additionally, when weakened down to a tolerance value wtol, the edge emnis completely severed, wmn=0.
In some cases, for very long iteration times, this can lead to some nodes being isolated when all of their edges are removed.
Here, we consider wtol=0.01, i.e. 1%of a unit connectivity. For this wtoland all the starting HMN considered, we used
β=0.99; rapid deterioration of the network is observed for β<0.99.
Supplementary Information
Network Evolution
Because of the relatively large number of parameters and the broad range of values considered, there should be a way to obtain
a reasonable comparison among the results from different parameter sets. Thankfully, the model shows a remarkable collapse
into a common temporal trend upon rescaling. For all the HMNs with different sizes Nlmax, and for s=3ands=4, the same
trend in the eventual number of links is achieved when time is rescaled by t/E0, where E0is the number of links in the original
HMN. Fig. 9 shows the trends for all lmaxandsvalues.
Figure 9. Network time evolution. Top panels: The total number of edges Evs. time for (a) s=3and (b) s=4.Insets : When
time tis normalized with the number of links of the original HMN E0, the plots show overlapping peaks that center at around
t/E0=300. The results presented in the paper used time snapshots of the network within the shaded region, t/E0∈(250,350).
The number of links within the network for the various instances of time as shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b), presented
here in double logarithmic scale for clarity, show an initial increasing trend, corresponding to the dominance of the link
reinforcement/creation mechanisms. The shaded regions in the insets of Fig. 9, corresponding to the values of around 250 to
350 of the ratio t/E0, is deemed to be the case when the network has maximal connectivity. The actual instances of maximum
network connectivity correspond to the following t∗values: t∗≈2million for lmax=5,s=3, and 4million for lmax=5,s=4;
12million for lmax=6,s=3, and 20million for lmax=6,s=4;60million for lmax=7,s=3, and 80million for lmax=7,s=4;
and150million for lmax=8,s=3, and 170million for lmax=8,s=4. Unless otherwise specified, the results presented in the
main text are obtained for network snapshots at t∗or within the shaded regions in the insets of Fig. 9.
Beyond this regime of maximal connectivity, the weakening mechanisms begin to manifest in the network, sometimes even
removing the peripheral nodes. These disconnections result in the gradual decay in the number of links. The simulations are
12/18
halted when all the peripheral nodes are removed from the system; in such a case, the “grains” would have no means for egress
and the system can never achieve a relaxation.
Effect of Initial Link Density
Starting with the same number of nodes N, the number of links E0of the baseline HMN is varied, producing different initial
average degree values ⟨k0⟩=E0/N. Here, we present some representative results for ⟨k0⟩=7.6.
Figure 10. Avalanche size distributions for ⟨k0⟩=7.6.The (a) P(A), (b)P(V), and P(C)distributions follow similar trends
as in Fig. 1 [for the denser ⟨k0⟩=11.8 case], albeit with shorter tails.
Fig. 10 shows the distributions of the avalanche measures, (a) P(A), (b)P(V), and (c) P(C)for⟨k0⟩=7.6. The axes scales
are preserved for direct comparison with Fig. 1, which are obtained for ⟨k0⟩=11.8. The lower average number of links of the
baseline HMN resulted in shorter tails for the avalanche size distributions, although the PL exponents remain almost the same.
The insensitivity of the PL exponents to the initial HMN edge density is a clear indication of critical (SOC) mechanisms of the
underlying sandpile driving rules.
Figure 11. Edge weight distributions for ⟨k0⟩=7.6.For both (a) s=3 and (b) s=4, the P(wi j)for⟨k0⟩=7.6 do not
produce distinct PL regimes, in contrast with (c) those generated by ⟨k0⟩=11.8 [see also Fig. 2] and ⟨k0⟩=13.9.
However, the lower density HMNs with ⟨k0⟩=7.6do not recover the distinct PL regimes found for the denser starting
HMNs [as shown in the main text in Fig. 2, which is obtained for ⟨k0⟩=11.8]. Even upon reaching the maximal connectivity
[see Supplementary Information: Network Evolution], the grown networks that started with original HMNs with ⟨k0⟩=7.6
produce non-PL distributions, as shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b). To further highlight this limitation, Fig. 11(c) shows the
representative results for ⟨k0⟩={7.6,11.8,13.9}for the representative case of lmax=7ands=3. The⟨k0⟩=7.6span shorter
orders of magnitude and show no clear linear trends, while the denser ⟨k0⟩=11.8and⟨k0⟩=13.9all clearly show the two PL
regimes also shown in Fig. 2(b) and (c). As such, unless otherwise specified, all of the presented results in the main text are
obtained for starting HMNs with original edge density ⟨k0⟩=11.8 or denser.
13/18
Scaling Behavior of Avalanche Metrics
In Fig. 12, every avalanche event (for each of the model parameter sets investigated) is represented by a point corresponding
to its A,V, and Cvalues. All of these points are plotted in Vvs.A[left panels], Cvs.A[middle panels], and Cvs.V[right
panels], for both the s=3 [top panels] and s=4 [bottom panels] cases. In all plots, the straight line with slope equal to unity
(corresponding to the case of equal values in the vertical and horizontal axes) are shown as the orange dashed lines.
Figure 12. Scaling behavior of avalanche measures [Top panels: s=3; bottom panels: s=4; dashed line is the line of
equality]. The left panels (a) and (d) scattergrams of Vvs.Ashow a floor behavior corresponding to the V=Aline, but most
points fall above this line due to multiple spatiotemporal counts done in reporting V. Additionally, the spikes at A=Nare
shown for the various lmaxconsidered. The middle panels (b) and (e) scattergrams of Cvs.Afall below the C=Aline because
the affected but non-toppled sites are not reported in Cbut counted in A. Additionally, the spikes at A=Nare still observed.
For the right panels (c) and (f) corresponding to the Cvs.Vplot, the rightward shift from the C=Vline is expected because
only the toppled sites are counted by C, while all affected sites are included in V.
TheVvs.Aplots in Fig. 12(a) and (d) show a lower limit (floor) bounded by the V=Aplot, as expected; the number of
spatiotemporal activations should not be lower than the number of affected nodes. The spreading of points above the V=Aline
indicates that the spatiotemporal activity within the network can trigger individual nodes multiple times, such that Vcan be
orders of magnitude greater than A. In Fig. 12(a) and (d), the “area” measures are limited by A=N, which is shown by the
spikes at these values for the different lmaxconsidered. This limitation, which is also apparent in the tails of P(A)in Fig. 1(a),
indicates that the spatiotemporal activity is a better indicator of the actual effect of the avalanche on the entire network. This, in
turn, is the motivation for the use of Vin the reinforcement mechanisms of the Hebbian learning rule, Eqn. 7.
In contrast, the scattergrams Cvs.Ain Fig. 12 mostly fall below the C=Aline especially for the smallest values of Cand
A. This is because the Cmetric takes only the sites that toppled, and not the affected ones such as in A. However, at the most
active state of the network, the “areas” are still limited up to the A=N, while the Cvalues reach several orders of magnitude
greater than A, indicating multiple repeated topplings. It is also interesting to note that the base of the scattergrams C=1
stretch throughout almost the entire Aaxis, indicating the instances when a single toppling affected all the other nodes in the
network without driving them beyond the threshold state.
Finally, the Fig. 12(c) and (f) show the Cvs.Vplot, which generally follow a unit slope in the double logarithmic scale but
not exactly at the line of equality C=V. This trend is expected because both CandVare measures of spatiotemporal activity.
The scattergrams are shifted to the right of the C=Vplot due to the fact that the Vmeasures all the affected sites, while Conly
counts those that achieved states above the threshold. Despite the strong correlation between CandV, especially at the largest
avalanches, we chose to report them separately because they report two distinct aspects of the avalanching behavior of the
14/18
system. The Cmetric is patterned after the experimental work on neural avalanches11that capture only the neurons that spiked;
as such, the P(C)distributions in Fig. 1(c) recovered the critical exponents of 3/2as reported in literature. On the other hand,
theVis deemed to be a more detailed depiction of the actual level of activity in the network, as it counts the participation of
sites that received “grains” even without toppling themselves. As such, the Vmeasure of avalanche activity is used for the
reinforcement rule Eqn. 7.
Robustness of Edge Weight Tail Distributions
The distribution of edge weights given by Fig. 2 features two prominent PL regimes. The middle region of the P(wi j)features
a gentle decay exponent of around 0.6, while the tails produce steeper PLs with exponents close to 3, which is found to be
universal across the different sizes and long-range connectivity of the baseline HMNs used. The steep PLs at the tails show
remarkable similarities with the empirical connectome weight distributions3, as shown in Fig. 5.
Figure 13. Edge weight distributions for different baseline networks. Resulting edge weight distributions for simulations that
utilize (a) the four-dimensional regular lattice and (b) the HMN with the same number of nodes. Upon reaching the state of
maximal connectivity, the runs on HMN show a steady approach to the universal exponent 3 tails. HMN parameters are shown
by the legends. Arrows display the behavior of the distributions over longer iteration times.
As such, to check for the robustness of the PL regimes, especially at the tails, we compared the runs that utilized the
HMNs with those that utilized simple lattice geometries. In particular, Fig. 13 shows the resulting P(wi j)distributions for the
implementations that utilized N=46nodes initially arranged into (a) the four-dimensional lattice and (b) the HMN with s=3
and⟨k0⟩=11.8. The distributions have the same number of bins for ease in comparisons. As is apparent in Fig. 13(b), HMNs
produce P(wi j)middle regions and the well-defined secondary mode exponent 3 PLs. On the other hand the 4d lattices (a)
produce a mild middle PL region crossing over to a faster than PL decay region later. As learning commences, the distributions
tend to shift leftward (a) due to the dominance of the mode that tends to shorten the tails, or rightward (b) as dynamical
criticality causes PL distributions.
The original HMN network in Fig. 13(b) shows a strong collapse into the gentle middle region and the sharp PL tail. The
collapse into the universal exponent of 3 at the tails is even more pronounced as time progresses. As noted in Fig. 2(e), after a
critical iteration time, all the distributions begin to collapse, resulting in robust and nearly universal PLs. Additionally, the
approach towards PLs with exponent 3 at the tails are observed for all HMN parameters sets investigated: for different network
sizes N=4lmax, with lmax={5,6,7,8}; long-range connectivity, s={3,4}; and initial edge density, ⟨k0⟩={7.6,11.8}.
References
1.Ercsey-Ravasz, M. et al. A predictive network model of cerebral cortical connectivity based on a distance rule. Neuron 80,
184–197, DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.07.036 (2013).
2.Gastner, M. T. & Ódor, G. The topology of large Open Connectome networks for the human brain. Sci. Reports 6, 27249,
DOI: 10.1038/srep27249 (2016).
3.Cirunay, M., Ódor, G., Papp, I. & Deco, G. Scale-free behavior of weight distributions of connectomes. Phys. Rev. Res. 7,
013134, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.7.013134 (2025).
4.Chialvo, D. & Bak, P. Learning from mistakes. Neuroscience 90, 1137–1148, DOI: 10.1016/S0306-4522(98)00472-2
(1999).
15/18
5.Legenstein, R. & Maass, W. Edge of chaos and prediction of computational performance for neural circuit models. Neural
Networks 20, 323–334, DOI: 10.1016/j.neunet.2007.04.017 (2007). Echo State Networks and Liquid State Machines.
6.Kinouchi, O. & Copelli, M. Optimal dynamical range of excitable networks at criticality. Nat. Phys. 2, 348–351, DOI:
10.1038/nphys289 (2006).
7.Bak, P., Tang, C. & Wiesenfeld, K. Self-organized criticality: An explanation of the 1/f noise. Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 381,
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.59.381 (1987).
8.Kaiser, M. & Hilgetag, C. C. Optimal hierarchical modular topologies for producing limited sustained activation of neural
networks. Front. Neuroinformatics 4, 713, DOI: 10.3389/fninf.2010.00008 (2010).
9.Ódor, G., Dickman, R. & Ódor, G. Griffiths phases and localization in hierarchical modular networks. Sci. Reports 5,
14451, DOI: 10.1038/srep14451 (2015).
10.Beggs, J. M. & Plenz, D. Neuronal avalanches in neocortical circuits. J. Neurosci. 23, 11167–11177, DOI: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.23-35-11167.2003 (2003).
11.Beggs, J. M. The cortex and the critical point: understanding the power of emergence (MIT Press, 2022).
12.Ódor, G. Critical dynamics on a large human open connectome network. Phys. Rev. E 94, 062411, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.
94.062411 (2016).
13.Ódor, G., Deco, G. & Kelling, J. Differences in the critical dynamics underlying the human and fruit-fly connectome. Phys.
Rev. Res. 4, 023057, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.4.023057 (2022).
14.Chialvo, D. R. Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nat. Phys. 6, 744–750, DOI: 10.1038/nphys1803 (2010).
15.Palva, J. et al. Neuronal long-range temporal correlations and avalanche dynamics are correlated with behavioral scaling
laws. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. United States Am. 110, 3585–3590, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1216855110 (2013).
16.Munoz, M. A. Colloquium: Criticality and dynamical scaling in living systems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 90, 031001 (2018).
17.Haimovici, A., Tagliazucchi, E., Balenzuela, P. & Chialvo, D. R. Brain organization into resting state networks emerges at
criticality on a model of the human connectome. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 178101, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.110.178101
(2013).
18.Hesse, J. & Gross, T. Self-organized criticality as a fundamental property of neural systems. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 8, 166,
DOI: 10.3389/fnsys.2014.00166 (2014).
19.De Arcangelis, L., Perrone-Capano, C. & Herrmann, H. J. Self-organized criticality model for brain plasticity. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 96, 028107, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.96.028107 (2006).
20.Nowrouzi-Nezhad, H., Mahdisoltani, S. & Moghimi-Araghi, S. Self-organized criticality and structural dynamics in
evolving neuronal networks: A modified sandpile model. Phys. A: Stat. Mech. its Appl. 130535 (2025).
21.Sporns, O. Networks of the Brain (MIT press, 2016).
22.Griffiths, R. B. Nonanalytic Behavior Above the Critical Point in a Random Ising Ferromagnet. Phys. Rev. Lett. 23, 17–19,
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.23.17 (1969).
23.Muñoz, M. A., Juhász, R., Castellano, C. & Ódor, G. Griffiths Phases on Complex Networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 128701
(2010).
24.Cota, W., Ferreira, S. C. & Ódor, G. Griffiths effects of the susceptible-infected-susceptible epidemic model on random
power-law networks. Phys. Rev. E 93, 032322 (2016).
25.Johnson, S., Marro, J. & Torres, J. J. Robust short-term memory without synaptic learning. PloS one 8, e50276, DOI:
10.1371/journal.pone.0050276 (2013).
26.Moretti, P. & Muñoz, M. A. Griffiths phases and the stretching of criticality in brain networks. Nat. Commun. 4, 2521,
DOI: 10.1038/ncomms3521 (2013).
27.Ódor, G. Robustness of griffiths effects in homeostatic connectome models. Phys. Rev. E 99, 012113, DOI: 10.1103/
PhysRevE.99.012113 (2019).
28.de Arcangelis, L. & Herrmann, H. J. Learning as a phenomenon occurring in a critical state. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 107,
3977–3981, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0912289107 (2010).
29.Angiolelli, M. et al. Criticality explains structure-function relationships in the human brain. bioRxiv DOI: 10.1101/2024.
07.15.603226 (2024). https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2024/07/17/2024.07.15.603226.full.pdf.
16/18
30.Zhang, Y .-C. Scaling theory of self-organized criticality. Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 470, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.63.470
(1989).
31.Dhar, D. Self-organized critical state of sandpile automaton models. Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1613, DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.
64.1613 (1990).
32.Dhar, D. & Ramaswamy, R. Exactly solved model of self-organized critical phenomena. Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 1659–1662,
DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.63.1659 (1989).
33.Zachariou, N., Expert, P., Takayasu, M. & Christensen, K. Generalised sandpile dynamics on artificial and real-world
directed networks. PLOS ONE 10, e0142685, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142685 (2015).
34.Batac, R. C., Paguirigan Jr, A. A., Tarun, A. B. & Longjas, A. G. Sandpile-based model for capturing magnitude
distributions and spatiotemporal clustering and separation in regional earthquakes. Nonlinear Process. Geophys. 24,
179–187, DOI: 10.5194/npg-24-179-2017 (2017).
35.Heiney, K. et al. Neuronal avalanche dynamics and functional connectivity elucidate information propagation in vitro.
Front. Neural Circuits 16, 980631 (2022).
36.Pasquale, V ., Massobrio, P., Bologna, L., Chiappalone, M. & Martinoia, S. Self-organization and neuronal avalanches in
networks of dissociated cortical neurons. Neuroscience 153, 1354–1369 (2008).
37.Plenz, D. et al. Self-organized criticality in the brain. Front. Phys. 9, DOI: 10.3389/fphy.2021.639389 (2021).
38.Alstott, J., Bullmore, E. & Plenz, D. powerlaw: a python package for analysis of heavy-tailed distributions. PLOS ONE 9,
e85777 (2014).
39.Clauset, A., Shalizi, C. R. & Newman, M. E. Power-law distributions in empirical data. SIAM Rev. 51, 661–703 (2009).
40.Lynn, C. W., Holmes, C. M. & Palmer, S. E. Heavy-tailed neuronal connectivity arises from Hebbian self-organization.
Nat. Phys. 20, 484–491, DOI: 10.1038/s41567-023-02332-9 (2024).
41.Chen, C.-c., Lee, Y .-T. & Chiao, L.-Y . Intermittent criticality in the long-range connective sandpile (LRCS) model. Phys.
Lett. A 372, 4340–4343, DOI: 10.1016/j.physleta.2008.04.043 (2008).
42.Goh, K.-I., Lee, D.-S., Kahng, B. & Kim, D. Sandpile on scale-free networks. Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 148701, DOI:
10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.148701 (2003).
43.Pan, G.-J., Zhang, D.-M., Yin, Y .-P. & He, M.-H. Sandpile on directed small-world networks. Phys. A: Stat. Mech. its Appl.
383, 435–442, DOI: 10.1016/j.physa.2007.04.113 (2007).
44.Wu, T., Xia, Y . & Liang, Y . Load cascades in spatial networks: A sandpile model approach. Phys. A: Stat. Mech. its Appl.
644, 129833, DOI: 10.1016/j.physa.2024.129833 (2024).
45.Benjamini, I. & Berger, N. The diameter of long-range percolation clusters on finite cycles. Random Struct. & Algorithms
19, 102–111, DOI: 10.1002/rsa.1022 (2001).
46.Sihotang, J. Analysis of shortest path determination by utilizing breadth first search algorithm. J. Info Sains: Informatika
dan Sains 10, 1–5 (2020).
47.Ahn, Y .-Y ., Jeong, H. & Kim, B. J. Wiring cost in the organization of a biological neuronal network. Phys. A: Stat. Mech.
its Appl. 367, 531–537 (2006).
48.Bullmore, E. & Sporns, O. The economy of brain network organization. Nat. reviews neuroscience 13, 336–349 (2012).
49.Batac, R. C. & Cirunay, M. T. Shortest paths along urban road network peripheries. Phys. A: Stat. Mech. its Appl. 597,
127255, DOI: 10.1016/j.physa.2022.127255 (2022).
Acknowledgments
We are thankful for the financial support from the Hungarian National Research, Development and Innovation Office NKFIH
(Grant No. K146736 and the KIFU access to the Hungarian supercomputer Komondor.).
Additional information
Author contributions statement
G. Ó conceptualized the work, did the theoretical analysis, and created the HMN; R.C.B. designed the model and ran the
simulations; M.T.C. did the fitting with empirical data and tested the PL fits. All authors analyzed the results and reviewed the
manuscript.
17/18
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Data Availability
Data are available upon request from the authors.
18/18
