Stability of complex communities: A perspective from discrete-time dynamics
Shuaiying Wang1,†, Yuguang Yang1,2,†, and Aming Li1,3,∗
1 Center for Systems and Control, College of Engineering,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
2 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
3 Center for Multi-Agent Research,
Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
†These authors contributed equally to this work.
∗Corresponding author: amingli@pku.edu.cn
Understanding the stability of complex communities is a central focus in ecology, many important
theoretical advancements have been made to identify drivers of ecological stability. However, pre-
vious results often rely on the continuous-time dynamics, assuming that species have overlapping
generations. In contrast, numerous real-world communities consist of species with non-overlapping
generations, whose quantitative behavior can only be precisely represented by discrete-time dynam-
ics rather than continuous ones. Here, we develop a theoretical framework and propose a metric
to quantify the stability of complex communities characterized by non-overlapping generations and
diverse interaction types. In stark contrast to existing results for overlapping generations, we find
that increasing self-regulation strength first stabilizes and then destabilizes complex communities.
This pattern is further confirmed in both exploitative ( E. aerogenes ,P. aurantiaca ,P. chlororaphis ,
P. citronellolis ) and competitive ( P. putida ,P. veroni ,S. marcescens ) soil microbial communities.
Moreover, we show that communities with diverse interaction types become the most stable, which
is corroborated by empirical mouse microbial networks. Furthermore, we reveal that the preva-
lence of weak interactions can stabilize communities, which is consistent with findings from existing
microbial experiments. Our analyses of complex communities with non-overlapping generations pro-
vide a more comprehensive understanding of ecological stability and informs practical strategies for
ecological restoration and control.
I. INTRODUCTION
Stability, capturing whether a system can recover from
external perturbations, is a key property of complex eco-
logical communities [1, 2]. The loss of ecological stabil-
ity may lead to massive species extinctions and poten-
tial community collapse, resulting in catastrophic con-
sequences for humanity and the natural world. There-
fore, studying the stability of complex communities lies
at the heart of ecology. Since the pioneering work of
May [3], ecologists have performed a tremendous amount
of theoretical work to understand and clarify the con-
tributions of different community characteristics to the
stability of complex communities. These characteristics
mainly cover interaction types [4, 5], interaction strength
[4, 6, 7], interaction network structure [8, 9], spatial struc-
ture [10, 11], and time delays in species interactions [12–
16].
However, the vast majority of existing research relies
on a crucial assumption that communities are composed
of species with overlapping generations. In other words,
individuals of the same species from different generations
can coexist at the same time, and the dynamical behav-
ior of such communities is described by continuous-time
dynamics (Fig. 1A). While it is true that species with
overlapping generations are widespread in nature, there
is also a large number of species having non-overlapping
generations, where individuals of the same species can-not coexist at the same time (Fig. 1B). These species,
including annual plants [17], univoltine insects [18] (i.e.,
insects only breeding once a year), pink salmon [19], are
important components of natural ecological communities.
For communities composed of such species, continuous-
time models cannot accurately capture their behavior,
and discrete-time models should be used instead [20]. As
a result, most conventional ecological theory, which was
developed for communities of species with overlapping
generations, becomes less effective in understanding the
stability of such communities.
Theorists have long recognized the short-comings of
continuous-time ecological theory and have made great
efforts to establish a discrete-time framework and thus to
understand the dynamics of communities of species with
non-overlapping generations. During the early period,
ecologists paid much attention to species-poor commu-
nities. In 1974, May’s prominent work studied the dy-
namics of a single population with non-overlapping gen-
erations and found that stability loss of such populations
can lead to surprising dynamical behaviors like limit cy-
cles and chaos [20]. Beddington et al. extended May’s
work to a two-species predator-prey model for popula-
tions with non-overlapping generations and showed that
the loss of stability can also lead to similar patterns [21].
Recently, researchers have begun to focus on species-
rich communities. Sinha et al. focused on communities
with randomly assigned interactions and demonstratedarXiv:2504.02332v1  [q-bio.PE]  3 Apr 2025
2
that increasing the number of interactions per species or
the intensity of interactions leads to an increased likeli-
hood of species extinctions [22]. However, in addition to
species richness, many other properties–such as interac-
tion type composition, interaction strength distribution,
and network structure–can emerge in real-world complex
communities. For communities composed of species with
non-overlapping generations, we still lack a comprehen-
sive understanding of how these properties influence sta-
bility.
Inspired by this gap, here we develop a new frame-
work to analyze the stability of large complex communi-
ties composed of species under discrete-time dynamics.
This allows us to explore in detail the influence of differ-
ent global community characteristics on stability by inte-
grating theoretical analyses with empirical data. Surpris-
ingly, we find that several key principles governing eco-
logical stability need to be modified. These findings high-
light the importance of studying communities of species
with non-overlapping generations to comprehensively un-
derstand and control complex communities.
II. RESULTS
A. Modeling framework
A community composed of Sspecies with non-
overlapping generations can be modeled by the famous
discrete-time Lotka-Volterra dynamics [20, 23]
Xi(k+ 1) = Xi(k) exp
ri−siXi(k) +SX
j=1,j̸=iAijXj(k)
(1)
with i= 1,2,···, S,where Xi(k) represents the abun-
dance of species iat generation k,riis the intrinsic
growth rate of species i,si>0 is the self-regulation
strength of species i, and Aijcaptures the influence that
species jhas on species i.
When X∗
i>0 (i= 1,···, S) satisfies
X∗
i=X∗
iexp
ri−siX∗
i+SX
j=1,j̸=iAijX∗
j
,
X∗= [X∗
1, X∗
2,···, X∗
S]Tis called a feasible equilibrium,
where each species has a positive abundance. Within the-
oretical ecology, researchers are more interested in study-
ing community behavior around a feasible equilibrium
since unfeasible equilibrium suggests species extinction
occurs. The dynamical behavior around feasible equilib-
riumX∗can be approximated by linearizing equation (1)
around X∗(see Supplementary Note 1)
∆x(k) =M∆x(k−1). (2)
Here ∆ x(k) =X(k)−X∗represents the deviation from
equilibrium abundance, Mis the Jacobian matrix whose
element Mijrepresents the effect that species jhas on
species iaround the equilibrium.For communities composed of species with overlapping
generations (namely the continuous-time dynamics), as
long as all eigenvalues λof the Jacobian matrix are lo-
cated in the left half of the complex plane, the com-
munity is stable (Fig. 1C and Supplementary Fig. S1).
Mathematically, this requirement can be interpreted as
max (Re ( λ))<0, and it can thus be seen that it is the
rightmost eigenvalue that determines community stabil-
ity. While for communities composed of species with
non-overlapping generations (namely the discrete-time
dynamics), stability requires that all eigenvalues of the
Jacobian matrix lie in the unit circle centered at the ori-
gin of the complex plane (Fig. 1D and Supplementary
Fig. S1), which is equivalent to
max(|λ|)<1. (3)
Here|λ|is the absolute value (or magnitude) of λ, and
reflects the distance between λand the origin of the com-
plex plane.
It can thus be seen that, unlike communities composed
of species with overlapping generations, the stability of
communities with non-overlapping generations is deter-
mined by the dominant eigenvalue of the Jacobian ma-
trix (i.e., the eigenvalue with the largest absolute value,
often denoted as λ1). Clearly, this difference in stabil-
ity criteria can lead to different stability classifications
for communities sharing the same set of community pa-
rameters but following different dynamics. As is shown
in Fig. 1, a community of species with overlapping gen-
erations is stable (Fig. 1C), but its counterpart with
non-overlapping generations becomes unstable (Fig. 1D).
This intuitive illustration suggests that focusing solely
on continuous-time dynamics can lead to misleading re-
sults when dealing with communities of species with non-
overlapping generations. Consequently, a systematic and
thorough exploration for the stability of communities fol-
lowing discrete-time dynamics is required.
B. Metric for stability of discrete-time complex
communities
The unit circle stability region helps us determine
whether a given community is stable, we next seek to
quantify the intensity of stability. That is, when there
are multiple stable communities, can we identify which
community is more stable? In ecology, the intensity of
stability is often assessed by recovery time (Fig. 2A)–the
time for a perturbation to decay to a specified fraction
of its initial size [24, 25]. With this metric, a community
with less recovery time is deemed as more stable (Fig. 2A,
B).
Dynamical systems theory reveals that the dominant
eigenvalue λ1of the Jacobian matrix Mnot only deter-
mines community stability but also reflects the recovery
time [26]: the closer λ1is to the origin, the shorter the
recovery time (Fig. 2A, B). This is because the distance
between the dominant eigenvalue and the origin of the
3
A Community with overlapping generations
Abundance of species at timeB Community with non-overlapping generations
C D
0 5 10 15
Continuous time0123AbundanceResponse
Species 1
Species 2
Species 3PerturbationContinuous 
time
Species in generation
Abundance of species in generation
Species in generation 
Generation
(Discrete time)
Stability criterion
-1 0 1
Real-101 Imaginary
StableUnstable
-2 -1 0 1
Real-101 ImaginaryStability criterion
Unstable Stable
Negative effect 
 Positive effect 
Response
0 2 4 6 80123Abundance
Discrete time
Self-regulation strength of species
Intrinsic growth rate of species Intrinsic growth rate of species
The effect of species on The effect of species on
Self-regulation strength of species
FIG. 1. Illustration of the stability of complex communities with overlapping and non-overlapping genera-
tions. A , Schematic diagram of a three–species community with overlapping generations. Blue and red rods represent species
from different generations, where sharp-head and blunt-head arrows represent positive and negative effects between species,
respectively. For the continuous-time dynamics shown in the grey frame, species from different generations can coexist. B,
For the counterpart with non-overlapping generations, species from different generations can not coexist, and the discrete-time
dynamics are shown in the grey frame. C-D, Responses of three-species communities to external perturbations (left half of
each panel) and eigenvalue distributions of Jacobian matrices (right half of each panel). Communities that recover to their
previous state following perturbations are stable, thus community with overlapping generations is stable (C). Mathematically,
a community with overlapping generations is stable when all eigenvalues of Jacobian matrix have negative real part, that is, all
eigenvalues locate in the left half of the complex plane (green region). In D, when the same community is under discrete-time
dynamics, species extinct and this community is no longer stable. Communities under discrete-time dynamics are stable when
all the eigenvalues of the Jacobian matrices locate in the unit circle centered at the origin of the complex plane (green region),
while here the three eigenvalues are not all in the circle. In C-D, we set s= 1,r1= 0.7,r2= 0.6,r3=−0.3,A12=A21=−1,
A13=A31= 0,A23=A32= 1.
complex plane (i.e., |λ1|) dictates how fast perturbations
decay over the long term: the longer the distance of λ1
from the origin, the slower the decay of perturbations,
and thus the longer the recovery time (see Supplemen-
tary Note 1). As a result, we next use the decay rate
α=−log (|λ1|), which is developed based on the distance
|λ1|, to quantify the intensity of stability: the larger α,
the shorter the recovery time and, consequently, the more
stable the community (Fig. 2C).
Consequently, the key to determine the stability inten-
sity is to identify the dominant eigenvalue of M. Given
that natural communities are rich in species and com-
plex in interactions, the determination of the dominant
eigenvalue can be challenging. Fortunately, this chal-
lenge can be addressed by recent advancements in ran-
dom matrix theory (RMT) [27–29]. For large communi-
ties, RMT points out that eigenvalues of Mare in gen-
eral distributed in an ellipse (sometimes with an outlier,
see Supplementary Note 2). Therefore, four endpoints
(leftmost, rightmost, uppermost, and lowermost eigen-value) of the eigenvalue distribution are more likely to be
the dominant eigenvalue (Supplementary Fig. S3). Due
to the symmetry in the eigenvalue distribution and the
unit circle stability region, the uppermost and lowermost
eigenvalues are equivalent. Consequently, the stability of
large complex communities can be estimated as
˜α=−log{max{β1, β2, β3}}. (4)
Here ˜ αis the estimated stability intensity, β1=
|Mλ,leftmost |,β2=|Mλ,rightmost |,β3=|Mλ,uppermost |.
Theoretical estimations are in good agreement with nu-
merical simulations, proving the effectiveness of our esti-
mation theory (Supplementary Figs. S4-S7).
C. Self-regulation strength modulates ecological
stability
Equipped with our theory, we next delve into the quan-
titative relationship between various characteristics of
4
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1020406080Recovery timeExploitative
Competitive
Mutualistic
GenerationC A
GenerationB
-1 0 1
Real-1 0 1
Real-101Imaginary Abundance
0 5 10 15012
0 5 10 15Recovery time = 12 Recovery time = 16Perturbation Species 1
Species 2
Species 3Community 1 Community 2
Stability,
Distance from the origin
The dominant eigenvalue,0.22
0.51
0.92
Other eigenvalues Unstable0.8
0.6
0.4
0 1 2 3 4
Stability, 
FIG. 2. Quantifying stability of discrete-time complex communities. A -B, Responses of three-species communities
to external perturbations (top) and eigenvalue distributions of the corresponding Jacobian matrices (bottom). When the
abundance of each species returns to within 0 .1% of the equilibrium after perturbation, we consider the community to have
returned to equilibrium and calculate the recovery time accordingly. Results show that community 2 has a shorter recovery
time and is thus more stable (community 1 recovers with 16 generations, community 2 recovers with 12 generations). For
the stability contour plot (bottom), colors represent the intensity of stability, where darker yellow indicates lower stability
intensity and grey indicates instability. Black lines with different styles are the isometric lines to the origin. Red, blue and
cyan dots represent the eigenvalues of the corresponding Jacobian matrix, with the red dot pointed by an arrow denoting the
dominant eigenvalue λ1. According to our theory, the recovery time can be reflected by the distance between λ1and the origin:
communities with shorter recovery times have a smaller distance, as shown in the bottom panels. α=−log|λ1|is introduced to
quantify the community stability, and communities with higher αhave a lower recovery time. C, The relationship between the
recovery time and the stability αfor exploitative, competitive, and mutualistic communities. Numerical results are obtained
by perturbing three-species communities, indicating that the stability of discrete-time complex communities is quantified by α.
In A, r1=−0.3,r2= 0.9,r3= 0.1,A12=−A21= 0.5,A13= 0.8,A23=A31= 0.6,A32= 0.3. In B, r1= 1.3,r2=−0.4,
r3= 0.1,A12=−A21=A32= 0.6,A13=A31= 0.3,A23= 0.8. In A-C, s= 1, and variables are the same as those in Fig. 1B.
complex communities and ecological stability. We begin
by examining the influence of the direct effects species
have on themselves. Originating from mechanisms in-
cluding intraspecific interference, cannibalism, time-scale
separation between consumers and their resources, these
self-effects decrease a species’ per-capita growth when the
species experiences an abundance increase, and are thus
known as ‘self-regulation’ [2, 4, 31]. Previous studies on
communities composed of species with overlapping gener-
ations revealed that self-regulation plays a pivotal role in
regulating stability: communities can uniformly benefit
from the increase of self-regulation strength, and ecologi-
cal stability can be maintained as long as species exhibit
substantially strong self-regulation [31].
Surprisingly, we find that these established rules do
not apply for communities composed of species with
non-overlapping generations. Our analyses indicate
that, in such communities, the relationship between self-
regulation strength and stability is non-monotonic: in-
creasing self-regulation strength initially enhances com-
munity stability, then inhibits it, and ultimately leads to
instability (Fig. 3A, Supplementary Figs. S5-S7). Fur-
thermore, we select two empirical microbial communitiesisolated from the soil [30]. Community 1 is an exploita-
tive community, and is composed of E. aerogenes (Ea), P.
aurantiaca (Pa), P. chlororaphis (Pch), and P. citronello-
lis(Pci). Community 2 is a competitive community, and
is composed of P. putida (Pp), P. veronii (Pv), and S.
marcescens (Sm). We confirm that the non-monotonic
relationship also exists in these empirical communities
(Fig. 3B, see Supplementary Note 3).
The above results can be intuitively understood by ex-
amining the eigenvalue distribution under different self-
regulation strengths and the unit circle stability region
(Fig. 3C). Taking communities with random interac-
tion distribution (such communities encompass exploita-
tive, competitive, and mutualistic interactions, and these
three types of interactions are ‘well-mixed’) as an ex-
ample. We show that when self-regulation strength is
relatively low, the rightmost eigenvalue is the dominant
eigenvalue λ1(top row of Fig. 3C). As self-regulation
strength increases, the rightmost eigenvalue shifts to-
ward the left, leading to a reduction in its absolute
value (i.e., it becomes closer to the origin of the complex
plane), thereby enhancing community stability. Con-
versely, when self-regulation strength is relatively high,
5
Model
Empirical community
Self-regulation, Real Imaginary0 1 2012Stability
UnstableTheo. Simu.Model community
Self-regulation, A C
Theo The dominant eigenvalue0 1 2StabilityB-101
-101
-1 0 1-101
-1 0 1-1 0 1
Stability 
0 1 2 3 4
024
UnstableEa-Pa-Pch-Pci (exploitative)
Pp-Pv-Sm (competitive)
Simu.Ea-Pa-Pch-Pci
 Pp-Pv-Sm
FIG. 3. Self-regulation strength modulates the ecological stability. A , The relationship between stability and self-
regulation strength in communities with random interaction distribution. The solid line is the analytical results calculated
by our theory (Theo.), and diamond dots are numerical simulations (Simu., each dot is an average of 50 communities with
the same set of community parameters). Grey region indicates instability. B, Same relationship observed in empirical soil
exploitative (Ea-Pa-Pch-Pci) and competitive (Pp-Pv-Sm) communities [30]. Dots are obtained by numerical simulations, and
solid lines are from curve fitting. C, Eigenvalue distributions of model and empirical communities (Model community with
random interaction distribution, top; Ea-Pa-Pch-Pci, middle; Pp-Pv-Sm, bottom) under weak ( s= 0.5), moderate ( s= 1)
and strong ( s= 1.5) self-regulation. Blue dots are eigenvalues from numerical simulations (Simu.), black lines are boundaries
predicted by our theory (Theo.). The blue dot pointed by the arrow represents the dominant eigenvalue (which determines
stability) of the Jacobian matrix M. In A, σ= 0.05,C= 0.1,S= 100. In B, σ= 0.1. In C, σ= 0.05,S= 100, C= 0.3.
the leftmost eigenvalue becomes the dominant eigen-
value (right panel). Further increases in self-regulation
strength result in the leftmost eigenvalue shifting further
leftward, leading to an increase in its absolute value (i.e.,
it moves away from the origin of the complex plane), thus
inhibiting community stability. Similar patterns are also
found in selected empirical soil microbial communities
with different compositions of interaction types (Middle
and bottom rows of Fig. 3C).
Stemming from this non-monotonic relationship, an-
other important and surprising finding is that maintain-
ing ecological stability imposes a stricter requirement on
self-regulation strength: it must reside within a suitable
range. Too strong or too weak self-regulation can both
lead to instability for communities composed of species
with non-overlapping generations (Fig. 3A, B, Supple-
mentary Figs. S5-S7).
D. Communities can benefit from the diversity of
interaction types
For complex communities, pairs of species can inter-
act in a range of well-defined ways, such as exploitative,
competitive, and mutualistic interactions. Disentanglinginfluences of different types of interactions on stability is
a fundamental focus in ecology [4, 5, 7, 31, 33]. Previous
studies based on continuous-time dynamics indicate that
the stability of these four typical communities–random,
exploitative, competitive, and mutualistic–exhibits a
strict hierarchical order: exploitative communities are
the most stable, followed by random communities, then
competitive communities, and mutualistic communities
are the least stable [4]. This suggests that exploitative
interactions are stabilizing, while competitive and mutu-
alistic interactions are destabilizing. Moreover, conven-
tional work suggests that this ranking is robust for other
community traits, such as self-regulation [4], short delays
[16], abundance [16], suggesting that ecological stability
can consistently benefit from exploitative interactions.
We then wonder if these results still hold for communities
of species with non-overlapping generations.
Unexpectedly, we find that the stability of communities
composed of species with non-overlapping generations
benefits from the diversity of interaction types (Fig. 4A),
in contrast to the continuous-time counterparts, which
consistently benefit from exploitative interactions (Fig.
S9). As is shown in Fig. 4A, random communities–where
different types of interactions are ‘well-mixed’–exhibit
the highest stability performance among these four typ-
6
B
0 0.5 1 1.5 2012 StabilitySynthetic community
Number of species, 00.10.2 Connectance,A
Self-regulation, 
Theo.
 Simu.
 Theo.
 Simu.
 Theo.
 Simu.
0 500 1000 1500C
10
0110D
Stability
0.20.30.40.5
11.21.41.6
Stability Stability
0.20.30.40.5
Empirical interaction network
Interaction type
10
0110
10
0110
10
0110
10
0110
10
0110=1=0.5 =1.5Random
Exploitative (+/-)
Competitive (-/-)
Mutualistic (+/+)RandomTheo. Simu.
Exploitative (+/-)
Competitive (-/-)
Mutualistic (+/+)
1.8
+/-
-/-+/+Random +/- -/- +/+0.511.52Stability
Stability criteria
FIG. 4. Stability of complex communities with typical interaction types. A , Stability criteria for communities with
different types of interactions. Different markers represent the critical S−Ccurves for different communities, and combinations
ofSandCbelow each curve result in stable communities with a probability close to 1. Different types of communities present
a hierarchy, from random communities (most likely to be stable) to mutualistic/competitive communities (most likely to be
unstable). B, The relationship between stability and self-regulation strength for different communities. Solid lines are obtained
from our theory (Theo.) and dots are from numerical simulations (Simu.). C, Stability analyses of typical communities
with empirical interaction network. We extract the interaction network from the mouse gut microbiome [32]. For each type
of community (random, exploitative, competitive, and mutualistic), we generate 100 samples respectively and calculate the
average stability. D, Stability of communities with diverse interaction types: exploitation, mutualism and competition with
proportion P+/−,P+/+, and P−/−, respectively. Left part of each panel gives results from our theory (Theo.) and right shows
numerical simulations (Simu.). Each data point in the right part is an average of 50 randomly generated communities with the
same set of parameters. In A, s= 1, and σ= 0.05,C= 0.1,S= 100 in B and D.
ical communities. Exploitative communities now rank
second, while competitive and mutualistic communities
possess the worst stability performance.
By checking the eigenvalue distribution of each type
of communities, this stability pattern can be intuitively
understood in the context of our theory. In case of all
species self-regulate with unit strength, the eigenvalue
distributions of all communities are centered at the ori-
gin. For random communities, the eigenvalues are dis-
tributed in a circle with radius r, suggesting that the dis-
tance between the origin and the dominant eigenvalue is
r(Supplementary Note 4 and Fig. S10). For exploitative
communities, the eigenvalues are distributed in a verti-
cally stretched ellipse with a semi-horizontal axis rex< r
and a semi-vertical axis rey> r(Supplementary Note 4
and Fig. S10). Therefore, the distance between the origin
and the dominant eigenvalue is rey, which is greater than
that of random communities, resulting in the decrease of
stability. For competitive/mutualistic communities, the
eigenvalues can be divided into two parts: a horizontally
stretched ellipse and an outlier on the horizontal axis out-
side this ellipse (Supplementary Note 4 and Fig. S10).
This outlier becomes the dominant eigenvalue for com-petitive/mutualistic communities, and its distance from
the origin is greater than that of exploitative communi-
ties. As a result, these two types of communities exhibit
the lowest stability performance.
With the exception of recognizing that the ecological
stability with non-overlapping generations can be pro-
moted by introducing the diversity of interaction types,
we further explore under what circumstances this promo-
tion can occur. We find that this is modulated by self-
regulation strength. With a low level of self-regulation,
the stability order of these typical communities keeps
the traditional ranking from continuous-time dynamics
(Fig. 4B). With a high level of self-regulation, exploita-
tive communities reclaim their position as the most stable
case, followed by random communities. Mutualistic com-
munities occupy the third spot, while competitive com-
munities lag behind (Fig. 4B). With a moderate level
of self-regulation, random communities exhibit the high-
est stability performance (Fig. 4B), as we have shown in
Fig. 4A.
Apart from corroborating our findings through theo-
retical analyses and numerical simulations, we test our
key predictions with recently published data on mouse
7
-101ImaginaryRandom
-1 0 1
Real-101
-1 0 1-1 0 1-1 0 101234CShape parameter,The expected magnitude 
      of the interactions
Shape parameter,
Exploitative Competitive MutualisticStability Weak interaction Strong interactionRandomTheo. Simu.
Exploitative
Competitive
Mutualistic
Weak
InteractionsStrong
Interactions
Simu
UnstableA B
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 300.511.5Stability
Unstable
0 1 2 3 4 500.20.40.60.81
FIG. 5. Weak interactions tend to stabilize complex communities. A , Shape parameter kcontrols the prevalence
of weak interactions. The expected magnitude of interactions reflects the prevalence of weak interactions, where rare weak
interactions result in high magnitude, while prevalent weak interactions result in low magnitude. The increase of kleads to the
increase of the expected magnitude of interactions, and thus the increase of weak interactions prevalence. B, The relationship
between stability and kfor typical communities (random, exploitative, competitive, and mutualistic). Solid lines are theoretical
calculations (Theo.), and dots are results from numerical simulations (Simu.). C, Eigenvalue distributions of Jacobian matrices
for different types of communities under weak ( k= 0.7, top) and strong ( k= 3, bottom) interactions. Blue dots are eigenvalues
from numerical simulations. Other settings are the same as those in Fig. 3C except that C= 0.2.
gut microbiome [32]. We extract interaction networks
from the data to generate corresponding random, ex-
ploitative, competitive, and mutualistic communities, re-
spectively. We confirm that this surprising stability
pattern emerges not only in synthetic communities but
also in communities constructed from empirical data
(Fig. 4C). This suggests that the stability promotion
driven by the diversity of interaction types occurs when
species have a moderate level of self-regulation. Further
extensions to communities where different types of in-
teractions are mixed with arbitrary proportions further
support this finding from theory and numerical simula-
tions (Fig. 4D).E. Weak interactions tend to stabilize complex
communities under discrete-time dynamics
Other than interaction types, the distribution of in-
teraction strength plays a critical role in characterizing
species interactions [1–4, 6, 34–36]. In communities of
species with overlapping generations, it is found that the
influence of interaction strength distribution on stability
depends on specific interaction types: the prevalence of
weak interactions can destabilize exploitative communi-
ties, can stabilize competitive and mutualistic commu-
nities, and has no influence on random communities [4].
To adjust the prevalence of weak interactions in complex
communities, an effective and efficient technical way is
to sample interaction strengths from a Gamma and a re-
8
flected Gamma distribution [4], which allows us to tune
the prevalence of weak interactions in a given community
by a single parameter (Fig. 5A, see Supplementary Note
5).
Our analyses reveal that, weak interactions can in
general promote community stability except for random
communities, which appears to be insensitive to the
prevalence of weak interactions (Fig. 5B). This is because
for exploitative, competitive, and mutualistic communi-
ties, the prevalence of weak interactions affects the eigen-
value distribution of the Jacobian matrix, and further
leads to the decrease of the magnitude of the dominant
eigenvalue (i.e., stability is enhanced, Fig. 5C). While
for random communities, the prevalence of weak interac-
tions has no influence on the eigenvalue distribution of
the Jacobian matrix, and thus has no influence on stabil-
ity (Fig. 5C). Note that these results are consistent with
recent experimental findings showing that weak interac-
tions can stabilize microbial communities [35, 36].
F. Structured food webs composed of species with
non-overlapping generations
So far, our theoretical analyses have primarily focused
on communities with unstructured interaction networks
(i.e., species interact randomly), implying that the oc-
currence of interactions between any two species is ran-
dom. However, supported by empirical data, interac-
tion networks of real-world ecological communities can
be structured. For example, interaction networks of em-
pirical food webs often exhibit hierarchical structure (i.e.,
trophic levels), intervality, and broad degree distribution
[37–42] (here degree of a species captures the number
of its interacting partners). We are then interested in
how these structures influence stability when species have
non-overlapping generations.
To address this problem, here we construct model ex-
ploitative communities following two widely used food
web models – cascade model [4, 31, 37, 41–43] and niche
model [4, 31, 43–45] (see Supplementary Note 6). In
the cascade model, species are organized into a strict
hierarchy, where species occupying higher ranks predate
species positioned at lower ranks with a fixed probability
(Fig. 6A). Therefore, cascade model introduces trophic
levels compared with unstructured food web. In the
niche model, each species is assigned a specific preda-
tion range, and accordingly preys upon all species that
fall within this range (Fig. 6A). Compared with cascade
model, niche model further introduces intervality and
broad degree distribution [46].
Compared with unstructured food webs, we find that
both cascade and niche food webs exhibit reduced stabil-
ity, suggesting that incorporating structural features of
empirical food webs tends to exert a destabilizing effect
(Fig. 6B and Supplementary Fig. S14). The observed
decline in stability from unstructured to cascade food
webs indicates that the introduction of trophic levels isa destabilizing factor. The additional decrease in stabil-
ity seen when transitioning from cascade to niche food
webs highlights the destabilizing impact of introducing
intervality (each predator consumes preys that are ad-
jacent in the hierarchy) alongside a broad degree distri-
bution within food web architectures. By constructing
variants of cascade model (interval cascade model, cas-
cade model with broad degree distribution, and interval
cascade model with broad degree distribution, see Sup-
plementary Note 6), we identify that intervality is the
key driver for the stability decrease from cascade model
to niche model (Fig. 6C,D and Supplementary Fig. S15).
This is because intervality causes the dominant eigenval-
ues to be further away from the origin, thus reducing
stability (Supplementary Fig. S16).
III. DISCUSSION
Since May’s pioneering work, ecologists have dedi-
cated tremendous effort to understanding the mecha-
nisms driving stability or instability in complex ecolog-
ical communities. However, most existing theories fo-
cus on continuous-time dynamics, rendering them inef-
fective in explaining the behavior of communities com-
posed of species with non-overlapping generations. To
address this gap, here we develop a discrete-time dynami-
cal framework to comprehensively understand the drivers
of ecological stability in these communities. With this
framework, we reveal that several established rules for
ecological stability need to be revised. It is worth not-
ing that although the main focus of our work is stability,
this framework can also be applied to study other critical
properties of complex communities, such as coexistence
[47], and reactivity [26, 46, 48, 49], to name a few.
In stark contrast to classic research on species com-
munities with overlapping generations, our study re-
veals that self-regulation plays a more versatile role in
shaping the stability of complex communities with non-
overlapping generations. Specifically, self-regulation acts
as a double-edged sword: increasing its strength is ini-
tially stabilizing but eventually becomes destabilizing.
This dual effect cautions ecosystem managers against
assuming that stronger self-regulation is always benefi-
cial. Moreover, self-regulation modulates the influence of
different interaction types on stability, and communities
benefit most from interaction-type diversity when species
exhibit a moderate level of self-regulation. This finding
highlights that the advantage of diverse interaction types
is a key feature of natural communities in maintaining
ecological stability.
Apart from revealing the beneficial influence of diverse
interaction types, the interplay between self-regulation
and interspecies interactions also provides insights into
whether populations tend to prefer competition or coop-
eration (mutualism)–a long-standing and debated topic
in microbiology. Some microbiologists argue that bac-
terial species rarely cooperate, as cooperation may un-
9
Cascade food web Niche food web
12 S i 
1
2
i
S 12 S i Schematic Interaction matrix Schematic Interaction matrixA
Exploitative interaction Negative effect Positive effect
C D
StabilityBS1
i-1
i+1i
S1
i-1
i+1i
S1
i-1
i+1i
Unstructured food web
Schematic Interaction matrix
12 S i 
012Stability
Sample number0 50 100Variant 1
0 50 100Variant 2
0 50 100Variant 3
Cascade
IntervalityBroad degree dist. Intervality+broad degree dist.
0 -0.1 -0.2123Variant number0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.800.20.40.60.81Unstructured food web
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8Cascade food web
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8Niche food web
1
2
i
S 1
2
i
S 
Stable
FIG. 6. Stability of structured food webs with non-overlapping generations. A , Diagrams of interaction network
structure and interaction matrices. In the unstructured food web, two species interact with each other randomly, and the role
of predator or prey is assigned with equal probability. In the cascade food web, ranks (numbers) of species are introduced, and
species with higher ranks prey on species with lower ranks with a fixed probability. And the curved arrow indicates exploitative
interaction. In the niche food web, species prey on all species within its predation range. For example, the yellow species i
preys on all species located within the yellow–shaded circle. Purple and red blocks in interaction matrices represent positive
and negative interactions, respectively. B, Transition from stability to instability for food webs. We systematically vary the
connectance C(cross) or the standard deviation σ(circle) to obtain the critical value of σ√
SCfor instability. The vertical
red line is the critical value calculated by our theory for unstructured food web. Black, blue, and yellow lines and markers
(crosses and circles) are numerical results, respectively. Each marker is calculated over 100 randomly generated communities
with the same set of parameters. C, Stability of the cascade food web with different variants. Variant 1 is interval cascade food
web; variant 2 is cascade food web with a broad degree distribution; variant 3 is a combination of 1 and 2. Red lines indicate
the stability of the cascade food web without these variants and blue markers (triangle, circle, and diamond) represent the
stability with different variants. For each type of variant, we randomly generated 100 communities with the same parameters.
D, Average stability change for different variants shown in panel C, and here ∆Stability = StabilityVariant −StabilityCascade .
In C-D, S= 200, C= 0.1,s= 1,σ= 0.05.
dermine community stability [33, 50]. Others, however,
contend that cooperation enhances stability and is there-
fore favored [51, 52]. Given that many bacterial species
reproduce through binary fission–a process in which a
single cell divides into two genetically identical daughter
cells and inherently follows a discrete-time structure–our
theory may help reconcile these seemingly contradictory
perspectives: when communities exhibit low or high lev-
els of self-regulation, competitive or mutualistic interac-
tions, respectively, lead to higher level of stability.Building on our current work and classic studies, a
natural next step is to investigate how to model and an-
alyze the dynamical behavior of complex communities
that contain a mixture of species with overlapping and
non-overlapping generations. This is a valuable direction,
as such communities are more representative of natural
systems than those composed solely of species with over-
lapping or non-overlapping generations. However, the
fact that modeling these communities requires combin-
ing continuous-time and discrete-time frameworks makes
10
the exploration of this topic particularly challenging.
In general, our study highlights that established rules
for ecological stability may falter when applied to com-
munities composed of species with non-overlapping gen-
erations, whose behavior is governed by discrete-time dy-
namics. Consequently, without a thorough understand-
ing of the stability mechanisms in such communities,
ecosystem managers may implement ill-advised measures
in response to ecological crises–potentially leading to
catastrophic consequences for the environment, climate,and the routine functioning of human societies. Although
our analyses focus on communities with non-overlapping
generations, the results can be broadly interpreted and
extended to a wide range of systems described by differ-
ence equations. Moreover, since real-world data are often
collected in discrete time, our theory can even be applied
to communities with overlapping generations. Thus, our
work offers a potential bridge between theory and em-
pirical research, contributing to the understanding and
management of ecological communities.
[1] R. M. May, Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosys-
tems (Princeton Univ. Press, 2001).
[2] R. M. May and A. R. McLean, Theoretical Ecology: Prin-
ciples and Applications (Oxford Univ. Press, 2007).
[3] R. M. May, Will a large complex system be stable?, Na-
ture238, 413 (1972).
[4] S. Allesina and S. Tang, Stability criteria for complex
ecosystems, Nature 483, 205 (2012).
[5] A. Mougi and M. Kondoh, Diversity of interaction types
and ecological community stability, Science 337, 349
(2012).
[6] S. Allesina and S. Tang, The stability–complexity rela-
tionship at age 40: A random matrix perspective, Popul.
Ecol. 57, 63 (2015).
[7] S. Tang, S. Pawar, and S. Allesina, Correlation between
interaction strengths drives stability in large ecological
networks, Ecol. Lett. 17, 1094 (2014).
[8] M. E. Newman, Modularity and community structure in
networks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103, 8577 (2006).
[9] J. Grilli, T. Rogers, and S. Allesina, Modularity and sta-
bility in ecological communities, Nat. Commun. 7, 12031
(2016).
[10] D. Gravel, F. Massol, and M. A. Leibold, Stability and
complexity in model meta-ecosystems, Nat. Commun. 7,
12457 (2016).
[11] J. W. Baron and T. Galla, Dispersal-induced instability
in complex ecosystems, Nat. Commun. 11, 6032 (2020).
[12] R. M. May, Time-delay versus stability in population
models with two and three trophic levels, Ecology 54,
315 (1973).
[13] E. Niebur, H. G. Schuster, and D. M. Kammen, Collec-
tive frequencies and metastability in networks of limit-
cycle oscillators with time delay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67,
2753 (1991).
[14] V. K. Jirsa and M. Ding, Will a large complex system
with time delays be stable?, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 070602
(2004).
[15] E. Pigani, D. Sgarbossa, S. Suweis, A. Maritan, and
S. Azaele, Delay effects on the stability of large ecosys-
tems, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 119, e2211449119
(2022).
[16] Y. Yang, K. R. Foster, K. Z. Coyte, and A. Li, Time de-
lays modulate the stability of complex ecosystems, Nat.
Ecol. Evol. 7, 1610 (2023).
[17] A. L. Jensen, Dynamics of populations with nonoverlap-
ping generations, continuous mortality, and discrete re-
productive periods, Ecol. Modell. 74, 305 (1994).
[18] I. M. Aalberg Haugen, D. Berger, and K. Gotthard, The
evolution of alternative developmental pathways: Foot-prints of selection on life-history traits in a butterfly, J.
Evol. Biol. 25, 1377 (2012).
[19] R. P. Kovach, A. J. Gharrett, and D. A. Tallmon, Tempo-
ral patterns of genetic variation in a salmon population
undergoing rapid change in migration timing, Evol. Appl.
6, 795 (2013).
[20] R. M. May, Biological populations with nonoverlapping
generations: Stable points, stable cycles, and chaos, Sci-
ence186, 645 (1974).
[21] J. Beddington, C. Free, and J. Lawton, Dynamic com-
plexity in predator-prey models framed in difference
equations, Nature 255, 58 (1975).
[22] S. Sinha and S. Sinha, Evidence of universality for the
May-Wigner stability theorem for random networks with
local dynamics, Phys. Rev. E 71, 020902 (2005).
[23] J. Hofbauer, V. Hutson, and W. Jansen, Coexistence
for systems governed by difference equations of Lotka-
Volterra type, J. Math. Biol. 25, 553 (1987).
[24] S. L. Pimm, The complexity and stability of ecosystems,
Nature 307, 321 (1984).
[25] C. L. Lehman and D. Tilman, Biodiversity, stability, and
productivity in competitive communities, Am. Nat. 156,
534 (2000).
[26] H. Caswell and M. G. Neubert, Reactivity and transient
dynamics of discrete-time ecological systems, J. Differ.
Equ. Appl. 11, 295 (2005).
[27] H. H. Nguyen and S. O’Rourke, The elliptic law, Int.
Math. Res. 2015 , 7620 (2015).
[28] S. O’Rourke and D. Renfrew, Low rank perturbations of
large elliptic random matrices, Electron. J. Probab. 19,
1 (2014).
[29] T. Rogers, Universal sum and product rules for random
matrices, J. Math. Phy. 51, 093304 (2010).
[30] J. Friedman, L. M. Higgins, and J. Gore, Community
structure follows simple assembly rules in microbial mi-
crocosms, Nat. Ecol. Evol. 1, 0109 (2017).
[31] G. Barab´ as, M. J. Michalska-Smith, and S. Allesina, Self-
regulation and the stability of large ecological networks,
Nat. Ecol. Evol. 1, 1870 (2017).
[32] R. R. Stein, V. Bucci, N. C. Toussaint, C. G. Buffie,
G. R¨ atsch, E. G. Pamer, C. Sander, and J. B. Xavier,
Ecological modeling from time-series inference: Insight
into dynamics and stability of intestinal microbiota,
PLoS Comput. Biol. 9, e1003388 (2013).
[33] K. Z. Coyte, J. Schluter, and K. R. Foster, The ecology
of the microbiome: Networks, competition, and stability,
Science 350, 663 (2015).
[34] K. McCann, A. Hastings, and G. R. Huxel, Weak trophic
interactions and the balance of nature, Nature 395, 794
11
(1998).
[35] C. Ratzke, J. Barrere, and J. Gore, Strength of species
interactions determines biodiversity and stability in mi-
crobial communities, Nat. Ecol. Evol. 4, 376 (2020).
[36] J. Hu, D. R. Amor, M. Barbier, G. Bunin, and J. Gore,
Emergent phases of ecological diversity and dynamics
mapped in microcosms, Science 378, 85 (2022).
[37] X. Chen and J. E. Cohen, Transient dynamics and food–
web complexity in the Lotka–Volterra cascade model,
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. 268, 869 (2001).
[38] D. B. Stouffer, J. Camacho, and L. A. N. Amaral, A
robust measure of food web intervality, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 103, 19015 (2006).
[39] J. A. Dunne, R. J. Williams, and N. D. Martinez, Food-
web structure and network theory: The role of con-
nectance and size, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 99, 12917
(2002).
[40] R. J. Williams and N. D. Martinez, Simple rules yield
complex food webs, Nature 404, 180 (2000).
[41] S. Allesina, D. Alonso, and M. Pascual, A general model
for food web structure, Science 320, 658 (2008).
[42] J. E. Cohen, F. Briand, and C. M. Newman, Commu-
nity Food Webs: Data and Theory (Springer Science &
Business Media, 2012).
[43] S. Allesina, J. Grilli, G. Barab´ as, S. Tang, J. Aljadeff, and
A. Maritan, Predicting the stability of large structuredfood webs, Nat. Commun. 6, 7842 (2015).
[44] S. McNaughton, Stability and diversity of ecological com-
munities, Nature 274, 251 (1978).
[45] P. Yodzis, The stability of real ecosystems, Nature 289,
674 (1981).
[46] Y. Yang, K. Z. Coyte, K. R. Foster, and A. Li, Reactiv-
ity of complex communities can be more important than
stability, Nat. Commun. 14, 7204 (2023).
[47] S. Saavedra, R. P. Rohr, J. Bascompte, O. Godoy, N. J.
Kraft, and J. M. Levine, A structural approach for un-
derstanding multispecies coexistence, Ecol. Monogr. 87,
470 (2017).
[48] M. G. Neubert and H. Caswell, Alternatives to resilience
for measuring the responses of ecological systems to per-
turbations, Ecology 78, 653 (1997).
[49] S. Tang and S. Allesina, Reactivity and stability of large
ecosystems, Front. Ecol. Evol. 2, 21 (2014).
[50] N. M. Oliveira, R. Niehus, and K. R. Foster, Evolution-
ary limits to cooperation in microbial communities, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 17941 (2014).
[51] L. O˜ na and C. Kost, Cooperation increases robustness
to ecological disturbance in microbial cross-feeding net-
works, Ecol. Lett. 25, 1410 (2022).
[52] G. D’Souza and C. Kost, Experimental evolution of
metabolic dependency in bacteria, PLoS Genet. 12,
e1006364 (2016).
