SymDQN: Symbolic Knowledge and Reasoning in Neural Network-based
Reinforcement Learning
Ivo Amador ,Nina Gierasimczuk
Technical University of Denmark
ivo.amador@gmail.com, nigi@dtu.dk
Abstract
We propose a learning architecture that allows
symbolic control and guidance in reinforcement
learning with deep neural networks. We intro-
duce SymDQN , a novel modular approach that
augments the existing Dueling Deep Q-Networks
(DuelDQN ) architecture with modules based on
the neuro-symbolic framework of Logic Tensor
Networks (LTNs). The modules guide action policy
learning and allow reinforcement learning agents to
display behavior consistent with reasoning about
the environment. Our experiment is an ablation
study performed on the modules. It is conducted
in a reinforcement learning environment of a 5x5
grid navigated by an agent that encounters various
shapes, each associated with a given reward. The
underlying DuelDQN attempts to learn the optimal
behavior of the agent in this environment, while
the modules facilitate shape recognition and reward
prediction. We show that our architecture signifi-
cantly improves learning, both in terms of perfor-
mance and the precision of the agent. The mod-
ularity of SymDQN allows reflecting on the intri-
cacies and complexities of combining neural and
symbolic approaches in reinforcement learning.
1 Introduction
Despite its rapidly growing impact on society, Artificial In-
telligence technologies are tormented by reliability issues,
such as lack of interpretability, propagation of biases, dif-
ficulty in generalizing across domains, and susceptibility to
adversarial attacks. A possible way towards more inter-
pretable, controlled and guided algorithms leads through the
field of neuro-symbolic AI, which explores new ways of inte-
grating symbolic, logic-based knowledge in neural networks
(NNs). In particular, the framework of Logic Tensor Net-
works (LTNs, for short) [Serafini and d’Avila Garcez, 2016;
Badreddine et al. , 2022 ]enhances learning by interpreting
first-order logic formulas concretely on data used by NNs al-
gorithms. Such formulas express properties of data and, given
a fuzzy semantics, can be integrated into the loss function,
thus guiding the learning process.In this paper, we apply LTNs to a reinforcement learning
problem. By integrating LTNs in the training process, our
learning agent uses logic to learn the structure of the envi-
ronment, to predict how different objects in the environment
interact with each other, and to guide its actions by perform-
ing elementary reasoning about rewards. We investigate how
such integration affects learning performance of a robust, es-
tablished and well-studied framework of Dueling Deep Q-
Network ( DuelDQN , for short) [Wang et al. , 2016 ]. The
structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we briefly
recall Logic Tensor Networks and elements of the underly-
ing Real Logic. In Section 3 we introduce our methodology:
theSymDQN architecture and its training process. We follow
up with the presentation of the experiment in Section 4. We
discuss of the results in Section 5. Section 6 concludes and
outlines directions for future work.
Related Work Since its conception, the framework of
LTNs has been applied in various domains. In computer vi-
sion, LTNs were used to inject prior knowledge about ob-
ject relationships and properties, improving interpretability
and accuracy in object detection [Donadello et al. , 2017 ].
Their addition to convolutional neural networks improves the
robustness on noisy data [Manigrasso et al. , 2021 ]. They
enhance the accuracy in reasoning tasks in open-world and
closed-world scenarios [Wagner and d’Avila Garcez, 2022 ].
In[Bianchi and Hitzler, 2019 ], LTNs are leveraged for de-
ductive reasoning tasks. Finally, in learning by reinforce-
ment LTNs were used to integrate prior knowledge into re-
inforcement learning agents improving both the learning rate
and robustness to environmental changes [Badreddine and
Spranger, 2019 ]. The latter work is similar to ours in the
choice of tools, but it differs in its methodology. In [Badred-
dine and Spranger, 2019 ], LTN is a separate pre-training mod-
ule which interacts with DuelDQN only by creating inputs. In
contrast, our SymDQN integrates LTN in the training process
(making it learn alongside DuelDQN ).
Our work uses logic to adjust elements of a reinforcement
learning framework. In that, it is related to reward shaping ap-
proaches, where the learner is given external symbolic infor-
mation about the environment, e.g., in the form of linear time
logic formulas (also known as restraining bolts) in [Giacomo
et al. , 2019 ]or of an induced automaton in [Furelos-Blanco
et al. , 2021 ]. In a way, the LTN approach is similar: logical
formulas adjust the reinforcement learning process. However,arXiv:2504.02654v1  [cs.AI]  3 Apr 2025
our technique is a more distributed form of reward shaping.
First, the formulas of Real Logic are used as guides to obtain
a symbolic representation of the environment, then to pre-
dict immediate rewards from encountering the objects of the
environment. Finally, a logical formula is used to help the
learner align the q-values (the agent’s long term policy) with
the predicted immediate rewards of symbolically represented
objects. In other words, we restrain the reinforcement learner
by expecting it to reason about its behavior as it learns, and
we investigate the impact of this restriction on learning pre-
cision and performance. We will come back to this issue in
Section 5.1, after we have detailed all the components.
2 Real Logic
Real Logic is the basis of the functioning of LTNs. In this
section we provide a rudimentary introduction (for a full ex-
position consult [Badreddine et al. , 2022 ]). Let us start with
a simple example.
Example 1. Consider two datasets: a data set of humans
(with two features: age and gender), and a dataset of pets
(with three features: height, weight and color). Assume that
Alice appears in the data set of humans (for instance as a five
year old female), and Max and Mittens are listed in a dataset
of pets. To be able to talk about Alice, Max and Mittens,
we need a logical language that includes constants referring
to objects (particular rows of the datasets). Note that such
constants can be of different types —in our example humans
consists of two, while pets are composed of three features.
The signature of the language of Real Logic Lcontains
a setCof constant symbols, a set Fof function symbols, a
setPof predicate symbols, and a set Xof variable symbols.
LetDbe a non-empty set of domain symbols (that represent
types). Domain symbols are used by functions D,Din, and
Doutwhich for a given element of the signature output its
type, in the following way. D:X ∪ C → D specifies the
types for variables and constants; Din:F ∪ P → D∗speci-
fies the types of the sequence of arguments allowed by func-
tion and predicate symbols ( D∗stands for the set of all finite
sequences of elements from D);Dout:F → D specifies the
type of the range of a function symbol.
Example 2. Continuing Example 1, let the language of
pet-ownership Lpets have the signature consisting of the
set of constants C={ALICE,MAX,MIT}, a set of func-
tion symbols F={OWNER }, a set of predicate sym-
bolsP={ISOWNER}, and two variable symbols X=
{PET,PERSON }. Further, we have two domain symbols, one
for the domain of humans and one for pets, D={H, P}.
Then, our domain functions can be defined in the follow-
ing way. D(ALICE) = H(Alice is a constant of type
H),D(MAX) =D(MIT) = P(Max and Mittens are of
typeP). Further, each dataset will have its own variable:
D(PET) =P,D(PERSON ) =H. We also need to specify in-
puts for predicates: Din(ISOWNER ) =HP (ISOWNER is a
predicate taking two arguments, a human and a pet). Finally,
for functions, we need both the input and the output types:
Din(OWNER ) =P, andDout(OWNER ) =H(OWNER takes
as input a pet and outputs the human who owns it).The language of Real Logic corresponds to first-order
logic, and so it allows for more complex expressions. The set
of terms consists of constants, variables, and function sym-
bols and is defined in the following way: each t∈X∪Cis a
term of domain D(t); ift1, . . . , t nare terms, then t1. . . tnis
a term of the domain D(t1)...D(tn); iftis a term of the do-
mainDin(f), then f(t)is a term of the domain Dout(f). Fi-
nally, the formulae of Real Logic are as follows: t1=t2is an
atomic formula for any terms t1andt2withD(t1) =D(t2);
P(t)is an atomic formula if D(t) =Din(P); ifφandψ
are formulae and x1, . . . , x nare variable symbols, then ¬φ,
φ∧ψ,φ∨ψ,φ→ψ,φ↔ψ,∀x1. . . x nφand∃x1. . . x nφ
are formulae.
Let us turn to the semantics of Real Logic. Domain
symbols allow grounding the logic in numerical, data-driven
representations—to be precise, Real Logic is grounded in
tensors in the field of real numbers. Tensor grounding is
the key concept that allows the interplay of Real Logic with
Neural Networks. It refers to the process of mapping high-
level symbols to tensor representations, allowing integration
of reasoning and differentiable functions. A grounding G
assigns to each domain symbol D∈ D a set of tensors
G(D)⊆S
n1...nd∈N∗Rn1×...×nd. For every D1. . . D n∈
D∗,G(D1. . . D n) =G(D1)×. . .×G(Dn). Given a language
L, a grounding GofLassigns to each constant symbol c, a
tensorG(c)in the domain G(D(c)); to a variable xit assigns
a finite sequence of tensors d1. . . d k, each in G(D(x)), rep-
resenting the instances of x; to a function symbol fit assigns
a function taking tensors from G(Din(f))as input, and pro-
ducing a tensor in G(Dout(f))as output; to a predicate sym-
bolPit assigns a function taking tensors from G(Din(P))
as input, and producing a truth-degree in the interval [0,1]as
output.
In other words, Gassigns to a variable a concatenation of
instances in the domain of the variable. The treatment of free
variables in Real Logic is analogous, departing from the usual
interpretation of free variables in FOL. Thus, the application
of functions and predicates to terms with free variables re-
sults in point-wise application of the function or predicate to
the string representing all instances of the variable (see p. 5 of
[Badreddine et al. , 2022 ]for examples). Semantically, logi-
cal connectives are fuzzy operators applied recursively to the
suitable subformulas: conjunction is a t-norm, disjunction
is a t-conorm, and for implication and negation—its fuzzy
correspondents. The semantics for formulae with quantifiers
(∀and∃) is given by symmetric and continuous aggregation
operators Agg :S
n∈N[0,1]n→[0,1]. Intuitively, quan-
tifiers reduce the dimensions associated with the quantified
variables.
Example 3. Continuing our running example, we could en-
rich our signature with predicates Dog andCat. Then,
Dog(Max)might return 0.8, while Dog(Mit)might return
0.3, indicating that Max is likely a dog, while Mittens is not.
In practice, the truth degrees for these atomic formulas could
be obtained for example by a Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP),
followed by a sigmoid function, taking the object’s features
as input and returning a value in [0,1]. For a new function
symbol age,age(Max)could be an MLP , taking Max’s fea-
tures, and outputting a scalar representing Max’s age. An
example of a formula could be Dog(Max)∨Cat(Max),
which could return 0.95indicating that Max is almost cer-
tainly either a dog or a cat. A formula with a universal quan-
tifier could be used to express that Alice owns all of the cats
∀pet(Cat(pet)→isOwner (Alice, pet )).
Real Logic allows some flexibility in the choice of appro-
priate fuzzy operators for the semantics of connectives and
quantifiers. However, note that not all fuzzy operators are
suitable for differentiable learning [van Krieken et al. , 2022 ].
In Appendix B of [Badreddine et al. , 2022 ], the authors dis-
cuss some particularly suitable fuzzy operators. In this work,
we follow their recommendation and adopt the Product Real
Logic semantics (product t-norm for conjunction, standard
negation, the Reichenbach implication, p-mean for the exis-
tential, and p-mean error for the universal quantifier).
LTNs make use of Real Logic—they learns parameters that
maximize the aggregated satisfiability of the formulas in the
so-called knowledge base containing formulas of Real Logic.
The framework is the basis of the PyTorch implementation
of the LTN framework, known as LTNtorch library [Carraro,
2022 ]. In our experiments we make substantial use of that
tool.
3 Methodology
3.1 The game
The environment used for the experiments was a cus-
tom Gymnasium [Towers et al. , 2024 ]environment
ShapesGridEnv designed for the experiments in [Badred-
dine and Spranger, 2019 ], see Fig. 1. The game is played
on an image showing a 5x5 grid with cells occupied by one
agent, represented by the symbol ‘+’, and a number of other
objects: circles, squares, and crosses. The agent moves across
the board (up, right, down, left) and when it enters a space
occupied by an object, it ‘consumes’ that object. Each ob-
ject shape is associated with a reward. The agent’s goal is to
maximize its cumulative reward throughout an episode. An
episode terminates when either all shapes with positive re-
ward have been consumed, or when a predefined number of
steps has been reached.
Figure 1: ShapesGridEnv environment
We chose this environment because of its simplicity, and
because it allows comparing our setting with that of [Badred-
dine and Spranger, 2019 ]. The environment is very flexible inits parameters: density (the minimum and maximum amount
of shapes initiated, in our case max is 18), rewards (in our
case the reward for a cross is +1, for a circle is -1 and for a
square is 0), colors (in our case the background is white and
objects are black), episode maximum length (for us it is 50).
Altering the environment configurations allows investigating
the adaptability of the learner in [Badreddine and Spranger,
2019 ].
3.2 The Model
A suitable approach to learning to play such a game could be
the existing Dueling Deep Q-Network ( DuelDQN )[Wang et
al., 2015 ]. The architecture is composed of several convo-
lutional layers, which extract relevant features from the raw
image input, and then pass them to the two main components,
a Value Stream and an Advantage Stream (see Fig. 2). The
Value Stream estimates how good it is for the agent to be in
the given state, while the Advantage Stream estimates how
good it is to perform each action in that given state. The two
streams are then combined to calculate the final output.
Figure 2: Network Architecture of DuelDQN , with the convolu-
tional layers in white, and the dense layers in red
TheDuelDQN architecture will be our starting point. We
will extend it with new symbolic, cognitively-motivated com-
ponents:
• shape recognition ( ShapeRecognizer ),
• reward prediction ( RewardPredictor ),
• action reasoning ( ActionReasoner ), and
• action filtering ( ActionFilter ).
In the following, we will discuss each component in more
detail.
ShapeRecognizer The function of ShapeRecognizer
is to estimate the likelihood of a certain observation to be
of a given unique kind. ShapeRecognizer is comprised
of one pre-processing function, which divides the initial raw
image into 25 patches. Each patch is then processed by a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which then outputs a
5-dimensional tensor.
The numbers chosen for the number of patches and the out-
put dimension are an instance of soft knowledge injection, as
the environment represents a 5x5 grid, and dividing it into
25 patches immediately separates the content of each cell in
the grid. As for the output size, 5 is the number of different
objects that each patch might contain: empty, agent, circle,
cross, square. This allows the agent to perform a multi-label
classification on each object type. The theoretical intention
of this module is to give the agent a possibility of symbolic
understanding of the different entities in the environment, by
labeling their types.
Given the simple nature of the ShapesGridEnv , repre-
senting the environment is very easy. The state is composed
of25positions, with each position being occupied by one of
five shapes (empty, agent, circle, square, cross), which results
in the state space of size 255. To generate this representation,
we start by instantiating five one-hot representations of the
classes, which are stored in the LTN Variable shape types .
Then, for each state that the agent is in, it keeps in memory
all the different patches that it has seen and a list of all the
patches that are present in the current state.
Figure 3: The process of obtaining unique labels
Once the variables have been set up, the
ShapeRecognizer module can be used to estimate
the likelihood of a grid cell containing a given unique shape.
To guide its learning, the aggregated satisfiability of three
axioms is maximized. The axioms represent the first instance
ofactual knowledge injection in the system:
∀s∃l IS(s, l) (A1)
¬∃s l1l2(IS(s, l1)∧IS(s, l2)∧(l1̸=l2)) (A2)
∀s1s2l((IS(s1, l)∧(s1̸=s2))→ ¬IS(s2, l) (A3)
In the above formulas, sstands for a shape, lstands for a la-
bel and IS(x, y)stands for xhas label y. A1 says that every
shape has a label; A2 says that no shape has two different
labels; A3 says that different shapes cannot have the same la-
bel. At each step of every episode, the aggregated satisfaction
(truth) degree of these axioms is calculated, and its inverse,
1−AggSat (A1, A2, A3), is used as a loss to train the agent.
Intuitively, ShapeRecognizer gives the learner a way
to distinguish between different shapes. In that, our approach
is somewhat similar to the framework of semi-supervised
symbol grounding [Umili et al. , 2023 ].
RewardPredictor Once the environment is symbolically
represented, we will make the agent understand the properties
of different objects and their dynamics. The only truly dy-
namic element in the environment is the agent itself—nothing
else moves. The agent can move to a cell that was previously
occupied by a different shape, which results in the shape be-
ing consumed, and the agent being rewarded with the value
of the respective shape. Hence, there are three key pieces of
knowledge that the learner must acquire to successfully navi-
gate the environment. It must identify which shape represents
the agent, it must understand how each action influences the
future position of the agent, and it must associate each shape
with its respective reward.The task of self-recognition can be approached in numer-
ous ways, depending on the information we have about the
environment, and on our understanding of its dynamics. In
our approach, leveraging the ShapeRecognizer , in each
episode we count the occurrences of each shape in the en-
vironment and add it to a variable that keeps track of this
shape’s count over time. The agent is the only shape that
has a constant, and equal to one, number of appearances in
the environment. This approach is enough to quickly deter-
mine with confidence which shape represents the agent. This
step demonstrates a specific advantage of using the neuro-
symbolic framework. Our reinforcement learning agent is
now equipped with memory of the previous states of the en-
vironment (i.e., the count of shapes) which can then be used
to make decisions or to further process symbolic knowledge.
Understanding the impact of different actions is crucial for
the agent to make informed decisions in the environment.
Each action represents a direction (up, right, down, left) and
taking the action will lead to one of two outcomes. If the
agent is at the edge of the environment and attempts to move
against the edge, it will remain in the same cell, otherwise,
the agent will move one cell in the given direction. Given the
simplicity of this dynamics, a function has been defined that
takes as input a position and an action, outputting the result-
ing position.
OurRewardPredictor is a Multi-layer Perceptron
(MLP), which takes as input a ShapeRecognizer ’s pre-
diction and outputs one scalar. The main intention of this
module is to train to predict the reward associated with each
object shape, using the symbolic representations generated
by the ShapeRecognizer paired with high-level reason-
ing on the training procedure. This module intends to give the
agent a way of knowing on a high level the reward associated
with any shape, and consequently with any action.
In reinforcement learning environments, agents learn ac-
tion policies by maximizing their expected rewards. When
building an agent that symbolically represents and reasons
about the environment, one of the key elements is the agent’s
ability to understand how to obtain rewards. Given that
the agent has the capability of identifying the shapes in the
grid, recognizing its own shape, and calculating the posi-
tion it will take given an action, it can now determine the
shape that will be consumed by that action. By using the
RewardPredictor module and passing it this shape, the
agent obtains a prediction of the reward associated with that
shape. Over time, by calculating the loss between that pre-
diction and the actual reward obtained after taking an action,
the module learns to accurately predict the reward associated
with every shape.
ActionReasoner Once the agent can predict the expected
reward of its own actions, we can then guide its policy learn-
ing so that it acts in the way (it expects) will give the high-
est immediate reward. To achieve this, we specify an axiom
to ensure that the q−value outputs of the Q-Network are in
alignment with the predicted rewards. To achieve this, the ex-
pected reward of all the possible actions is calculated by using
theRewardPredictor and the q−values are calculated by
calling the SymDQN . Our axiom expresses the following con-
dition: if the reward prediction of action a1is higher than the
reward prediction of action a2, then the q−value of a1must
also be higher than the q−value of a2. The learning is then
guided by the LTN framework with the following formula of
Real Logic used in the loss function.
∀Diag((r1, q1),(r2, q2))(r1> r 2) : (q1> q 2) (A4)
Two standard operators of Real Logic [Badreddine et al. ,
2022 ]are applied in this axiom: Diag and guarded quan-
tification with the condition (r1> r 2). Firstly, the Diag
operator restricts the range of the quantifier, which will then
not run through all the pairs from {r1, r2, q1, q2}, but only the
pairs of (reward, q-value) that correspond to the same actions.
Specifically, when r1corresponds to the predicted reward of
action ‘up’, then q1corresponds to q-value of action ‘up’.
Secondly, we use guarded quantification, restricting the range
of the quantifier to only those cases in which (r1> r 2). If we
had used implication, with the antecedent (r1> r 2)false, the
whole condition would evaluate to true. This is problematic
when the majority of pairs do not fulfill the antecedent. In
such a case the universal quantifier evaluates to true for most
of the instances, even if the important ones, with antecedent
true, are false. Guarded quantification gives a satisfaction de-
gree that is much closer to the value we are interested in.
ActionFilter Our learner can now predict the reward for
each shape. For each action in a given state, it then knows
what shapes could be consumed and what is their correspond-
ing immediate reward. ActionFilter eliminates the ac-
tions for which the difference between their reward and the
maximum immediately obtainable reward in that state is un-
der a predefined threshold (we set it at 0.5). This allows a bal-
ance between the strictness of symbolic selection of immedi-
ately best actions and the information about rewards available
in the network as a whole. This is represented in Fig. 4.
Figure 4: The process of action filtering
ActionFilter severely restricts action choice. We pre-
vented it from forcing the outcomes by switching it off during
the training period. When the agent is actually running in the
environment, the ActionFilter is used to optimize deci-
sion making. Further strategies on how this dynamic might
be implemented in training must be studied, as we want to
maintain the asymptotic optimality of DuelDQNs , while en-
hancing them with reasoning, when relevant.
With ShapeRecognizer ,RewardPredictor ,
ActionReasoner andActionFilter integrated with
the original DuelDQN , the complete architecture of SymDQN
can be seen in Fig. 5.
Figure 5: SymDQN network architecture integrating DuelDQN with
ShapeRecognizer andRewardPredictor modules
4 The experiment
By comparing the baseline DuelDQN model with our
SymDQN model, this study attempts to answer the following
questions:
Q1 Does the SymDQN converge to a stable action policy
faster than the baseline DuelDQN ?
Q2 Does the SymDQN outperform the baseline DuelDQN in
average reward accumulation?
Q3 Is SymDQN more precise in its performance than
DuelDQN , i.e., is it better at avoiding shapes with nega-
tive rewards?
In the experiment, we analyze the impact that each
individual modification has on the performance of the
SymDQN , comparing them between each other and the base-
lineDuelDQN . We hence consider five experimental condi-
tions:
DuelDQN : the baseline model-no symbolic components;
SymDQN :DuelDQN enriched with ShapeRecognizer
(that uses A1-A3) and with RewardPredictor ;
SymDQN(AR) :SymDQN with ActionReasoner (that
uses the axiom A4);
SymDQN(AF) :SymDQN withActionFilter ;
SymDQN(AR,AF) :SymDQN enriched with both
ActionReasoner andActionFilter .
Our experiment runs through 250epochs, after which the
empirically observed rate of learning of all the variations is
no longer significant. Each epoch contains 50episodes of
training, and then the agent’s performance is evaluated as the
average score of 50new episodes. The score is defined as the
ratio of the actual score and the maximum score obtainable in
a given episode. The other performance measure we look at
is the percentage of the negative-reward objects consumed.1
5 Results
In this section, we will report on the results of our ablation
study, which isolates the impact of each component on the
1The hardware and software specification and the hyperparame-
ters of the experiment can be found in the Appendix A.
agent’s performance. We will first focus on the obtained
score comparison among different experimental conditions,
and later we will report on the precision of the agent.
We first compare our best-performing condition,
SymDQN(AF) with the baseline learning of the pure non-
symbolic DuelDQN , see Fig. 6. Clearly, the performance
Figure 6: SymDQN(AF) (in green) vs. DuelDQN (in black): x-axis
represents epochs and y-axis represents the ratio of obtained score
in the episode and the maximum obtainable score in that episode.
of the SymDQN agent equipped with ActionFilter is
superior to DuelDQN both in terms of quicker convergence
(high initial learning rate) and overall end performance.
Let us now look at different versions of our SymDQN to
better understand what contributes to its performance. In
Fig. 7 we show the performance of all four versions of
SymDQN . From this graph, we can conclude that the presence
Figure 7: All versions of SymDQN :SymDQN(AF) (in green),
SymDQN(AR,AF) (in red), SymDQN (in blue) and SymDQN(AR)
(in purple); the x-axis represents epochs and the y-axis represents
the ratio of obtained score in the episode and the maximum obtain-
able score in that episode. We report in standard deviations in the
Appendix.
ofActionReasoner , despite giving a slight boost in the
initial learning rate, hampers the overall performance of the
agent (red and purple graphs). On the other hand, the pres-
ence of ActionFilter improves the initial performance
(green and red).Let us now move to another performance measure: the
precision of the agent in avoiding objects of the shape as-
sociated with negative rewards. We now compare all five
experimental conditions, see Fig. 8. While the presence of
Figure 8: Agent’s precision in all conditions: SymDQN(AF) (in
green), SymDQN(AR,AF) (in red), SymDQN(AR) (in purple);
SymDQN (in blue); DuelDQN (in black): the x-axis represents
epochs and the y-axis represents the percentage of negative-reward
objects consumed by the agent. Note that the green and red lines
overlap.
ActionReasoner (in purple) allows a significant improve-
ment of precision, it’s the ActionFilter that eradicates
negative rewards completely (red and green graphs). The
baseline DuelDQN and the pure SymDQN perform similarly,
not being able to learn to avoid negative rewards completely.
5.1 Interpretation and Discussion
The integration of symbolic knowledge into reinforcement
learning, as demonstrated by SymDQN , provides several in-
sights into the potential of neuro-symbolic approaches in AI.
The ability of SymDQN to extract and utilize key environ-
mental features drives a significant boost in initial learning
rate and overall performance, suggesting that symbolic rep-
resentations can provide a valuable advantage to neural net-
works, enabling them to rapidly leverage the features for bet-
ter decision-making. The ActionFilter provides a dra-
matic enhancement in early-stage performance, allowing the
model to make good decisions as soon as the symbolic repre-
sentation is available. By leveraging the symbolic representa-
tion and understanding of the environment, ActionFilter
prunes sub-optimal actions, aligning the agent’s behavior
with a symbolic understanding of the environment. The role
ofActionReasoner is less clear: while providing a slight
boost in initial performance, it hampers the overall learning
rate. It seems that by forcing the model output to comply with
the logical axiom, it diminishes its ability to capture informa-
tion that is not described by the logical formulas.
The two components, ActionReasoner and
ActionFilter use symbolic information to adjust
(the impact of) q-values and could be seen as a form of
reward shaping. ActionReasoner uses the axiom (A4)
to align q-values with predicted immediate rewards. As we
can see in Fig. 7, this ‘reward shaping’ process is detrimental
to the overall performance. A possible reason for that can
be illustrated in the following example. Let’s assume the
agent is separated from a multitude of positive shapes by
a thin wall of negative shapes. A long-term perspective
of sacrificing some reward by crossing over the wall can
be blocked by attaching too much value to the immediate
punishment. Note, however, that although ineffective, this
‘reward shaping’ makes the agent more cautious/precise (see
Fig. 7). While ActionFilter does not shape the reward
function directly (as it is turned off in the training phase),
it performs reasoning based on rewards (Fig. 4). In a given
state it eliminates the possibility of executing actions for
which q-values and immediate rewards differ too drastically.
The advantages of SymDQN come with trade-offs. The
computational cost introduced by the additional components
is non-trivial, and the logical constraints imposed on the
learning might hamper performance in more complex envi-
ronments. In that, the use of LTNs in reinforcement learning
sheds light on the ‘thinking fast and slow’ effects in learning.
Firstly, the use of axioms (A1)-(A3) in ShapeRecognizer
gives a sharp increase in the initial performance due to the un-
derstanding of the environment structure (Fig. 8). Apart from
that, adjusting the reward function with ActionReasoner
andActionFilter will increase precision (as normally
assumed about the System 2 type of behavior), but it can also
hamper the overall performance, like it does in the case of
ActionReasoner (see Fig. 7).
6 Conclusions and Future Work
This research introduces a novel modular approach to inte-
grating symbolic knowledge with deep reinforcement learn-
ing through the implementation of SymDQN . We contribute
to the field of Neuro-Symbolic AI in several ways. Firstly,
we demonstrate a successful integration of LTNs into rein-
forcement learning, a promising and under-explored research
direction. This integration touches on key challenges: inter-
pretability, alignment, and knowledge injection. Secondly,
SymDQN augments reinforcement learning through symbolic
environment representation, modeling of object relationships
and dynamics, and guiding action based on symbolic knowl-
edge, effectively improving both initial learning rates and the
end performance of the reinforcement learning agents. These
contributions advance the field of neuro-symbolic AI, bridg-
ing the gap between symbolic reasoning and deep learning
systems. Our findings demonstrate the potential of integrative
approaches in creating more aligned, controllable and inter-
pretable models for safe and reliable AI systems.
6.1 Future Work
We see several potential avenues for future research.
Enhancing Environment Representation It is easy to see
that the ShapeRecognizer can be adapted to any grid-
like environment. It could also be further developed to rep-
resent more complex environments symbolically, e.g., by in-
tegrating a more advanced object-detection component (e.g.,
Faster-LTN [Manigrasso et al. , 2021 ]). With the addition
of precise bounding box detection and multi-class labeling,
the component could be extended to also perform hierarchi-cal representations, e.g., recognizing independent objects and
their parts or constructing abstract taxonomies.
Automatic Axiom Discovery The investigation of auto-
matic axiom discovery through iterative learning, or meta-
learning, is an interesting direction that opens the doors to
knowledge extraction from a model (see, e.g., [Hasanbeig et
al., 2021; Umili et al. , 2021; Meli et al. , 2024 ]). Theoreti-
cally, given enough time and randomization, Q-learning con-
verges to optimal decision policy in any environment, and so
the iterative development and assessment of axioms might al-
low us to extract knowledge from deep learning systems that
outperform human experts.
Broader Evaluation While a version of SymDQN was
shown to be advantageous, it was only tested in a single, sim-
ple environment. A broader suite of empirical experiments
in more complex environments, such as Atari games or Pac-
Man, is necessary to understand the generalization capabili-
ties of the findings. These environments provide more com-
plex and diverse challenges, potentially offering deeper in-
sights into the advantages of SymDQN .
A Appendix
Hardware and software specifications The experiments,
hyper-parameter tuning, and model variation comparisons
were performed on a computing center machine (Tesla V100
with either 16 or 32GB). The coding environment used was
Python 3.9.5 and Pytorch 2.3.1 with Cuda Toolkit 12.1. To in-
tegrate LTNs, the LTNtorch [Carraro, 2022 ]library was used,
a PyTorch implementation by Tommaso Carraro. For exper-
iment tracking, the ClearMl Platform [cle, 2023 ]was used.
The code is provided as a separate .zip file.
Hyperparameters The hyper-parameters used for training
were: explore steps: 25000, update steps: 1000, initial ep-
silon: 0.95, end epsilon: 0.05, memory capacity: 1000, batch
size: 16, gamma: 0.99, learning rate: 0.0001, maximum gra-
dient norm: 1. Semantics of quantifiers in LTN used p= 8.
Standard deviations Performance was assessed through 5
independent experimental runs per configuration. Each run
evaluated 50 distinct environments to calculate average scores
per epoch; ( ∗) stands for SymDQN( ∗), values for epochs 50,
150, 250 (smoothed, rolling window 5). First table: overall
performance (rewards, r) and standard deviations (sd). Sec-
ond table: ratio of negative shapes collected (inverse of pre-
cision, p) and sd.
Model 50r 50sd 150r 150sd 250r 250sd
(AF) 0.65 0.03 0.70 0.01 0.71 0.01
(AR) 0.26 0.03 0.47 0.01 0.53 0.04
() 0.43 0.05 0.65 0.02 0.66 0.02
(AR,AF) 0.40 0.02 0.53 0.02 0.59 0.02
DuelDQN 0.24 0.06 0.57 0.02 0.64 0.01
Model 50p 50sd 150p 150sd 250p 250sd
(AF) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
(AR) 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00
() 0.17 0.02 0.12 0.02 0.08 0.00
(AR,AF) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
DDQN 0.19 0.03 0.14 0.01 0.10 0.00
References
[Badreddine and Spranger, 2019 ]Samy Badreddine and
Michael Spranger. Injecting prior knowledge for transfer
learning into reinforcement learning algorithms using
logic tensor networks. CoRR , abs/1906.06576, 2019.
[Badreddine et al. , 2022 ]Samy Badreddine, Artur d’Avila
Garcez, Luciano Serafini, and Michael Spranger. Logic
tensor networks. Artificial Intelligence , 303:103649, 2022.
[Bianchi and Hitzler, 2019 ]Federico Bianchi and Pascal
Hitzler. On the capabilities of logic tensor networks for de-
ductive reasoning. In AAAI Spring Symposium Combining
Machine Learning with Knowledge Engineering , 2019.
[Carraro, 2022 ]Tommaso Carraro. LTNtorch: PyTorch im-
plementation of Logic Tensor Networks, mar 2022.
[cle, 2023 ]ClearML - your entire mlops stack in one
open-source tool, 2023. Software available from
http://github.com/allegroai/clearml.
[Donadello et al. , 2017 ]Ivan Donadello, Luciano Serafini,
and Artur d’Avila Garcez. Logic tensor networks for se-
mantic image interpretation. In Proceedings of the Twenty-
Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, IJCAI-17 , pages 1596–1602, 2017.
[Furelos-Blanco et al. , 2021 ]Daniel Furelos-Blanco, Mark
Law, Anders Jonsson, Krysia Broda, and Alessandra
Russo. Induction and exploitation of subgoal automata
for reinforcement learning. J. Artif. Intell. Res. , 70:1031–
1116, 2021.
[Giacomo et al. , 2019 ]Giuseppe De Giacomo, Luca Iocchi,
Marco Favorito, and Fabio Patrizi. Foundations for re-
straining bolts: Reinforcement learning with ltlf/ldlf re-
straining specifications. In J. Benton, Nir Lipovetzky, Eva
Onaindia, David E. Smith, and Siddharth Srivastava, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Con-
ference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, ICAPS
2019, Berkeley, CA, USA, July 11-15, 2019 , pages 128–
136. AAAI Press, 2019.
[Hasanbeig et al. , 2021 ]Mohammadhosein Hasanbeig,
Natasha Yogananda Jeppu, Alessandro Abate, Tom
Melham, and Daniel Kroening. Deepsynth: Automata
synthesis for automatic task segmentation in deep rein-
forcement learning. In Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third Confer-
ence on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence,
IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational
Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2021, Virtual
Event, February 2-9, 2021 , pages 7647–7656. AAAI
Press, 2021.
[Manigrasso et al. , 2021 ]Francesco Manigrasso,
Filomeno Davide Miro, Lia Morra, and Fabrizio Lamberti.
Faster-LTN: A neuro-symbolic, end-to-end object detec-
tion architecture. In Igor Farka ˇs, Paolo Masulli, Sebastian
Otte, and Stefan Wermter, editors, Artificial Neural
Networks and Machine Learning – ICANN 2021 , pages
40–52, Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing.[Meli et al. , 2024 ]Daniele Meli, Alberto Castellini, and
Alessandro Farinelli. Learning logic specifications for
policy guidance in pomdps: an inductive logic program-
ming approach. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research ,
79:725–776, February 2024.
[Serafini and d’Avila Garcez, 2016 ]Luciano Serafini and
Artur S. d’Avila Garcez. Logic tensor networks: Deep
learning and logical reasoning from data and knowledge.
CoRR , abs/1606.04422, 2016.
[Towers et al. , 2024 ]Mark Towers, Jordan K. Terry, Ariel
Kwiatkowski, John U. Balis, Gianluca de Cola, Tris-
tan Deleu, Manuel Goul ˜A£o, Andreas Kallinteris, Arjun
KG, Markus Krimmel, Rodrigo Perez-Vicente, Andrea
Pierr ˜A©, Sander Schulhoff, Jun Jet Tai, Andrew Tan Jin
Shen, and Omar G. Younis. Gymnasium, June 2024.
[Umili et al. , 2021 ]Elena Umili, Emanuele Antonioni,
Francesco Riccio, Roberto Capobianco, Daniele Nardi,
Giuseppe De Giacomo, et al. Learning a symbolic
planning domain through the interaction with continuous
environments. In Workshop on Bridging the Gap Be-
tween AI Planning and Reinforcement Learning (PRL),
workshop at ICAPS 2021 , 2021.
[Umili et al. , 2023 ]Elena Umili, Roberto Capobianco, and
Giuseppe De Giacomo. Grounding LTLf Specifications
in Image Sequences. In Proceedings of the 20th Interna-
tional Conference on Principles of Knowledge Represen-
tation and Reasoning , pages 668–678, 8 2023.
[van Krieken et al. , 2022 ]Emile van Krieken, Erman Acar,
and Frank van Harmelen. Analyzing differentiable fuzzy
logic operators. Artificial Intelligence , 302:103602, 2022.
[Wagner and d’Avila Garcez, 2022 ]Benedikt Wagner and
Artur S. d’Avila Garcez. Neural-symbolic reasoning un-
der open-world and closed-world assumptions. In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI 2022 Spring Symposium on Machine
Learning and Knowledge Engineering for Hybrid Intelli-
gence (AAAI-MAKE 2022) , 2022.
[Wang et al. , 2015 ]Ziyu Wang, Nando de Freitas, and Marc
Lanctot. Dueling network architectures for deep reinforce-
ment learning. CoRR , abs/1511.06581, 2015.
[Wang et al. , 2016 ]Ziyu Wang, Tom Schaul, Matteo Hes-
sel, Hado Van Hasselt, Marc Lanctot, and Nando De Fre-
itas. Dueling network architectures for deep reinforcement
learning. In Proceedings of the 33rd International Confer-
ence on International Conference on Machine Learning -
Volume 48 , ICML’16, pages 1995–2003. JMLR.org, 2016.
