Invisible Man 
by Ralph Ellison 
a.b.e-book v3.0 / Notes at EOF 
Back Cover:
Winner of the National Book Award for fiction. . . Acclaimed by a 1965 Book 
Week poll of 200 prominent authors, critics, and editors as "the m ost 
distinguished single work published in the last twenty years. " 
Unlike any novel you've ever read, this is a richly comic, deepl y 
tragic, and profoundly soul-searching story of one young Negro' s baffling 
experiences on the road to self-discovery.
From the bizarre encounter with the white trustee that results in h is 
expulsion from a Southern college, to its powerful culmination in New York's 
Harlem, his story moves with a relentless drive: -- the nightmari sh job in a 
paint factory -- the bitter disillusionment with the "Brothe rhood" and its 
policy of betrayal -- the violent climax when screaming tensio ns are released 
in a terrifying race riot.
This brilliant, monumental novel is a triumph of story-tellin g. It 
reveals profound insight into every man's struggle to find his t rue self.
"Tough, brutal, sensational. . . it blazes with authentic tal ent." -- New York 
Times 
"A work of extraordinary intensity -- powerfully imagined and wri tten with a 
savage, wryly humorous gusto." -- The Atlantic Monthly 
"A stunning block-buster of a book that will floor and flabbe rgast some 
people, bedevil and intrigue others, and keep everybody readin g right through 
to its explosive end." -- Langston Hughes 
"Ellison writes at a white heat, but a heat which he manipulate s like a 
veteran." -- Chicago Sun-Times 
TO IDA 
COPYRIGHT, 1947, 1948, 1952, BY RALPH ELLISON 
All rights reserved under International
and Pan-American Copyright Conventions.
For information address Random House, Inc.,
457 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10022.
This is an authorized reprint of a hardcover edition 
published by Random House, Inc.
THIRTEENTH PRINTING 
SIGNET BOOKS are published by 
The New American Library, Inc.,
1301 Avenue of the Americas, New York, New York 10019 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
"You are saved," cried Captain Delano, more and more astonished a nd pained;
"you are saved: what has cast such a shadow upon you?" 
Herman Melville, Benito Cereno 
HARRY: I tell you, it is not me you are looking at,
Not me you are grinning at, not me your confidential looks 
Incriminate, but that other person, if person,
You thought I was: let your necrophily 
Feed upon that carcase. . .
T. S. Eliot, Family Reunion 
Prologue 
I am an invisible man. No, I am not a spook like those who haunte d 
Edgar Allan Poe; nor am I one of your Hollywood-movie ectopla sms. I am a 
man of substance, of flesh and bone, fiber and liquids -- and I might even be 
said to possess a mind. I am invisible, understand, simply bec ause people 
refuse to see me. Like the bodiless heads you see sometimes in c ircus 
sideshows, it is as though I have been surrounded by mirrors of hard,
distorting glass. When they approach me they see only my surround ings,
themselves, or figments of their imagination -- indeed, eve rything and 
anything except me.
Nor is my invisibility exactly a matter of a bio-chemical acc ident to 
my epidermis. That invisibility to which I refer occurs because of a peculiar 
disposition of the eyes of those with whom I come in contact. A matter of
the construction of their inner eyes, those eyes with which th ey look through 
their physical eyes upon reality. I am not complaining, nor am I protesting 
either. It is sometimes advantageous to be unseen, although i t is most often 
rather wearing on the nerves. Then too, you're constantly being bumped 
against by those of poor vision. Or again, you often doubt if y ou really exist.
You wonder whether you aren't simply a phantom in other people 's minds.
Say, a figure in a nightmare which the sleeper tries with all his s trength to 
destroy. It's when you feel like this that, out of resentment, y ou begin to 
bump people back. And, let me confess, you feel that way most o f the time.
You ache with the need to convince yourself that you do exist in the real
world, that you're a part of all the sound and anguish, and you stri ke out 
with your fists, you curse and you swear to make them recognize y ou. And,
alas, it's seldom successful.
One night I accidentally bumped into a man, and perhaps becaus e of
the near darkness he saw me and called me an insulting name. I sp rang at 
him, seized his coat lapels and demanded that he apologize. H e was a tall
blond man, and as my face came close to his he looked insolentl y out of his 
blue eyes and cursed me, his breath hot in my face as he struggled. I pulled 
his chin down sharp upon the crown of my head, butting him as I had seen 
the West Indians do, and I felt his flesh tear and the blood gus h out, and I 
yelled, "Apologize! Apologize!" But he continued to curse an d struggle, and I 
butted him again and again until he went down heavily, on his k nees,
profusely bleeding. I kicked him repeatedly, in a frenzy becaus e he still
uttered insults though his lips were frothy with blood. Oh yes, I kicked him!
And in my outrage I got out my knife and prepared to slit his throat, right 
there beneath the lamplight in the deserted street, holding him by the collar 
with one hand, and opening the knife with my teeth -- when it oc curred to 
me that the man had not seen me, actually; that he, as far as he k new, was 
in the midst of a walking nightmare! And I stopped the blade, sl icing the air 
as I pushed him away, letting him fall back to the street. I stare d at him 
hard as the lights of a car stabbed through the darkness. He lay th ere,
moaning on the asphalt; a man almost killed by a phantom. It un nerved me.
I was both disgusted and ashamed. I was like a drunken man mysel f,
wavering about on weakened legs. Then I was amused. Something in this 
man's thick head had sprung out and beaten him within an inch of his life. I 
began to laugh at this crazy discovery. Would he have awakened at the point 
of death? Would Death himself have freed him for wakeful livin g? But I 
didn't linger. I ran away into the dark, laughing so hard I feared I m ight 
rupture myself. The next day I saw his picture in the Daily News, b eneath a 
caption stating that he had been "mugged." Poor fool, poor bl ind fool, I 
thought with sincere compassion, mugged by an invisible man!
Most of the time (although I do not choose as I once did to deny 
the violence of my days by ignoring it) I am not so overtly violen t. I 
remember that I am invisible and walk softly so as not to awaken the 
sleeping ones. Sometimes it is best not to awaken them; there a re few things 
in the world as dangerous as sleepwalkers. I learned in time thoug h that it is 
possible to carry on a fight against them without their realizi ng it. For 
instance, I have been carrying on a fight with Monopolated Lig ht & Power for 
some time now. I use their service and pay them nothing at all, and they 
don't know it. Oh, they suspect that power is being drained off , but they 
don't know where. All they know is that according to the master m eter back 
there in their power station a hell of a lot of free current is disap pearing 
somewhere into the jungle of Harlem. The joke, of course, is that I don't live 
in Harlem but in a border area. Several years ago (before I discovered the 
advantage of being invisible) I went through the routine proces s of buying 
service and paying their outrageous rates. But no more. I gave up all that,
along with my apartment, and my old way of life: That way based u pon the 
fallacious assumption that I, like other men, was visible. N ow, aware of my 
invisibility, I live rent-free in a building rented strictly to w hites, in a section 
of the basement that was shut off and forgotten during the ninet eenth 
century, which I discovered when I was trying to escape in the n ight from 
Ras the Destroyer. But that's getting too far ahead of the story , almost to the 
end, although the end is in the beginning and lies far ahead.
The point now is that I found a home -- or a hole in the ground, as 
you will. Now don't jump to the conclusion that because I call my home a 
"hole" it is damp and cold like a grave; there are cold holes and wa rm holes.
Mine is a warm hole. And remember, a bear retires to his hole for the w inter 
and lives until spring; then he comes strolling out like the Eas ter chick 
breaking from its shell. I say all this to assure you that it is inc orrect to 
assume that, because I'm invisible and live in a hole, I am dea d. I am 
neither dead nor in a state of suspended animation. Call me Ja ck-the-Bear,
for I am in a state of hibernation.
My hole is warm and full of light. Yes, full of light. I doubt if t here 
is a brighter spot in all New York than this hole of mine, and I do n ot 
exclude Broadway. Or the Empire State Building on a photographe r's dream 
night. But that is taking advantage of you. Those two spots are among the 
darkest of our whole civilization -- pardon me, our whole cultu re (an 
important distinction, I've heard) -- which might sound like a hoax, or a 
contradiction, but that (by contradiction, I mean) is how the w orld moves:
Not like an arrow, but a boomerang. (Beware of those who speak of th e 
spiral of history; they are preparing a boomerang. Keep a steel hel met handy.) 
I know; I have been boomeranged across my head so much that I now c an 
see the darkness of lightness. And I love light. Perhaps you'll think it strange 
that an invisible man should need light, desire light, love li ght. But maybe it 
is exactly because I am invisible. Light confirms my reality, g ives birth to my 
form. A beautiful girl once told me of a recurring nightmare in which she lay 
in the center of a large dark room and felt her face expand until it filled the 
whole room, becoming a formless mass while her eyes ran in biliou s jelly up 
the chimney. And so it is with me. Without light I am not only in visible, but 
formless as well; and to be unaware of one's form is to live a death . I 
myself, after existing some twenty years, did not become aliv e until I 
discovered my invisibility.
That is why I fight my battle with Monopolated Light & Power. Th e 
deeper reason, I mean: It allows me to feel my vital aliveness. I also fight 
them for taking so much of my money before I learned to protect mys elf. In 
my hole in the basement there are exactly 1,369 lights. I've wire d the entire 
ceiling, every inch of it. And not with fluorescent bulbs, but with the older,
more-expensive-to-operate kind, the filament type. An act of sabotage, you 
know. I've already begun to wire the wall. A junk man I know, a man of
vision, has supplied me with wire and sockets. Nothing, storm o r flood, must 
get in the way of our need for light and ever more and brighter lig ht. The 
truth is the light and light is the truth. When I finish all four w alls, then I'll
start on the floor. Just how that will go, I don't know. Yet when y ou have 
lived invisible as long as I have you develop a certain ingenui ty. I'll solve the 
problem. And maybe I'll invent a gadget to place my coffeepot o n the fire 
while I lie in bed, and even invent a gadget to warm my bed -- like the 
fellow I saw in one of the picture magazines who made himself a g adget to 
warm his shoes! Though invisible, I am in the great American tradi tion of
tinkers. That makes me kin to Ford, Edison and Franklin. Call me, since I 
have a theory and a concept, a "thinker-tinker." Yes, I'll warm m y shoes; they 
need it, they're usually full of holes. I'll do that and more.
Now I have one radio-phonograph; I plan to have five. There is a 
certain acoustical deadness in my hole, and when I have music I want to feel
its vibration, not only with my ear but with my whole body. I'd l ike to hear 
five recordings of Louis Armstrong playing and singing "What Did I Do to Be 
so Black and Blue" -- all at the same time. Sometimes now I list en to Louis 
while I have my favorite dessert of vanilla ice cream and sloe gin . I pour the 
red liquid over the white mound, watching it glisten and the va por rising as 
Louis bends that military instrument into a beam of lyrical sou nd. Perhaps I 
like Louis Armstrong because he's made poetry out of being invi sible. I think 
it must be because he's unaware that he is invisible. And my own grasp of
invisibility aids me to understand his music. Once when I aske d for a 
cigarette, some jokers gave me a reefer, which I lighted when I got home and 
sat listening to my phonograph. It was a strange evening. Invis ibility, let me 
explain, gives one a slightly different sense of time, you're n ever quite on the 
beat. Sometimes you're ahead and sometimes behind. Instead o f the swift and 
imperceptible flowing of time, you are aware of its nodes, those points where 
time stands still or from which it leaps ahead. And you slip int o the breaks 
and look around. That's what you hear vaguely in Louis' music.
Once I saw a prizefighter boxing a yokel. The fighter was swift and 
amazingly scientific. His body was one violent flow of rapid rh ythmic action.
He hit the yokel a hundred times while the yokel held up his arms i n 
stunned surprise. But suddenly the yokel, rolling about in the g ale of boxing 
gloves, struck one blow and knocked science, speed and footwo rk as cold as a 
well-digger's posterior. The smart money hit the canvas. The lon g shot got the 
nod. The yokel had simply stepped inside of his opponent's se nse of time. So 
under the spell of the reefer I discovered a new analytical way o f listening to 
music. The unheard sounds came through, and each melodic line e xisted of
itself, stood out clearly from all the rest, said its piece, and w aited patiently 
for the other voices to speak. That night I found myself hearin g not only in 
time, but in space as well. I not only entered the music but desc ended, like 
Dante, into its depths. And beneath the swiftness of the hot t empo there was 
a slower tempo and a cave and I entered it and looked around and he ard an 
old woman singing a spiritual as full of Weltschmerz as flamenc o, and 
beneath that lay a still lower level on which I saw a beautiful girl the color 
of ivory pleading in a voice like my mother's as she stood before a group of
slave owners who bid for her naked body, and below that I found a lower 
level and a more rapid tempo and I heard someone shout:
"Brothers and sisters, my text this morning is the 'Blackness of
Blackness.' " 
And a congregation of voices answered: "That blackness is most
black, brother, most black . . ." 
"In the beginning . . ." 
"At the very start," they cried.
". . . there was blackness . . ." 
"Preach it . . ." 
". . . and the sun . . ." 
"The sun, Lawd . . ." 
". . . was bloody red . . ." 
"Red . . ." 
"Now black is . . ." the preacher shouted.
"Bloody . . ." 
"I said black is . . ." 
"Preach it, brother . . ." 
". . . an' black ain't . . " 
"Red, Lawd, red: He said it's red!" 
"Amen, brother . . ." 
"Black will git you . . ." 
"Yes, it will . . ." 
". . . an' black won't . . ." 
"Naw, it won't!" 
"It do . . ." 
"It do, Lawd . . ." 
". . . an' it don't." 
"Halleluiah . . ." 
". . . It'll put you, glory, glory, Oh my Lawd, in the WHALE'S 
BELLY." 
"Preach it, dear brother . . ." 
". . . an' make you tempt . . ." 
"Good God a-mighty!" 
"Old Aunt Nelly!" 
"Black will make you . . ." 
"Black . . ." 
". . . or black will un-make you." 
"Ain't it the truth, Lawd?" 
And at that point a voice of trombone timbre screamed at me, "Git 
out of, here, you fool! Is you ready to commit treason?" 
And I tore myself away, hearing the old singer of spirituals moan ing,
"Go curse your God, boy, and die." 
I stopped and questioned her, asked her what was wrong.
"I dearly loved my master, son," she said.
"You should have hated him," I said.
"He gave me several sons," she said, "and because I loved my son s I 
learned to love their father though I hated him too." 
"I too have become acquainted with ambivalence," I said. "Th at's why 
I'm here." 
"What's that?" 
"Nothing, a word that doesn't explain it. Why do you moan?" 
"I moan this way 'cause he's dead," she said.
"Then tell me, who is that laughing upstairs?" 
"Them's my sons. They glad." 
"Yes, I can understand that too," I said.
"I laughs too, but I moans too. He promised to set us free but he 
never could bring hisself to do it. Still I loved him . . ." 
"Loved him? You mean . . ." 
"Oh yes, but 1 loved something else even more." 
"What more?" 
"Freedom." 
"Freedom," I said. "Maybe freedom lies in hating." 
"Naw, son, it's in loving. I loved him and give him the poison a nd 
he withered away like a frost-bit apple. Them boys woulda tore hi m to pieces 
with they homemake knives." 
"A mistake was made somewhere," I said, "I'm confused." And I 
wished to say other things, but the laughter upstairs became t oo loud and 
moan-like for me and I tried to break out of it, but I couldn't. Ju st as I was 
leaving I felt an urgent desire to ask her what freedom was and wen t back.
She sat with her head in her hands, moaning softly; her leathe r-brown face 
was filled with sadness.
"Old woman, what is this freedom you love so well?" I asked aroun d 
a corner of my mind.
She looked surprised, then thoughtful, then baffled. "I done f orgot,
son. It's all mixed up. First I think it's one thing, then I thin k it's another. It 
gits my head to spinning. I guess now it ain't nothing but know ing how to 
say what I got up in my head. But it's a hard job, son. Too much is d one 
happen to me in too short a time. Hit's like I have a fever. Ever' ti me I 
starts to walk my head gits to swirling and I falls down. Or if it a in't that,
it's the boys; they gits to laughing and wants to kill up the wh ite folks.
They's bitter, that's what they is . . ." 
"But what about freedom?" 
"Leave me 'lone, boy; my head aches!" 
I left her, feeling dizzy myself. I didn't get far.
Suddenly one of the sons, a big fellow six feet tall, appeared o ut of
nowhere and struck me with his fist.
"What's the matter, man?" I cried.
"You made Ma cry!" 
"But how?" I said, dodging a blow.
"Askin' her them questions, that's how. Git outa here and stay , and 
next time you got questions like that, ask yourself!" 
He held me in a grip like cold stone, his fingers fastening upon m y 
windpipe until I thought I would suffocate before he finally a llowed me to go.
I stumbled about dazed, the music beating hysterically in my e ars. It was 
dark. My head cleared and I wandered down a dark narrow passage, thin king 
I heard his footsteps hurrying behind me. I was sore, and into my b eing had 
come a profound craving for tranquillity, for peace and quiet, a state I felt I 
could never achieve. For one thing, the trumpet was blaring and the rhythm 
was too hectic. A tomtom beating like heart-thuds began drowni ng out the 
trumpet, filling my ears. I longed for water and I heard it rushing through 
the cold mains my fingers touched as I felt my way, but I couldn' t stop to 
search because of the footsteps behind me.
"Hey, Ras," I called. "Is it you, Destroyer? Rinehart?" 
No answer, only the rhythmic footsteps behind me. Once I tried 
crossing the road, but a speeding machine struck me, scraping the skin from 
my leg as it roared past.
Then somehow I came out of it, ascending hastily from this 
underworld of sound to hear Louis Armstrong innocently asking,
What did I do 
To be so black 
And blue? 
At first I was afraid; this familiar music had demanded action, the 
kind of which I was incapable, and yet had I lingered there benea th the 
surface I might have attempted to act. Nevertheless, I know now that few 
really listen to this music. I sat on the chair's edge in a soakin g sweat, as 
though each of my 1,369 bulbs had everyone become a klieg ligh t in an 
individual setting for a third degree with Ras and Rinehart in ch arge. It was 
exhausting -- as though I had held my breath continuously for a n hour under 
the terrifying serenity that comes from days of intense hunger. An d yet, it 
was a strangely satisfying experience for an invisible man to h ear the silence 
of sound. I had discovered unrecognized compulsions of my bein g -- even 
though I could not answer "yes" to their promptings. I haven't smoked a 
reefer since, however; not because they're illegal, but becaus e to see around 
corners is enough (that is not unusual when you are invisible). B ut to hear 
around them is too much; it inhibits action. And despite Brothe r Jack and all
that sad, lost period of the Brotherhood, I believe in nothing if not in action.
Please, a definition: A hibernation is a covert preparation for a more 
overt action.
Besides, the drug destroys one's sense of time completely. If t hat 
happened, I might forget to dodge some bright morning and some cl uck 
would run me down with an orange and yellow street car, or a bilious bus!
Or I might forget to leave my hole when the moment for action pres ents 
itself.
Meanwhile I enjoy my life with the compliments of Monopolate d 
Light & Power. Since you never recognize me even when in closest contact 
with me, and since, no doubt, you'll hardly believe that I exis t, it won't 
matter if you know that I tapped a power line leading into the b uilding and 
ran it into my hole in the ground. Before that I lived in the darknes s into 
which I was chased, but now I see. I've illuminated the blackn ess of my 
invisibility -- and vice versa. And so I play the invisible mus ic of my 
isolation. The last statement doesn't seem just right, does i t? But it is; you 
hear this music simply because music is heard and seldom seen, except by 
musicians. Could this compulsion to put invisibility down i n black and white 
be thus an urge to make music of invisibility? But I am an orator, a rabble 
rouser -- Am? I was, and perhaps shall be again. Who knows? All si ckness is 
not unto death, neither is invisibility.
I can hear you say, "What a horrible, irresponsible bastard!" And 
you're right. I leap to agree with you. I am one of the most irrespons ible 
beings that ever lived. Irresponsibility is part of my invisibi lity; any way you 
face it, it is a denial. But to whom can I be responsible, and why should I 
be, when you refuse to see me? And wait until I reveal how truly 
irresponsible I am. Responsibility rests upon recognition, and recognition is a 
form of agreement. Take the man whom I almost killed: Who was resp onsible 
for that near murder -- I? I don't think so, and I refuse it. I won' t buy it.
You can't give it to me. He bumped me, he insulted me. Shouldn' t he, for his 
own personal safety, have recognized my hysteria, my "danger po tential"? He,
let us say, was lost in a dream world. But didn't he control that dre am world 
-- which, alas, is only too real! -- and didn't he rule me out of it ? And if he 
had yelled for a policeman, wouldn't I have been taken for the offending one? 
Yes, yes, yes! Let me agree with you, I was the irresponsible one; for I 
should have used my knife to protect the higher interests of soc iety. Some 
day that kind of foolishness will cause us tragic trouble. All d reamers and 
sleepwalkers must pay the price, and even the invisible victim is responsible 
for the fate of all. But I shirked that responsibility; I became too snarled in 
the incompatible notions that buzzed within my brain. I was a c oward . . .
But what did I do to be so blue? Bear with me.
Chapter 1 
It goes a long way back, some twenty years. All my life I had been
looking for something, and everywhere I turned someone tried to tell me 
what it was. I accepted their answers too, though they were ofte n in 
contradiction and even self-contradictory. I was na?e. I was l ooking for myself
and asking everyone except myself questions which I, and onl y I, could 
answer. It took me a long time and much painful boomeranging of m y 
expectations to achieve a realization everyone else appears t o have been born 
with: That I am nobody but myself. But first I had to discover th at I am an 
invisible man!
And yet I am no freak of nature, nor of history. I was in the cards,
other things having been equal (or unequal) eighty-five yea rs ago. I am not 
ashamed of my grandparents for having been slaves. I am only ash amed of
myself for having at one time been ashamed. About eighty-fiv e years ago they 
were told that they were free, united with others of our country in everything 
pertaining to the common good, and, in everything social, sep arate like the 
fingers of the hand. And they believed it. They exulted in it. T hey stayed in 
their place, worked hard, and brought up my father to do the same. But my 
grandfather is the one. He was an odd old guy, my grandfather, and I am 
told I take after him. It was he who caused the trouble. On his de athbed he 
called my father to him and said, "Son, after I'm gone I want yo u to keep up 
the good fight. I never told you, but our life is a war and I have been a 
traitor all my born days, a spy in the enemy's country ever since I give up 
my gun back in the Reconstruction. Live with your head in the li on's mouth.
I want you to overcome 'em with yeses, undermine 'em with grins, a gree 'em 
to death and destruction, let 'em swoller you till they vomit o r bust wide 
open." They thought the old man had gone out of his mind. He had been the 
meekest of men. The younger children were rushed from the room, the
shades drawn and the flame of the lamp turned so low that it sputt ered on 
the wick like the old man's breathing. "Learn it to the younguns ," he 
whispered fiercely; then he died.
But my folks were more alarmed over his last words than over his 
dying. It was as though he had not died at all, his words caused s o much 
anxiety. I was warned emphatically to forget what he had said an d, indeed,
this is the first time it has been mentioned outside the family circle. It had a 
tremendous effect upon me, however. I could never be sure of what he 
meant. Grandfather had been a quiet old man who never made any t rouble,
yet on his deathbed he had called himself a traitor and a spy, an d he had 
spoken of his meekness as a dangerous activity. It became a con stant puzzle 
which lay unanswered in the back of my mind. And whenever thing s went 
well for me I remembered my grandfather and felt guilty and uncom fortable.
It was as though I was carrying out his advice in spite of myself . And to 
make it worse, everyone loved me for it. I was praised by the most lily-white 
men of the town. I was considered an example of desirable conduc t -- just as 
my grandfather had been. And what puzzled me was that the old ma n had 
defined it as treachery. When I was praised for my conduct I felt a guilt that 
in some way I was doing something that was really against the wi shes of the 
white folks, that if they had understood they would have desire d me to act 
just the opposite, that I should have been sulky and mean, and that that 
really would have been what they wanted, even though they were f ooled and 
thought they wanted me to act as I did. It made me afraid that som e day 
they would look upon me as a traitor and I would be lost. Still I w as more 
afraid to act any other way because they didn't like that at all . The old man's 
words were like a curse. On my graduation day I delivered an oration i n 
which I showed that humility was the secret, indeed, the very e ssence of
progress. (Not that I believed this -- how could I, remembering my
grandfather? -- I only believed that it worked.) It was a great suc cess.
Everyone praised me and I was invited to give the speech at a gat hering of
the town's leading white citizens. It was a triumph for our who le community.
It was in the main ballroom of the leading hotel. When I got there I 
discovered that it was on the occasion of a smoker, and I was told that since 
I was to be there anyway I might as well take part in the battle roya l to be 
fought by some of my schoolmates as part of the entertainment. T he battle 
royal came first.
All of the town's big shots were there in their tuxedoes, wolfin g down 
the buffet foods, drinking beer and whiskey and smoking black cigars. It was 
a large room with a high ceiling. Chairs were arranged in neat rows arou nd 
three sides of a portable boxing ring. The fourth side was clear, rev ealing a 
gleaming space of polished floor. I had some misgivings over t he battle royal,
by the way. Not from a distaste for fighting, but because I didn 't care too 
much for the other fellows who were to take part. They were tough g uys who 
seemed to have no grandfather's curse worrying their minds. No on e could 
mistake their toughness. And besides, I suspected that figh ting a battle royal
might detract from the dignity of my speech. In those pre-invisi ble days I 
visualized myself as a potential Booker T. Washington. But t he other fellows 
didn't care too much for me either, and there were nine of them. I fe lt 
superior to them in my way, and I didn't like the manner in which we were 
all crowded together into the servants' elevator. Nor did they like my being 
there. In fact, as the warmly lighted floors flashed past the ele vator we had 
words over the fact that I, by taking part in the fight, had knock ed one of
their friends out of a night's work.
We were led out of the elevator through a rococo hall into an 
anteroom and told to get into our fighting togs. Each of us was i ssued a pair 
of boxing gloves and ushered out into the big mirrored hall, which we 
entered looking cautiously about us and whispering, lest we mi ght accidentally 
be heard above the noise of the room. It was foggy with cigar smok e. And 
already the whiskey was taking effect. I was shocked to see som e of the most 
important men of the town quite tipsy. They were all there -- bank ers,
lawyers, judges, doctors, fire chiefs, teachers, merchants. Eve n one of the 
more fashionable pastors. Something we could not see was going on up front.
A clarinet was vibrating sensuously and the men were standing up and 
moving eagerly forward. We were a small tight group, clustered tog ether, our 
bare upper bodies touching and shining with anticipatory swe at; while up 
front the big shots were becoming increasingly excited over som ething we still
could not see. Suddenly I heard the school superintendent, who had told me 
to come, yell, "Bring up the shines, gentlemen! Bring up the lit tle shines!" 
We were rushed up to the front of the ballroom, where it smelled 
even more strongly of tobacco and whiskey. Then we were pushed in to place.
I almost wet my pants. A sea of faces, some hostile, some amuse d, ringed 
around us, and in the center, facing us, stood a magnificent blo nde -- stark 
naked. There was dead silence. I felt a blast of cold air chill m e. I tried to 
back away, but they were behind me and around me. Some of the boys stood 
with lowered heads, trembling. I felt a wave of irrational guilt a nd fear. My 
teeth chattered, my skin turned to goose flesh, my knees knocke d. Yet I was 
strongly attracted and looked in spite of myself. Had the price o f looking 
been blindness, I would have looked. The hair was yellow like that of a circus 
kewpie doll, the face heavily powdered and rouged, as though to form an 
abstract mask, the eyes hollow and smeared a cool blue, the colo r of a 
baboon's butt. I felt a desire to spit upon her as my eyes brushed slowly over 
her body. Her breasts were firm and round as the domes of East India n 
temples, and I stood so close as to see the fine skin texture and beads of
pearly perspiration glistening like dew around the pink and erect ed buds of
her nipples. I wanted at one and the same time to run from the room, to 
sink through the floor, or go to her and cover her from my eyes and t he 
eyes of the others with my body; to feel the soft thighs, to cares s her and 
destroy her, to love her and murder her, to hide from her, and yet to st roke 
where below the small American flag tattooed upon her belly her thighs 
formed a capital V. I had a notion that of all in the room she saw on ly me 
with her impersonal eyes.
And then she began to dance, a slow sensuous movement; the smo ke 
of a hundred cigars clinging to her like the thinnest of veils. S he seemed like 
a fair bird-girl girdled in veils calling to me from the angry surfa ce of some 
gray and threatening sea. I was transported. Then I became aware of the 
clarinet playing and the big shots yelling at us. Some threaten ed us if we 
looked and others if we did not. On my right I saw one boy faint. An d now 
a man grabbed a silver pitcher from a table and stepped close as h e dashed 
ice water upon him and stood him up and forced two of us to support him 
as his head hung and moans issued from his thick bluish lips. An other boy 
began to plead to go home. He was the largest of the group, wearing dark 
red fighting trunks much too small to conceal the erection which projected 
from him as though in answer to the insinuating low-registered m oaning of
the clarinet. He tried to hide himself with his boxing gloves.
And all the while the blonde continued dancing, smiling fain tly at the 
big shots who watched her with fascination, and faintly smil ing at our fear. I 
noticed a certain merchant who followed her hungrily, his lips l oose and 
drooling. He was a large man who wore diamond studs in a shirtfront w hich 
swelled with the ample paunch underneath, and each time the bl onde swayed 
her undulating hips he ran his hand through the thin hair of his b ald head 
and, with his arms upheld, his posture clumsy like that of an int oxicated 
panda, wound his belly in a slow and obscene grind. This creature was 
completely hypnotized. The music had quickened. As the danc er flung herself
about with a detached expression on her face, the men began reac hing out to 
touch her. I could see their beefy fingers sink into the soft fle sh. Some of the 
others tried to stop them and she began to move around the floor in graceful
circles, as they gave chase, slipping and sliding over the pol ished floor. It was 
mad. Chairs went crashing, drinks were spilt, as they ran laughing and 
howling after her. They caught her just as she reached a door, rais ed her 
from the floor, and tossed her as college boys are tossed at a hazi ng, and 
above her red, fixed-smiling lips I saw the terror and disgust in her eyes,
almost like my own terror and that which I saw in some of the other boys.
As I watched, they tossed her twice and her soft breasts seemed to flatten 
against the air and her legs flung wildly as she spun. Some of t he more 
sober ones helped her to escape. And I started off the floor, hea ding for the 
anteroom with the rest of the boys.
Some were still crying and in hysteria. But as we tried to leave we
were stopped and ordered to get into the ring. There was nothing to d o but 
what we were told. All ten of us climbed under the ropes and allow ed 
ourselves to be blindfolded with broad bands of white cloth. On e of the men 
seemed to feel a bit sympathetic and tried to cheer us up as we st ood with 
our backs against the ropes. Some of us tried to grin. "See that bo y over 
there?" one of the men said. "I want you to run across at the bell an d give it 
to him right in the belly. If you don't get him, I'm going to get y ou. I don't 
like his looks." Each of us was told the same. The blindfolds w ere put on.
Yet even then I had been going over my speech. In my mind each wo rd was 
as bright as flame. I felt the cloth pressed into place, and frown ed so that it 
would be loosened when I relaxed.
But now I felt a sudden fit of blind terror. I was unused to darkness .
It was as though I had suddenly found myself in a dark room filled with 
poisonous cottonmouths. I could hear the bleary voices yell ing insistently for 
the battle royal to begin.
"Get going in there!" 
"Let me at that big nigger!" 
I strained to pick up the school superintendent's voice, as tho ugh to 
squeeze some security out of that slightly more familiar sound .
"Let me at those black sonsabitches!" someone yelled.
"No, Jackson, no!" another voice yelled. "Here, somebody, he lp me 
hold Jack." 
"I want to get at that ginger-colored nigger. Tear him limb from 
limb," the first voice yelled.
I stood against the ropes trembling. For in those days I was what
they called ginger-colored, and he sounded as though he might c runch me 
between his teeth like a crisp ginger cookie.
Quite a struggle was going on. Chairs were being kicked about and I 
could hear voices grunting as with a terrific effort. I wanted to s ee, to see 
more desperately than ever before. But the blindfold was as tigh t as a thick 
skin-puckering scab and when I raised my gloved hands to push th e layers of
white aside a voice yelled, "Oh, no you don't, black bastard! L eave that 
alone!" 
"Ring the bell before Jackson kills him a coon!" someone boome d in 
the sudden silence. And I heard the bell clang and the sound of t he feet 
scuffling forward.
A glove smacked against my head. I pivoted, striking out stiff ly as 
someone went past, and felt the jar ripple along the length of m y arm to my 
shoulder. Then it seemed as though all nine of the boys had turne d upon me 
at once. Blows pounded me from all sides while I struck out as bes t I could.
So many blows landed upon me that I wondered if I were not the only
blindfolded fighter in the ring, or if the man called Jackson h adn't succeeded 
in getting me after all.
Blindfolded, I could no longer control my motions. I had no dig nity.
I stumbled about like a baby or a drunken man. The smoke had beco me 
thicker and with each new blow it seemed to sear and further rest rict my 
lungs. My saliva became like hot bitter glue. A glove connect ed with my head,
filling my mouth with warm blood. It was everywhere. I could not tell if the 
moisture I felt upon my body was sweat or blood. A blow landed ha rd 
against the nape of my neck. I felt myself going over, my head hi tting the 
floor. Streaks of blue light filled the black world behind the bl indfold. I lay 
prone, pretending that I was knocked out, but felt myself seize d by hands 
and yanked to my feet. "Get going, black boy! Mix it up!" My arms were like 
lead, my head smarting from blows. I managed to feel my way to the ropes 
and held on, trying to catch my breath. A glove landed in my mid- section 
and I went over again, feeling as though the smoke had become a knife 
jabbed into my guts. Pushed this way and that by the legs milli ng around 
me, I finally pulled erect and discovered that I could see the bl ack,
sweat-washed forms weaving in the smoky-blue atmosphere like drunken 
dancers weaving to the rapid drum-like thuds of blows.
Everyone fought hysterically. It was complete anarchy. Every body 
fought everybody else. No group fought together for long. Two , three, four,
fought one, then turned to fight each other, were themselves att acked.
Blows landed below the belt and in the kidney, with the gloves open as well
as closed, and with my eye partly opened now there was not so much terror.
I moved carefully, avoiding blows, although not too many to at tract attention,
fighting from group to group. The boys groped about like blind, ca utious 
crabs crouching to protect their mid-sections, their heads pul led in short 
against their shoulders, their arms stretched nervously before them, with their 
fists testing the smoke-filled air like the knobbed feelers o f hypersensitive 
snails. In one corner I glimpsed a boy violently punching the a ir and heard 
him scream in pain as he smashed his hand against a ring post. For a 
second I saw him bent over holding his hand, then going down as a blow 
caught his unprotected head. I played one group against the oth er, slipping in 
and throwing a punch then stepping out of range while pushing th e others 
into the melee to take the blows blindly aimed at me. The smoke was 
agonizing and there were no rounds, no bells at three minute inter vals to 
relieve our exhaustion. The room spun round me, a swirl of lights, smoke,
sweating bodies surrounded by tense white faces. I bled from bot h nose and 
mouth, the blood spattering upon my chest.
The men kept yelling, "Slug him, black boy! Knock his guts out !" 
"Uppercut him! Kill him! Kill that big boy!" 
Taking a fake fall, I saw a boy going down heavily beside me as 
though we were felled by a single blow, saw a sneaker-clad foot s hoot into 
his groin as the two who had knocked him down stumbled upon him. I 
rolled out of range, feeling a twinge of nausea.
The harder we fought the more threatening the men became. And 
yet, I had begun to worry about my speech again. How would it go? Would 
they recognize my ability? What would they give me? 
I was fighting automatically when suddenly I noticed that on e after 
another of the boys was leaving the ring. I was surprised, filled with panic, as 
though I had been left alone with an unknown danger. Then I unde rstood.
The boys had arranged it among themselves. It was the custom for the two 
men left in the ring to slug it out for the winner's prize. I discov ered this too 
late. When the bell sounded two men in tuxedoes leaped into th e ring and 
removed the blindfold. I found myself facing Tatlock, the big gest of the gang.
I felt sick at my stomach. Hardly had the bell stopped ringing in my ears 
than it clanged again and I saw him moving swiftly toward me. Th inking of
nothing else to do I hit him smash on the nose. He kept coming, b ringing 
the rank sharp violence of stale sweat. His face was a black blan k of a face,
only his eyes alive -- with hate of me and aglow with a feverish t error from 
what had happened to us all. I became anxious. I wanted to deli ver my 
speech and he came at me as though he meant to beat it out of me. I
smashed him again and again, taking his blows as they came. Th en on a 
sudden impulse I struck him lightly and as we clinched, I whisp ered, "Fake 
like I knocked you out, you can have the prize." 
"I'll break your behind," he whispered hoarsely.
"For them?" 
"For me, sonofabitch!" 
They were yelling for us to break it up and Tatlock spun me half
around with a blow, and as a joggled camera sweeps in a reeling sce ne, I 
saw the howling red faces crouching tense beneath the cloud of b lue-gray 
smoke. For a moment the world wavered, unraveled, flowed, then m y head 
cleared and Tatlock bounced before me. That fluttering shadow b efore my 
eyes was his jabbing left hand. Then falling forward, my head a gainst his 
damp shoulder, I whispered,
"I'll make it five dollars more." 
"Go to hell!" 
But his muscles relaxed a trifle beneath my pressure and I breathed ,
"Seven?" 
"Give it to your ma," he said, ripping me beneath the heart.
And while I still held him I butted him and moved away. I felt 
myself bombarded with punches. I fought back with hopeless de speration. I 
wanted to deliver my speech more than anything else in the world , felt that 
only these men could judge truly my ability, and now this stupi d clown was 
ruining my chances. I began fighting carefully now, moving in t o punch him 
and out again with my greater speed. A lucky blow to his chin and I had 
him going too -- until I heard a loud voice yell, "I got my money o n the big 
boy." 
Hearing this, I almost dropped my guard. I was confused: Should I
try to win against the voice out there? Would not this go agains t my speech,
and was not this a moment for humility, for nonresistance? A bl ow to my 
head as I danced about sent my right eye popping like a jack-in- the-box and 
settled my dilemma. The room went red as I fell. It was a dream fall , my 
body languid and fastidious as to where to land, until the floo r became 
impatient and smashed up to meet me. A moment later I came to. A n 
hypnotic voice said FIVE emphatically. And I lay there, hazil y watching a 
dark red spot of my own blood shaping itself into a butterfly, gli stening and 
soaking into the soiled gray world of the canvas.
When the voice drawled TEN I was lifted up and dragged to a chair.
I sat dazed. My eye pained and swelled with each throb of my poun ding 
heart and I wondered if now I would be allowed to speak. I was wring ing 
wet, my mouth still bleeding. We were grouped along the wall now . The other 
boys ignored me as they congratulated Tatlock and speculated a s to how 
much they would be paid. One boy whimpered over his smashed han d.
Looking up front, I saw attendants in white jackets rolling the portable ring 
away and placing a small square rug in the vacant space surrounded by 
chairs. Perhaps, I thought, I will stand on the rug to deliver my s peech.
Then the M.C. called to us, "Come on up here boys and get your 
money." 
We ran forward to where the men laughed and talked in their chairs,
waiting. Everyone seemed friendly now.
"There it is on the rug," the man said. I saw the rug covered with 
coins of all dimensions and a few crumpled bills. But what exci ted me,
scattered here and there, were the gold pieces.
"Boys, it's all yours," the man said. "You get all you grab." 
"That's right, Sambo," a blond man said, winking at me 
confidentially.
I trembled with excitement, forgetting my pain. I would get the gold 
and the bills, I thought. I would use both hands. I would throw m y body 
against the boys nearest me to block them from the gold.
"Get down around the rug now," the man commanded, "and don't 
anyone touch it until I give the signal." 
"This ought to be good," I heard.
As told, we got around the square rug on our knees. Slowly the man 
raised his freckled hand as we followed it upward with our eyes.
I heard, "These niggers look like they're about to pray!" 
Then, "Ready," the man said. "Go!" 
I lunged for a yellow coin lying on the blue design of the carpet ,
touching it and sending a surprised shriek to join those rising aro und me. I 
tried frantically to remove my hand but could not let go. A hot, vi olent force 
tore through my body, shaking me like a wet rat. The rug was electrif ied. The 
hair bristled up on my head as I shook myself free. My muscles jum ped, my 
nerves jangled, writhed. But I saw that this was not stopping t he other boys.
Laughing in fear and embarrassment, some were holding back and s cooping 
up the coins knocked off by the painful contortions of the othe rs. The men 
roared above us as we struggled.
"Pick it up, goddamnit, pick it up!" someone called like a bas s-voiced 
parrot. "Go on, get it!" 
I crawled rapidly around the floor, picking up the coins, trying t o 
avoid the coppers and to get greenbacks and the gold. Ignoring th e shock by 
laughing, as I brushed the coins off quickly, I discovered that I could contain 
the electricity -- a contradiction, but it works. Then the men be gan to push 
us onto the rug. Laughing embarrassedly, we struggled out of thei r hands and 
kept after the coins. We were all wet and slippery and hard to hol d.
Suddenly I saw a boy lifted into the air, glistening with sweat like a circus 
seal, and dropped, his wet back landing flush upon the charged ru g, heard 
him yell and saw him literally dance upon his back, elbows beat ing a frenzied 
tattoo upon the floor, his muscles twitching like the flesh of a horse stung 
my many flies. When he finally rolled off, his face was gray and n o one 
stopped him when he ran from the floor amid booming laughter.
"Get the money," the M.C. called. "That's good hard American ca sh!" 
And we snatched and grabbed, snatched and grabbed. I was careful
not to come too close to the rug now, and when I felt the hot whisk ey 
breath descend upon me like a cloud of foul air I reached out and g rabbed 
the leg of a chair. It was occupied and I held on desperately.
"Leggo, nigger! Leggo!" 
The huge face wavered down to mine as he tried to push me free.
But my body was slippery and he was too drunk. It was Mr. Colcord, w ho 
owned a chain of movie houses and "entertainment palaces." Ea ch time he 
grabbed me I slipped out of his hands. It became a real struggle. I feared the 
rug more than I did the drunk, so I held on, surprising myself for a mo ment 
by trying to topple him upon the rug. It was such an enormous idea that I 
found myself actually carrying it out. I tried not to be obvious , yet when I 
grabbed his leg, trying to tumble him out of the chair, he raised u p roaring 
with laughter, and, looking at me with soberness dead in the eye , kicked me 
viciously in the chest. The chair leg flew out of my hand and I f elt myself
going and rolled. It was as though I had rolled through a bed of hot coals. It 
seemed a whole century would pass before I would roll free, a cent ury in 
which I was seared through the deepest levels of my body to the fe arful
breath within me and the breath seared and heated to the point of e xplosion.
It'll all be over in a flash, I thought as I rolled clear. It'll al l be over in a 
flash.
But not yet, the men on the other side were waiting, red faces 
swollen as though from apoplexy as they bent forward in their ch airs. Seeing 
their fingers coming toward me I rolled away as a fumbled footbal l rolls off
the receiver's fingertips, back into the coals. That time I luck ily sent the rug 
sliding out of place and heard the coins ringing against the flo or and the 
boys scuffling to pick them up and the M.C. calling, "All right , boys, that's 
all. Go get dressed and get your money." 
I was limp as a dish rag. My back felt as though it had been beaten
with wires.
When we had dressed the M.C. came in and gave us each five 
dollars, except Tatlock, who got ten for being last in the ring. Then he told 
us to leave. I was not to get a chance to deliver my speech, I tho ught. I was 
going out into the dim alley in despair when I was stopped and t old to go 
back. I returned to the ballroom, where the men were pushing back th eir 
chairs and gathering in groups to talk.
The M.C. knocked on a table for quiet. "Gentlemen," he said, " we 
almost forgot an important part of the program. A most serious part,
gentlemen. This boy was brought here to deliver a speech which h e made at 
his graduation yesterday . . ." 
"Bravo!" 
"I'm told that he is the smartest boy we've got out there in 
Greenwood. I'm told that he knows more big words than a pocket-si zed 
dictionary." 
Much applause and laughter.
"So now, gentlemen, I want you to give him your attention." 
There was still laughter as I faced them, my mouth dry, my eye 
throbbing. I began slowly, but evidently my throat was tense, b ecause they 
began shouting, "Louder! Louder!" 
"We of the younger generation extol the wisdom of that great lea der 
and educator," I shouted, "who first spoke these flaming words o f wisdom: 'A 
ship lost at sea for many days suddenly sighted a friendly vess el. From the 
mast of the unfortunate vessel was seen a signal: "Water, water; we die of
thirst!" The answer from the friendly vessel came back: "Cast do wn your 
bucket where you are." The captain of the distressed vessel, at l ast heeding 
the injunction, cast down his bucket, and it came up full of fre sh sparkling 
water from the mouth of the Amazon River.' And like him I say, and in his 
words, 'To those of my race who depend upon bettering their condi tion in a 
foreign land, or who underestimate the importance of cultivati ng friendly 
relations with the Southern white man, who is his next-door nei ghbor, I 
would say: "Cast down your bucket where you are" -- cast it down i n making 
friends in every manly way of the people of all races by whom we are
surrounded . . .' " 
I spoke automatically and with such fervor that I did not reali ze that 
the men were still talking and laughing until my dry mouth, fil ling up with 
blood from the cut, almost strangled me. I coughed, wanting to s top and go 
to one of the tall brass, sand-filled spittoons to relieve myse lf, but a few of
the men, especially the superintendent, were listening and I w as afraid. So I 
gulped it down, blood, saliva and all, and continued. (What p owers of
endurance I had during those days! What enthusiasm! What a beli ef in the 
rightness of things!) I spoke even louder in spite of the pain. But still they 
talked and still they laughed, as though deaf with cotton in d irty ears. So I 
spoke with greater emotional emphasis. I closed my ears and swa llowed blood 
until I was nauseated. The speech seemed a hundred times as lon g as before,
but I could not leave out a single word. All had to be said, each m emorized 
nuance considered, rendered. Nor was that all. Whenever I uttere d a word of
three or more syllables a group of voices would yell for me to repea t it. I 
used the phrase "social responsibility" and they yelled:
"What's that word you say, boy?" 
"Social responsibility," I said.
"What?" 
"Social . . ." 
"Louder." 
". . . responsibility." 
"More!" 
"Respon --" 
"Repeat!" 
"-- sibility." 
The room filled with the uproar of laughter until, no doubt,
distracted by having to gulp down my blood, I made a mistake and yelled a 
phrase I had often seen denounced in newspaper editorials, hea rd debated in 
private.
"Social . . ." 
"What?" they yelled.
". . . equality --" 
The laughter hung smokelike in the sudden stillness. I opene d my 
eyes, puzzled. Sounds of displeasure filled the room. The M.C. rushed forward.
They shouted hostile phrases at me. But I did not understand.
A small dry mustached man in the front row blared out, "Say that 
slowly, son!" 
"What sir?" 
"What you just said!" 
"Social responsibility, sir," I said.
"You weren't being smart, were you, boy?" he said, not unkindly.
"No, sir!" 
"You sure that about 'equality' was a mistake?" 
"Oh, yes, sir," I said. "I was swallowing blood." 
"Well, you had better speak more slowly so we can understand. We
mean to do right by you, but you've got to know your place at all t imes. All
right, now, go on with your speech." 
I was afraid. I wanted to leave but I wanted also to speak and I wa s 
afraid they'd snatch me down.
"Thank you, sir," I said, beginning where I had left off, and hav ing 
them ignore me as before.
Yet when I finished there was a thunderous applause. I was surpris ed 
to see the superintendent come forth with a package wrapped in wh ite tissue 
paper, and, gesturing for quiet, address the men.
"Gentlemen, you see that I did not overpraise this boy. He makes a 
good speech and some day he'll lead his people in the proper pat hs. And I 
don't have to tell you that that is important in these days and t imes. This is 
a good, smart boy, and so to encourage him in the right direction, i n the 
name of the Board of Education I wish to present him a prize in the f orm of
this . . ." 
He paused, removing the tissue paper and revealing a gleaming 
calfskin brief case.
". . . in the form of this first-class article from Shad Whitmore's 
shop." 
"Boy," he said, addressing me, "take this prize and keep it well .
Consider it a badge of office. Prize it. Keep developing as you are and some 
day it will be filled with important papers that will help shape the destiny of
your people." 
I was so moved that I could hardly express my thanks. A rope of
bloody saliva forming a shape like an undiscovered continent d rooled upon 
the leather and I wiped it quickly away. I felt an importance th at I had never 
dreamed.
"Open it and see what's inside," I was told.
My fingers a-tremble, I complied, smelling the fresh leather an d 
finding an official-looking document inside. It was a schol arship to the state 
college for Negroes. My eyes filled with tears and I ran awkwardly off the 
floor.
I was overjoyed; I did not even mind when I discovered that the 
gold pieces I had scrambled for were brass pocket tokens advertis ing a certain 
make of automobile.
When I reached home everyone was excited. Next day the neighbo rs 
came to congratulate me. I even felt safe from grandfather, whose deathbed 
curse usually spoiled my triumphs. I stood beneath his photogra ph with my 
brief case in hand and smiled triumphantly into his stolid blac k peasant's 
face. It was a face that fascinated me. The eyes seemed to foll ow everywhere 
I went.
That night I dreamed I was at a circus with him and that he refused 
to laugh at the clowns no matter what they did. Then later he to ld me to 
open my brief case and read what was inside and I did, finding an o fficial
envelope stamped with the state seal; and inside the envelop e I found another 
and another, endlessly, and I thought I would fall of weariness . "Them's 
years," he said. "Now open that one." And I did and in it I found a n 
engraved document containing a short message in letters of gold . "Read it," 
my grandfather said. "Out loud." 
"To Whom It May Concern," I intoned. "Keep This Nigger-Boy 
Running." 
I awoke with the old man's laughter ringing in my ears.
(It was a dream I was to remember and dream again for many years 
after. But at that time I had no insight into its meaning. First I had to 
attend college.) 
Chapter 2 
It was a beautiful college. The buildings were old and covered w ith 
vines and the roads gracefully winding, lined with hedges and w ild roses that 
dazzled the eyes in the summer sun. Honeysuckle and purple wis teria hung 
heavy from the trees and white magnolias mixed with their scent s in the 
bee-humming air. I've recalled it often, here in my hole: How the grass 
turned green in the springtime and how the mocking birds fluttered their tails 
and sang, how the moon shone down on the buildings, how the bel l in the 
chapel tower rang out the precious short-lived hours; how the girl s in bright 
summer dresses promenaded the grassy lawn. Many times, here at ni ght, I've 
closed my eyes and walked along the forbidden road that winds p ast the girls'
dormitories, past the hall with the clock in the tower, its windo ws warmly 
aglow, on down past the small white Home Economics practice co ttage, whiter 
still in the moonlight, and on down the road with its sloping an d turning,
paralleling the black powerhouse with its engines droning earth -shaking 
rhythms in the dark, its windows red from the glow of the furnace, on to 
where the road became a bridge over a dry riverbed, tangled with bru sh and 
clinging vines; the bridge of rustic logs, made for trysting, b ut virginal and 
untested by lovers; on up the road, past the buildings, with the southern 
verandas half-a-city-block long, to the sudden forking, barren of buildings,
birds, or grass, where the road turned off to the insane asylum.
I always come this far and open my eyes. The spell breaks and I tr y 
to re-see the rabbits, so tame through having never been hunted, that played 
in the hedges and along the road. And I see the purple and silver o f thistle 
growing between the broken glass and sunheated stones, the ant s moving 
nervously in single file, and I turn and retrace my steps and come back to 
the winding road past the hospital, where at night in certain ward s the gay 
student nurses dispensed a far more precious thing than pills to lucky boys in 
the know; and I come to a stop at the chapel. And then it is sudde nly 
winter, with the moon high above and the chimes in the steeple ri nging and 
a sonorous choir of trombones rendering a Christmas carol; and over all is a 
quietness and an ache as though all the world were loneliness. A nd I stand 
and listen beneath the high-hung moon, hearing "A Mighty Fortre ss Is Our 
God," majestically mellow on four trombones, and then the orga n. The sound 
floats over all, clear like the night, liquid, serene, and lon ely. And I stand as 
for an answer and see in my mind's eye the cabins surrounded by em pty 
fields beyond red clay roads, and beyond a certain road a river, slug gish and 
covered with algae more yellow than green in its stagnant stilln ess; past more 
empty fields, to the sun-shrunk shacks at the railroad crossing w here the 
disabled veterans visited the whores, hobbling down the tracks on crutches 
and canes; sometimes pushing the legless, thighless one in a red wheelchair.
And sometimes I listen to hear if music reaches that far, but reca ll only the 
drunken laughter of sad, sad whores. And I stand in the circle whe re three 
roads converge near the statue, where we drilled four-abreast down the 
smooth asphalt and pivoted and entered the chapel on Sundays, our uniforms 
pressed, shoes shined, minds laced up, eyes blind like those o f robots to 
visitors and officials on the low, whitewashed reviewing stan d.
It's so long ago and far away that here in my invisibility I wond er if
it happened at all. Then in my mind's eye I see the bronze statue of the 
college Founder, the cold Father symbol, his hands outstretch ed in the 
breathtaking gesture of lifting a veil that flutters in hard, met allic folds above 
the face of a kneeling slave; and I am standing puzzled, unabl e to decide 
whether the veil is really being lifted, or lowered more firmly in place;
whether I am witnessing a revelation or a more efficient blindi ng. And as I 
gaze, there is a rustle of wings and I see a flock of starlings flig hting before 
me and, when I look again, the bronze face, whose empty eyes loo k upon a 
world I have never seen, runs with liquid chalk -- creating anoth er ambiguity 
to puzzle my groping mind: Why is a bird-soiled statue more comma nding 
than one that is clean? 
Oh, long green stretch of campus, Oh, quiet songs at dusk, Oh, mo on 
that kissed the steeple and flooded the perfumed nights, Oh, b ugle that called 
in the morning, Oh, drum that marched us militarily at noon -- what was 
real, what solid, what more than a pleasant, time-killing dream ? For how 
could it have been real if now I am invisible? If real, why is it th at I can 
recall in all that island of greenness no fountain but one that w as broken,
corroded and dry? And why does no rain fall through my recollection s, sound 
through my memories, soak through the hard dry crust of the still so recent 
past? Why do I recall, instead of the odor of seed bursting in spri ngtime,
only the yellow contents of the cistern spread over the lawn's d ead grass? 
Why? And how? How and why? 
The grass did grow and the green leaves appeared on the trees and 
filled the avenues with shadow and shade as sure as the million aires 
descended from the North on Founders' Day each spring. And how the y 
arrived! Came smiling, inspecting, encouraging, conversing in whispers,
speechmaking into the wide-open ears of our black and yellow f aces -- and 
each leaving a sizeable check as he departed. I'm convinced it was the 
product of a subtle magic, the alchemy of moonlight; the schoo l a 
flower-studded wasteland, the rocks sunken, the dry winds hid den, the lost 
crickets chirping to yellow butterflies.
And oh, oh, oh, those multimillionaires!
THEY were all such a part of that other life that's dead that I can 't 
remember them all. (Time was as I was, but neither that time nor that "I" 
are any more.) But this one I remember: near the end of my junior yea r I 
drove for him during the week he was on the campus. A face pink lik e St.
Nicholas', topped with a shock of silk white hair. An easy, inf ormal manner,
even with me. A Bostonian, smoker of cigars, teller of polite N egro stories,
shrewd banker, skilled scientist, director, philanthropist, fo rty years a bearer 
of the white man's burden, and for sixty a symbol of the Great Trad itions.
We were driving, the powerful motor purring and filling me with 
pride and anxiety. The car smelled of mints and cigar smoke. St udents looked 
up and smiled in recognition as we rolled slowly past. I had just come from 
dinner and in bending forward to suppress a belch, I accidental ly pressed the 
button on the wheel and the belch became a loud and shattering b last of the 
horn. Folks on the road turned and stared.
"I'm awfully sorry, sir," I said, worried lest he report me to Dr.
Bledsoe, the president, who would refuse to allow me to drive aga in.
"Perfectly all right. Perfectly." 
"Where shall I drive you, sir?" 
"Let me see . . ." 
Through the rear-view mirror I could see him studying a wafer-thin 
watch, replacing it in the pocket of his checked waistcoat. Hi s shirt was soft 
silk, set off with a blue-and-white polka-dotted bow tie. Hi s manner was 
aristocratic, his movements dapper and suave.
"It's early to go in for the next session," he said. "Suppose yo u just 
drive. Anywhere you like." 
"Have you seen all the campus, sir?" 
"Yes, I think so. I was one of the original founders, you know." 
"Gee! I didn't know that, sir. Then I'll have to try some of the 
roads." 
Of course I knew he was a founder, but I knew also that it was 
advantageous to flatter rich white folks. Perhaps he'd give me a large tip, or 
a suit, or a scholarship next year.
"Anywhere else you like. The campus is part of my life and I know 
my life rather well." 
"Yes, sir." 
He was still smiling.
In a moment the green campus with its vine-covered buildings wa s 
behind us. The car bounded over the road. How was the campus part of his 
life, I wondered. And how did one learn his life "rather well"? 
"Young man, you're part of a wonderful institution. It is a great 
dream become reality . . ." 
"Yes, sir," I said.
"I feel as lucky to be connected with it as you no doubt do yourse lf.
I came here years ago, when all your beautiful campus was barren gro und.
There were no trees, no flowers, no fertile farmland. That was years a go 
before you were born . . ." 
I listened with fascination, my eyes glued to the white line d ividing 
the highway as my thoughts attempted to sweep back to the time s of which 
he spoke.
"Even your parents were young. Slavery was just recently past. Y our 
people did not know in what direction to turn and, I must confess , many of
mine didn't know in what direction they should turn either. But y our great 
Founder did. He was my friend and I believed in his vision. So mu ch so,
that sometimes I don't know whether it was his vision or mine . . ." 
He chuckled softly, wrinkles forming at the corners of his eyes.
"But of course it was his; I only assisted. I came down with him t o 
see the barren land and did what I could to render assistance. And it has 
been my pleasant fate to return each spring and observe the chang es that the 
years have wrought. That has been more pleasant and satisfying t o me than 
my own work. It has been a pleasant fate, indeed." 
His voice was mellow and loaded with more meaning than I could 
fathom. As I drove, faded and yellowed pictures of the school's early days 
displayed in the library flashed across the screen of my mind, co ming fitfully 
and fragmentarily to life -- photographs of men and women in wago ns drawn 
by mule teams and oxen, dressed in black, dusty clothing, peop le who seemed 
almost without individuality, a black mob that seemed to be w aiting, looking 
with blank faces, and among them the inevitable collection o f white men and 
women in smiles, clear of features, striking, elegant and conf ident. Until now,
and although I could recognize the Founder and Dr. Bledsoe amon g them, the 
figures in the photographs had never seemed actually to have be en alive, but 
were more like signs or symbols one found on the last pages of the
dictionary . . . But now I felt that I was sharing in a great work and , with 
the car leaping leisurely beneath the pressure of my foot, I iden tified myself
with the rich man reminiscing on the rear seat . . .
"A pleasant fate," he repeated, "and I hope yours will be as plea sant." 
"Yes, sir. Thank you, sir," I said, pleased that he wished somet hing 
pleasant for me.
But at the same time I was puzzled: How could anyone's fate be 
pleasant? I had always thought of it as something painful. No one I knew 
spoke of it as pleasant -- not even Woodridge, who made us read Gre ek 
plays.
We were beyond the farthest extension of the school-owned land s 
now and I suddenly decided to turn off the highway, down a road th at 
seemed unfamiliar. There were no trees and the air was brilliant. F ar down 
the road the sun glared cruelly against a tin sign nailed to a barn. A lone 
figure bending over a hoe on the hillside raised up wearily and wa ved, more 
a shadow against the skyline than a man.
"How far have we come?" I heard over my shoulder.
"Just about a mile, sir." 
"I don't remember this section," he said.
I didn't answer. I was thinking of the first person who'd mention ed 
anything like fate in my presence, my grandfather. There had been nothing 
pleasant about it and I had tried to forget it. Now, riding here in t he 
powerful car with this white man who was so pleased with what he called his 
fate, I felt a sense of dread. My grandfather would have called t his treachery 
and I could not understand in just what way it was. Suddenly I gre w guilty 
at the realization that the white man might have thought so too . What would 
he have thought? Did he know that Negroes like my grandfather ha d been 
freed during those days just before the college had been founded ? 
As we came to a side road I saw a team of oxen hitched to a 
broken-down wagon, the ragged driver dozing on the seat beneath the shade 
of a clump of trees.
"Did you see that, sir?" I asked over my shoulder.
"What was it?" 
"The ox team, sir." 
"Oh! No, I can't see it for the trees," he said looking back. "It 's good 
timber." 
"I'm sorry, sir. Shall I turn back?" 
"No, it isn't much," he said. "Go on." 
I drove on, remembering the lean, hungry face of the sleeping man .
He was the kind of white man I feared. The brown fields swept out t o the 
horizon. A flock of birds dipped down, circled, swung up and out a s though 
linked by invisible strings. Waves of heat danced above the en gine hood. The 
tires sang over the highway. Finally I overcame my timidity and asked him:
"Sir, why did you become interested in the school?" 
"I think," he said, thoughtfully, raising his voice, "it was b ecause I 
felt even as a young man that your people were somehow closely c onnected 
with my destiny. Do you understand?" 
"Not so clearly, sir," I said, ashamed to admit it.
"You have studied Emerson, haven't you?" 
"Emerson, sir?" 
"Ralph Waldo Emerson." 
I was embarrassed because I hadn't. "Not yet, sir. We haven't com e 
to him yet." 
"No?" he said with a note of surprise. "Well, never mind. I am a 
New Englander, like Emerson. You must learn about him, for he was
important to your people. He had a hand in your destiny. Yes, pe rhaps that 
is what I mean. I had a feeling that your people were somehow con nected 
with my destiny. That what happened to you was connected with what would 
happen to me . . ." 
I slowed the car, trying to understand. Through the glass I saw hi m 
gazing at the long ash of his cigar, holding it delicately in hi s slender,
manicured fingers.
"Yes, you are my fate, young man. Only you can tell me what it 
really is. Do you understand?" 
"I think I do, sir." 
"I mean that upon you depends the outcome of the years I have 
spent in helping your school. That has been my life's work, not my banking 
or my researches, but my first-hand organizing of human life." 
I saw him now, leaning toward the front seat, speaking with an 
intensity which had not been there before. It was hard not to turn m y eyes 
from the highway and face him.
"There is another reason, a reason more important, more passionate
and, yes, even more sacred than all the others," he said, no longe r seeming 
to see me, but speaking to himself alone. "Yes, even more sacred than all the 
others. A girl, my daughter. She was a being more rare, more beautiful ,
purer, more perfect and more delicate than the wildest dream of a poe t. I 
could never believe her to be my own flesh and blood. Her beaut y was a 
well-spring of purest water-of-life, and to look upon her was to drink and 
drink and drink again . . . She was rare, a perfect creation, a work of pu rest 
art. A delicate flower that bloomed in the liquid light of the m oon. A nature 
not of this world, a personality like that of some biblical maid en, gracious 
and queenly. I found it difficult to believe her my own . . ." 
Suddenly he fumbled in his vest pocket and thrust something ov er 
the back of the seat, surprising me.
"Here, young man, you owe much of your good fortune in attending
such a school to her." 
I looked upon the tinted miniature framed in engraved platinum. I 
almost dropped it. A young woman of delicate, dreamy features lo oked up at 
me. She was very beautiful, I thought at the time, so beautifu l that I did not 
know whether I should express admiration to the extent I felt it or merely 
act polite. And yet I seemed to remember her, or someone like her, in the 
past. I know now that it was the flowing costume of soft, flims y material that 
made for the effect; today, dressed in one of the smart, well-ta ilored, angular,
sterile, streamlined, engine-turned, air-conditioned modern o utfits you see in 
the women's magazines, she would appear as ordinary as an expe nsive piece 
of machine-tooled jewelry and just as lifeless. Then, howev er, I shared 
something of his enthusiasm.
"She was too pure for life," he said sadly; "too pure and too good
and too beautiful. We were sailing together, touring the world, j ust she and I,
when she became ill in Italy. I thought little of it at the time and we 
continued across the Alps. When we reached Munich she was alread y fading 
away. While we were attending an embassy party she collapsed. T he best 
medical science in the world could not save her. It was a lonely re turn, a 
bitter voyage. I have never recovered. I have never forgiven mys elf. Everything 
I've done since her passing has been a monument to her memory. " 
He became silent, looking with his blue eyes far beyond the fi eld 
stretching away in the sun. I returned the miniature, wondering wh at in the 
world had made him open his heart to me. That was something I neve r did;
it was dangerous. First, it was dangerous if you felt like that ab out anything,
because then you'd never get it or something or someone would take it away 
from you; then it was dangerous because nobody would understand you and 
they'd only laugh and think you were crazy.
"So you see, young man, you are involved in my life quite intima tely,
even though you've never seen me before. You are bound to a great d ream 
and to a beautiful monument. If you become a good farmer, a chef, a 
preacher, doctor, singer, mechanic -- whatever you become, and e ven if you 
fail, you are my fate. And you must write me and tell me the outcom e." 
I was relieved to see him smiling through the mirror. My feelings 
were mixed. Was he kidding me? Was he talking to me like someone in a 
book just to see how I would take it? Or could it be, I was almost afraid to 
think, that this rich man was just the tiniest bit crazy? How cou ld I tell him 
his fate? He raised his head and our eyes met for an instant in th e glass,
then I lowered mine to the blazing white line that divided the h ighway.
The trees along the road were thick and tall. We took a curve. Floc ks 
of quail sailed up and over a field, brown, brown, sailing down, blending.
"Will you promise to tell me my fate?" I heard.
"Sir?" 
"Will you?" 
"Right now, sir?" I asked with embarrassment.
"It is up to you. Now, if you like." 
I was silent. His voice was serious, demanding. I could think o f no 
reply. The motor purred. An insect crushed itself against the win dshield,
leaving a yellow, mucous smear.
"I don't know now, sir. This is only my junior year . . ." 
"But you'll tell me when you know?" 
"I'll try, sir." 
"Good." 
When I took a quick glance into the mirror he was smiling again. I
wanted to ask him if being rich and famous and helping to direct t he school
to become what it was, wasn't enough; but I was afraid.
"What do you think of my idea, young man?" he said.
"I don't know, sir. I only think that you have what you're lookin g 
for. Because if I fail or leave school, it doesn't seem to me it w ould be your 
fault. Because you helped make the school what it is." 
"And you think that enough?" 
"Yes, sir. That's what the president tells us. You have yours, an d you 
got it yourself, and we have to lift ourselves up the same way." 
"But that's only part of it, young man. I have wealth and a 
reputation and prestige -- all that is true. But your great Founde r had more 
than that, he had tens of thousands of lives dependent upon hi s ideas and 
upon his actions. What he did affected your whole race. In a way , he had the 
power of a king, or in a sense, of a god. That, I've come to belie ve, is more 
important than my own work, because more depends upon you. You are
important because if you fail I have failed by one individual, one defective 
cog; it didn't matter so much before, but now I'm growing old and it has 
become very important . . ." 
But you don't even know my name, I thought, wondering what it wa s 
all about.
". . . I suppose it is difficult for you to understand how this co ncerns 
me. But as you develop you must remember that I am dependent upo n you 
to learn my fate. Through you and your fellow students I become, let us say,
three hundred teachers, seven hundred trained mechanics, eight h undred 
skilled farmers, and so on. That way I can observe in terms of livi ng 
personalities to what extent my money, my time and my hopes hav e been 
fruitfully invested. I also construct a living memorial to my da ughter.
Understand? I can see the fruits produced by the land that your gre at 
Founder has transformed from barren clay to fertile soil." 
His voice ceased and I saw the strands of pale blue smoke driftin g 
across the mirror and heard the electric lighter snap back on its ca ble into 
place behind the back of the seat.
"I think I understand you better, now, sir," I said.
"Very good, my boy." 
"Shall I continue in this direction, sir?" 
"By all means," he said, looking out at the countryside. "I'v e never 
seen this section before. It's new territory for me." 
Half-consciously I followed the white line as I drove, thinki ng about 
what he had said. Then as we took a hill we were swept by a wave of
scorching air and it was as though we were approaching a desert. It almost 
took my breath away and I leaned over and switched on the fan, he aring its 
sudden whirr.
"Thank you," he said as a slight breeze filled the car.
We were passing a collection of shacks and log cabins now, blea ched 
white and warped by the weather. Sun-tortured shingles lay on the roofs like 
decks of water-soaked cards spread out to dry. The houses consis ted of two 
square rooms joined together by a common floor and roof with a porc h in 
between. As we passed we could look through to the fields beyon d. I stopped 
the car at his excited command in front of a house set off from the rest.
"Is that a log cabin?" 
It was an old cabin with its chinks filled with chalk-white cl ay, with 
bright new shingles patching its roof. Suddenly I was sorry that I had 
blundered down this road. I recognized the place as soon as I saw t he group 
of children in stiff new overalls who played near a rickety fence .
"Yes, sir. It is a log cabin," I said.
It was the cabin of Jim Trueblood, a sharecropper who had brought 
disgrace upon the black community. Several months before he had caused 
quite a bit of outrage up at the school, and now his name was neve r 
mentioned above a whisper. Even before that he had seldom come n ear the 
campus but had been well liked as a hard worker who took good care o f his 
family's needs, and as one who told the old stories with a sense of humor 
and a magic that made them come alive. He was also a good tenor s inger,
and sometimes when special white guests visited the school h e was brought 
up along with the members of a country quartet to sing what the of ficials 
called "their primitive spirituals" when we assembled in the c hapel on Sunday 
evenings. We were embarrassed by the earthy harmonies they sang, b ut since 
the visitors were awed we dared not laugh at the crude, high, plain tively 
animal sounds Jim Trueblood made as he led the quartet. That had all
passed now with his disgrace, and what on the part of the school o fficials 
had been an attitude of contempt blunted by tolerance, had now become a 
contempt sharpened by hate. I didn't understand in those pre-in visible days 
that their hate, and mine too, was charged with fear. How all of u s at the 
college hated the black-belt people, the "peasants," during those days! We 
were trying to lift them up and they, like Trueblood, did everyt hing it seemed 
to pull us down.
"It appears quite old," Mr. Norton said, looking across the bare, h ard 
stretch of yard where two women dressed in new blue-and-white che cked 
ginghams were washing clothes in an iron pot. The pot was soot-b lack and 
the feeble flames that licked its sides showed pale pink and b ordered with 
black, like flames in mourning. Both women moved with the wear y,
full-fronted motions of far-gone pregnancy.
"It is, sir," I said. "That one and the other two like it were buil t 
during slavery times." 
"You don't say! I would never have believed that they were so 
enduring. Since slavery times!" 
"That's true, sir. And the white family that owned the land when it 
was a big plantation still lives in town." 
"Yes," he said, "I know that many of the old families still sur vive.
And individuals too, the human stock goes on, even though it d egenerates.
But these cabinsl" He seemed surprised and confounded.
"Do you suppose those women know anything about the age and 
history of the place? The older one looks as though she might. " 
"I doubt it, sir. They -- they don't seem very bright." 
"Bright?" he said, removing his cigar. "You mean that they would n't 
talk with me?" he asked suspiciously.
"Yes, sir. That's it." 
"Why not?" 
I didn't want to explain. It made me feel ashamed, but he sense d 
that I knew something and pressed me.
"It's not very nice, sir. But I don't think those women would ta lk to 
us." 
"We can explain that we're from the school. Surely they'll talk t hen.
You may tell them who I am." 
"Yes, sir," I said, "but they hate us up at the school. They neve r 
come there . . ." 
"What!" 
"No, sir." 
"And those children along the fence down there?" 
"They don't either, sir." 
"But why?" 
"I don't really know, sir. Quite a few folks out this way don't,
though. I guess they're too ignorant. They're not interested." 
"But I can't believe it." 
The children had stopped playing and now looked silently at th e car,
their arms behind their backs and their new over-sized overalls pulled tight 
over their little pot bellies as though they too were pregnant.
"What about their men folk?" 
I hesitated. Why did he find this so strange? 
"He hates us, sir," I said.
"You say he; aren't both the women married?" 
I caught my breath. I'd made a mistake. "The old one is, sir," I sa id 
reluctantly.
"What happened to the young woman's husband?" 
"She doesn't have any -- That is . . . I --" 
"What is it, young man? Do you know these people?" 
"Only a little, sir. There was some talk about them up on the 
campus a while back." 
"What talk?" 
"Well, the young woman is the old woman's daughter . . ." 
"And?" 
"Well, sir, they say . . . you see . . . I mean they say the daughter
doesn't have a husband." 
"Oh, I see. But that shouldn't be so strange. I understand that y our 
people -- Never mind! Is that all?" 
"Well, sir . . ." 
"Yes, what else?" 
"They say that her father did it." 
"What!" 
"Yes, sir . . . that he gave her the baby." 
I heard the sharp intake of breath, like a toy balloon suddenly 
deflated. His face reddened. I was confused, feeling shame fo r the two women 
and fear that I had talked too much and offended his sensibili ties.
"And did anyone from the school investigate this matter?" he as ked 
at last.
"Yes, sir," I said.
"What was discovered?" 
"That it was true -- they say." 
"But how does he explain his doing such a -- a -- such a monstrous
thing?" 
He sat back in the seat, his hands grasping his knees, his knuck les 
bloodless. I looked away, down the heat-dazzling concrete of the highway. I 
wished we were back on the other side of the white line, heading back to the 
quiet green stretch of the campus.
"It is said that the man took both his wife and his daughter?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"And that he is the father of both their children?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"No, no, no!" 
He sounded as though he were in great pain. I looked at him 
anxiously. What had happened? What had I said? 
"Not that! No . . ." he said, with something like horror.
I saw the sun blaze upon the new blue overalls as the man appeared
around the cabin. His shoes were tan and new and he moved easily o ver the 
hot earth. He was a small man and he covered the yard with a familia rity 
that would have allowed him to walk in the blackest darkness wi th the same 
certainty. He came and said something to the women as he fanned himself
with a blue bandanna handkerchief. But they appeared to regard hi m sullenly,
barely speaking, and hardly looking in his direction.
"Would that be the man?" Mr. Norton asked.
"Yes, sir. I think so." 
"Get out!" he cried. "I must talk with him." 
I was unable to move. I felt surprise and a dread and resentment of
what he might say to Trueblood and his women, the questions he m ight ask.
Why couldn't he leave them alone!
"Hurry!" 
I climbed from the car and opened the rear door. He clambered out 
and almost ran across the road to the yard, as though compelled by s ome 
pressing urgency which I could not understand. Then suddenly I s aw the two 
women turn and run frantically behind the house, their movement s heavy and 
flatfooted. I hurried behind him, seeing him stop when he reache d the man 
and the children. They became silent, their faces clouding ov er, their features 
becoming soft and negative, their eyes bland and deceptive. They were 
crouching behind their eyes waiting for him to speak -- just as I recognized 
that I was trembling behind my own. Up close I saw what I had not s een 
from the car: The man had a scar on his right cheek, as though he had been 
hit in the face with a sledge. The wound was raw and moist and from time 
to time he lifted his handkerchief to fan away the gnats.
"I, I --" Mr. Norton stammered, "I must talk with you!" 
"All right, suh," Jim Trueblood said without surprise and waited .
"Is it true . . . I mean did you?" 
"Suh?" Trueblood asked, as I looked away.
"You have survived," he blurted. "But is it true . . .?" 
"Suh?" the farmer said, his brow wrinkling with bewilderment.
"I'm sorry, sir," I said, "but I don't think he understands you."
He ignored me, staring into Trueblood's face as though reading a 
message there which I could not perceive.
"You did and are unharmed!" he shouted, his blue eyes blazing in to 
the black face with something like envy and indignation. True blood looked 
helplessly at me. I looked away. I understood no more than he.
"You have looked upon chaos and are not destroyed!" 
"No suh! I feels all right." 
"You do? You feel no inner turmoil, no need to cast out the 
offending eye?" 
"Suh?" 
"Answer me!" 
"I'm all right, suh," Trueblood said uneasily. "My eyes is all ri ght too.
And when I feels po'ly in my gut I takes a little soda and it goes away." 
"No, no, no! Let us go where there is shade," he said, looking abo ut 
excitedly and going swiftly to where the porch cast a swath of sh ade. We 
followed him. The farmer placed his hand on my shoulder, but I sh ook it off,
knowing that I could explain nothing. We sat on the porch in a se micircle in 
camp chairs, me between the sharecropper and the millionaire. Th e earth 
around the porch was hard and white from where wash water had long be en 
thrown.
"How are you faring now?" Mr. Norton asked. "Perhaps I could 
help." 
"We ain't doing so bad, suh. 'Fore they heard 'bout what happen t o 
us out here I couldn't git no help from nobody. Now lotta folks is curious 
and goes outta they way to help. Even the biggity school folks up on the hill,
only there was a catch to it! They offered to send us clean outta t he county,
pay our way and everything and give me a hundred dollars to git se ttled 
with. But we likes it here so I told 'em No. Then they sent a fello w out here,
a big fellow too, and he said if I didn't leave they was going to turn the 
white folks loose on me. It made me mad and it made me scared. The m 
folks up there to the school is in strong with the white folks and that scared 
me. But I thought when they first come out here that they was diff erent from 
when I went up there a long time ago looking for some book learnin g and 
some points on how to handle my crops. That was when I had my own 
place. I thought they was trying to he'p me, on accounta I got t wo women 
due to birth 'bout the same time.
"But I got mad when I found they was tryin' to git rid of us 'cause
they said we was a disgrace. Yessuh, I got real mad. So I went down to see 
Mr. Buchanan, the boss man, and I tole him 'bout it and he give me a note 
to the sheriff and tole me to take it to him. I did that, jus' like he tole me. I 
went to the jailhouse and give Sheriff Barbour the note and he a sk me to tell
him what happen, and I tole him and he called in some more men and they 
made me tell it again. They wanted to hear about the gal lots of times and 
they gimme somethin' to eat and drink and some tobacco. Surprise d me,
'cause I was scared and spectin' somethin' different. Why, I gu ess there ain't 
a colored man in the county who ever got to take so much of the whi te 
folkses' time as I did. So finally they tell me not to worry, tha t they was 
going to send word up to the school that I was to stay right where I a m.
Them big nigguhs didn't bother me, neither. It just goes to sho w yuh that no 
matter how biggity a nigguh gits, the white folks can always c ut him down.
The white folks took up for me. And the white folks took to comi ng out here 
to see us and talk with us. Some of 'em was big white folks, too, from the 
big school way cross the State. Asked me lots 'bout what I thoug ht 'bout 
things, and 'bout my folks and the kids, and wrote it all down in a book. But 
best of all, suh, I got more work now than I ever did have before . . . " 
He talked willingly now, with a kind of satisfaction and no tra ce of
hesitancy or shame. The old man listened with a puzzled expres sion as he 
held an unlit cigar in his delicate fingers.
"Things is pretty good now," the farmer said. "Ever time I think of
how cold it was and what a hard time we was having I gits the shake s." 
I saw him bite into a plug of chewing tobacco. Something tinkl ed 
against the porch and I picked it up, gazing at it from time to tim e. It was a 
hard red apple stamped out of tin.
"You see, suh, it was cold and us didn't have much fire. Nothin' but 
wood, no coal. I tried to git help but wouldn't nobody help us an d I couldn't 
find no work or nothin'. It was so cold all of us had to sleep toge ther; me,
the ole lady and the gal. That's how it started, suh." 
He cleared his throat, his eyes gleaming and his voice taking on a 
deep, incantatory quality, as though he had told the story ma ny, many times.
Flies and fine white gnats swarmed about his wound.
"That's the way it was," he said. "Me on one side and the ole lad y 
on the other and the gal in the middle. It was dark, plum black. B lack as the 
middle of a bucket of tar. The kids was sleeping all together in they bed over 
in the corner. I must have been the last one to go to sleep, 'cause I was 
thinking 'bout how to git some grub for the next day and 'bout th e gal and 
the young boy what was startin' to hang 'round her. I didn't like h im and he 
kept comin' through my thoughts and I made up my mind to warn him a way 
from the gal. It was black dark and I heard one of the kids whimper i n his 
sleep and the last few sticks of kindlin' crackin' and settlin ' in the stove and 
the smell of the fat meat seemed to git cold and still in the air just like 
meat grease when it gits set in a cold plate of molasses. And I wa s thinkin'
'bout the gal and this boy and feelin' her arms besides me and he aring the 
ole lady snorin' with a kinda moanin' and a-groanin' on the othe r side. I was 
worryin' 'bout my family, how they was goin' to eat and all, and I thought 
'bout when the gal was little like the younguns sleepin' over in the corner 
and how I was her favorite over the ole lady. There we was, breathi n'
together in the dark. Only I could see 'em in my mind, knowin' 'e m like I 
do. In my mind I looked at all of 'em, one by one. The gal looks ju st like 
the ole lady did when she was young and I first met her, only bette r lookin'.
You know, we gittin' to be a better-lookin' race of people . . .
"Anyway, I could hear 'em breathin' and though I hadn't been it
made me sleepy. Then I heard the gal say, 'Daddy,' soft and low i n her sleep 
and I looked, tryin' to see if she was still awake. But all I can do is smell
her and feel her breath on my hand when I go to touch her. She said i t so 
soft I couldn't be sure I had heard anything, so I just laid there l istenin'.
Seems like I heard a whippoorwill callin', and I thought to mys elf, Go on 
away from here, we'll whip ole Will when we find him. Then I heard t he 
clock up there at the school strikin' four times, lonesome like .
"Then I got to thinkin' 'bout way back when I left the farm and we nt 
to live in Mobile and 'bout a gal I had me then. I was young then - - like 
this young fellow here. Us lived in a two-story house 'longsid e the river, and 
at night in the summertime we used to lay in bed and talk, and aft er she'd 
gone off to sleep I'd be awake lookin' out at the lights comin' up from the 
water and listenin' to the sounds of the boats movin' along. T hey used to 
have musicianers on them boats, and sometimes I used to wake he r up to 
hear the music when they come up the river. I'd be layin' there and it would 
be quiet and I could hear it comin' from way, way off. Like when y ou quail
huntin' and it's getting dark and you can hear the boss bird whis tlin' tryin' to 
get the covey together again, and he's coming toward you slow a nd whistlin'
soft, cause he knows you somewhere around with your gun. Still h e got to 
round them up, so he keeps on comin'. Them boss quails is like a g ood man,
what he got to do he do.
"Well, that's the way the boats used to sound. Comin' close to you 
from far away. First one would be comin' to you when you almost sl eep and 
it sounded like somebody hittin' at you slow with a big shiny p ick. You see 
the pick-point comin' straight at you, comin' slow too, and yo u can't dodge;
only when it goes to hit you it ain't no pick a'tall but somebod y far away 
breakin' little bottles of all kindsa colored glass. It's stil l comin' at you 
though. Still comin'. Then you hear it close up, like when you up in the 
second-story window and look down on a wagonful of watermelon s, and you 
see one of them young juicy melons split wide open a-layin' al l spread out 
and cool and sweet on top of all the striped green ones like it's w aitin' just 
for you, so you can see how red and ripe and juicy it is and all the s hiny 
black seeds it's got and all. And you could hear the sidewheel s splashin' like 
they don't want to wake nobody up; and us, me and the gal, would lay there 
feelin' like we was rich folks and them boys on the boats would b e playin'
sweet as good peach brandy wine. Then the boats would be past an d the 
lights would be gone from the window and the music would be goin ' too.
Kinda like when you watch a gal in a red dress and a wide straw hat go in'
past you down a lane with the trees on both sides, and she's plum p and 
juicy and kinda switchin' her tail 'cause she knows you watch in' and you 
know she know, and you just stands there and watches 'til you ca n't see 
nothin' but the top of her red hat and then that goes and you know she 
done dropped behind a hill -- I seen me a gal like that once. All I could 
hear then would be that Mobile gal -- name of Margaret -- she be bre athin'
beside me, and maybe 'bout that time she'd say, 'Daddy, you st ill 'wake?' and 
then I'd grunt, 'Uhhuh' and drop on off -- Gent'mens," Jim Truebl ood said, "I 
likes to recall them Mobile days.
"Well, it was like that when I heard Matty Lou say, 'Daddy,' and I 
knowed she musta been dreamin' 'bout somebody from the way she s aid it 
and I gits mad wonderin' if it's that boy. I listen to her mumbli n' for a while 
tryin' to hear if she calls his name, but she don't, and I rememb er that they 
say if you put the hand of a person who's talkin' in his sleep in w arm water 
he'll say it all, but the water is too cold and I wouldn't have d one it anyway.
But I'm realizin' that she's a woman now, when I feels her turn an d squirm 
against me and throw her arm across my neck, up where the cover didn 't 
reach and I was cold. She said somethin' I couldn't understand, like a woman 
says when she wants to tease and please a man. I knowed then she was 
grown and I wondered how many times it'd done happened and was it that 
doggone boy. I moved her arm and it was soft, but it didn't wake h er, so I 
called her, but that didn't wake her neither. Then I turned my bac k and tried 
to move away, though there wasn't much room and I could still fee l her 
touchin' me, movin' close to me. Then I musta dropped into the d ream. I 
have to tell you 'bout that dream." 
I looked at Mr. Norton and stood up, thinking that now was a good 
time to leave; but he was listening to Trueblood so intensely h e didn't see 
me, and I sat down again, cursing the farmer silently. To hell wi th his 
dream!
"I don't quite remember it all, but I remember that I was lookin' for 
some fat meat. I went to the white folks downtown and they said go see Mr.
Broadnax, that he'd give it to me. Well, he lives up on a hill and I was 
climbin' up there to see him. Seems like that was the highest hi ll in the 
world. The more I climbed the farther away Mr. Broadnax's house see ms to 
git. But finally I do reach there. And I'm so tired and restless to g it to the 
man, I goes through the front door! I knows it's wrong, but I can't h elp it. I 
goes in and I'm standin' in a big room full of lighted candles an d shiny 
furniture and pictures on the walls, and soft stuff on the floor. B ut I don't 
see a livin' soul. So I calls his name, but still don't nobody c ome and don't 
nobody answer. So I sees a door and goes through that door and I'm in a 
big white bedroom, like I seen one time when I was a little ole bo y and went 
to the big house with my Ma. Everything in the room was white and I'm 
standin' there knowin' I got no business in there, but there anyh ow. It's a 
woman's room too. I tries to git out, but I don't find the door; and all
around me I can smell woman, can smell it gittin' stronger all th e time. Then 
I looks over in a corner and sees one of them tall grandfather clo cks and I 
hears it strikin' and the glass door is openin' and a white lady i s steppin' out 
of it. She got on a nightgown of soft white silky stuff and noth in' else, and 
she looks straight at me. I don't know what to do. I wants to run, b ut the 
only door I see is the one in the clock she's standin' in -- and a nyway, I 
can't move and this here clock is keepin' up a heapa racket. It's gittin' faster 
and faster all the time. I tries to say somethin', but I caint. T hen she starts 
to screamin' and I thinks I done gone deef, 'cause though I can s ee her 
mouth working, I don't hear nothin'. Yit I can still hear the cl ock and I tries 
to tell her I'm just lookin' for Mr. Broadnax but she don't hear m e. Instead 
she runs up and grabs me around the neck and holds tight, tryin' to keep me 
out of the clock. I don't know what to do then, sho 'nough. I trie s to talk to 
her, and I tries to git away. But she's holdin' me and I'm scared to touch her 
cause she's white. Then I gits so scared that I throws her on the b ed and 
tries to break her holt. That woman just seemed to sink outta sig ht, that 
there bed was so soft. It's sinkin' down so far I think it's goin g to smother 
both of us. Then swoosh! all of a sudden a flock of little white geese flies out 
of the bed like they say you see when you go to dig for buried mone y. Lawd!
they hadn't no more'n disappeared than I heard a door open and Mr.
Broadnax's voice said, 'They just nigguhs, leave 'em do it.' "
How can he tell this to white men, I thought, when he knows they 'll
say that all Negroes do such things? I looked at the floor, a red mi st of
anguish before my eyes.
"And I caint stop -- although I got a feelin' somethin' is wrong . I git 
loose from the woman now and I'm runnin' for the clock. At first I c ouldn't 
git the door open, it had some kinda crinkly stuff like steel wo ol on the 
facing. But I gits it open and gits inside and it's hot and dark i n there. I 
goes up a dark tunnel, up near where the machinery is making all t hat noise 
and heat. It's like the power plant they got up to the school. I t's burnin' hot 
as iffen the house was caught on fire, and I starts to runnin', try -in' to git 
out. I runs and runs till I should be tired but ain't tired but feeli n' more 
rested as I runs, and runnin' so good it's like flyin' and I'm flyi n' and sailin'
and floatin' right up over the town. Only I'm still in the tunne l. Then way up 
ahead I sees a bright light like a jack-o-lantern over a graveyard . It gits 
brighter and brighter and I know I got to catch up with it or else. Then all
at once I was right up with it and it burst like a great big electric l ight in 
my eyes and scalded me all over. Only it wasn't a scald, but like I was 
drownin' in a lake where the water was hot on the top and had cold n umbin'
currents down under it. Then all at once I'm through it and I'm reli eved to 
be out and in the cool daylight agin.
"I wakes up intendin' to tell the ole lady 'bout my crazy dream.
Morning done come, and it's gettin' almost light. And there I am , lookin'
straight in Matty Lou's face and she's beatin' me and scratchin ' and tremblin'
and shakin' and cryin' all at the same time like she's havin' a fit. I'm too 
surprised to move. She's cryin', 'Daddy, Daddy, oh Daddy,' jus t like that. And 
all at once I remember the ole lady. She's right beside us snorin' and I can't 
move 'cause I figgers if I moved it would be a sin And I figgers too , that if I 
don't move it maybe ain't no sin, 'cause it happened when I was asleep -- 
although maybe sometimes a man can look at a little ole pigtai l gal and see 
him a whore -- you'all know that? Anyway, I realizes that if I don 't move the 
ole lady will see me. I don't want that to happen. That would be worse than 
sin. I'm whisperin' to Matty Lou, tryin' to keep her quiet and I 'm figurin' how 
to git myself out of the fix I'm in without sinnin'. I almost ch okes her.
"But once a man gits hisself in a tight spot like that there ain' t much 
he can do. It ain't up to him no longer. There I was, tryin' to git a way with 
all my might, yet having to move without movin'. I flew in but I had to walk 
out. I had to move without movin'. I done thought 'bout it sinc e a heap, and 
when you think right hard you see that that's the way things is al ways been 
with me. That's just about been my life. There was only one way I can figger 
that I could git out: that was with a knife. But I didn't have no knife, and if
you'all ever seen them geld them young boar pigs in the fall, y ou know I 
knowed that that was too much to pay to keep from sinnin'. Every thing was 
happenin' inside of me like a fight was goin' on. Then just the very thought 
of the fix I'm in puts the iron back in me.
"Then if that ain't bad enough, Matty Lou can't hold out no lon ger 
and gits to movin' herself. First she was tryin' to push me away a nd I'm 
tryin' to hold her down to keep from sinnin'. Then I'm pullin' a way and 
shushin' her to be quiet so's not to wake her Ma, when she grabs h olt to me 
and holds tight. She didn't want me to go then -- and to tell the
honest-to-God truth I found out that I didn't want to go neithe r. I guess I 
felt then, at that time -- and although I been sorry since -- jus t 'bout like 
that fellow did down in Birmingham. That one what locked hisse lf in his 
house and shot at them police until they set fire to the house an d burned 
him up. I was lost. The more wringlin' and twistin' we done tryin ' to git 
away, the more we wanted to stay. So like that fellow, I stayed, I had to 
fight it on out to the end. He mighta died, but I suspects now th at he got a 
heapa satisfaction before he went. I know there ain't nothin' l ike what I went 
through, I caint tell how it was. It's like when a real drinkin' ma n gits drunk,
or when a real sanctified religious woman gits so worked up she ju mps outta 
her clothes, or when a real gamblin' man keeps on gamblin' when he's losin'.
You got holt to it and you caint let go even though you want to."
"Mr. Norton, sir," I said in a choked voice, "it's time we were gett ing 
back to the campus. You'll miss your appointments . . ." 
He didn't even look at me. "Please," he said, waving his hand i n 
annoyance.
Trueblood seemed to smile at me behind his eyes as he looked from
the white man to me and continued.
"I couldn't even let go when I heard Kate scream. It was a scream to
make your blood run cold. It sounds like a woman who was watchin ' a team 
of wild horses run down her baby chile and she caint move. Kate's hair is 
standin' up like she done seen a ghost, her gown is hanging ope n and the 
veins in her neck is 'bout to bust. And her eyes! Lawd, them eye s. I'm lookin'
up at her from where I'm layin' on the pallet with Matty Lou, and I 'm too 
weak to move. She screams and starts to pickin' up the first thing that comes 
to her hand and throwin' it. Some of them misses me and some of th em hits 
me. Little things and big things. Somethin' cold and strong-s tinkin' hits me 
and wets me and bangs against my head. Somethin' hits the wall -- 
boom-a-loom-a-loom! -- like a cannon ball, and I tries to cove r up my head.
Kate's talkin' the unknown tongue, like a wild woman.
" 'Wait a minit, Kate,' I says. 'Stop it!'
"Then I hears her stop a second and I hears her runnin' across the 
floor, and I twists and looks and Lawd, she done got my double-b arrel
shotgun!
"And while she's foamin' at the mouth and cockin' the gun, she gits 
her speech.
" 'Git up! Git up!' she says.
" 'HEY! NAW! KATE!' I says.
" 'Goddam yo' soul to hell! Git up offa my chile!'
" 'But woman, Kate, lissen . . .'
" 'Don't talk, MOVE!'
" 'Down that thing, Kate!'
" 'No down, UP!'
" 'That there's buckshot, woman, BUCKshot!'
" 'Yes, it is!'
" 'Down it, I say!" 
" 'I'm gon blast your soul to hell!'
" 'You gon hit Matty Lou!'
" 'Not Matty Lou -- YOU!'
" 'It spreads, Kate. Matty Lou!'
"She moves around, aimin' at me.
" 'I done warn you, Jim . . .'
" 'Kate, it was a dream. Lissen to me . . .'
" 'You the one who lissen -- UP FROM THERE!'
"She jerks the gun and I shuts my eyes. But insteada thunder and
lightin' bustin' me, I hears Matty Lou scream in my ear,
" 'Mamma! Oooooo, MAMA!'
"I rolls almost over then and Kate hesitates. She looks at the g un,
and she looks at us, and she shivers a minit like she got the feve r. Then all
at once she drops the gun, and ZIP! quick as a cat, she turns and gra bs 
somethin' off the stove. It catches me like somebody diggin' into my side with 
a sharp spade. I caint breathe. She's throwin' and talkin' all at the same time.
"And when I looks up, Maan, Maaan! she's got a iron in her hand!
"I hollers, 'No blood, Kate. Don't spill no blood!'
" 'You low-down dog,' she says, 'it's better to spill than to f oul!'
" 'Naw, Kate. Things ain't what they 'pear! Don't make no blood -sin 
on accounta no dream-sin!" 
" 'Shut up, nigguh. You done fouled!'
"But I sees there ain't no use reasonin' with her then. I makes up
my mind that I'm goin' to take whatever she gimme. It seems to m e that all
I can do is take my punishment. I tell myself, Maybe if you suff er for it, it 
will be best. Maybe you owe it to Kate to let her beat you. You ai n't guilty,
but she thinks you is. You don't want her to beat you, but she th ink she got 
to beat you. You want to git up, but you too weak to move.
"I was too. I was frozen to where I was like a youngun what done 
stuck his lip to a pump handle in the wintertime. I was just like a jaybird 
that the yellow jackets done stung 'til he's paralyzed -- but s till alive in his 
eyes and he's watchin' 'em sting his body to death.
"It made me seem to go way back a distance in my head, behind my 
eyes, like I was standin' behind a windbreak durin' a storm. I loo ks out and 
sees Kate runnin' toward me draggin' something behind her. I tries to see 
what it is 'cause I'm curious 'bout it and sees her gown catch on the stove 
and her hand comin' in sight with somethin' in it. I thinks to m yself, It's a 
handle. What she got the handle to? Then I sees her right up on me , big.
She's swingin' her arms like a man swingin' a ten-pound sledge and I sees 
the knuckles of her hand is bruised and bleedin', and I sees it c atch in her 
gown and I sees her gown go up so I can see her thighs and I sees ho w 
rusty and gray the cold done made her skin, and I sees her bend and
straightenin' up and I hears her grunt and I sees her swing and I sm ells her 
sweat and I knows by the shape of the shinin' wood what she's go t to put on 
me. Lawd, yes! I sees it catch on a quilt this time and raise that quilt up 
and drop it on the floor. Then I sees that ax come free! It's shinin ', shinin'
from the sharpenin' I'd give it a few days before, and man, way bac k in 
myself, behind that windbreak, I says,
" 'NAAW! KATE -- Lawd, Kate, NAW!!!' " 
Suddenly his voice was so strident that I looked up startled.
Trueblood seemed to look straight through Mr. Norton, his eyes gla ssy. The 
children paused guiltily at their play, looking toward their f ather.
"I might as well been pleadin' with a switch engine," he went o n. "I 
sees it comin' down. I sees the light catchin' on it, I sees Kat e's face all
mean and I tightens my shoulders and stiffens my neck and I wait s -- ten 
million back-breakin' years, it seems to me like I waits. I wait s so long I 
remembers all the wrong things I ever done; I waits so long I opens my eyes 
and closes 'em and opens my eyes agin, and I sees it fallin'. It 's fallin' fast as 
flops from a six-foot ox, and while I'm waitin' I feels somethi n' wind up 
inside of me and turn to water. I sees it, Lawd, yes! I sees it and s eein' it I 
twists my head aside. Couldn't help it; Kate has a good aim, bu t for that. I 
moves. Though I meant to keep still, I moved! Anybody but Jesu s Christ 
hisself woulda moved. I feel like the whole side of my face is s mashed clear 
off. It hits me like hot lead so hot that insteada burnin' me it n umbs me.
I'm layin' there on the floor, but inside me I'm runnin' round in ci rcles like a 
dog with his back broke, and back into that numbness with my tai l tucked 
between my legs. I feels like I don't have no skin on my face no m ore, only 
the naked bone. But this is the part I don't understand: more'n th e pain and 
numbness I feels relief. Yes, and to git some more of that relief I seems to 
run out from behind the windbreak again and up to where Kate's stan din'
with the ax, and I opens my eyes and waits. That's the truth. I wa nts some 
more and I waits. I sees her swing it, lookin' down on me, and I se es it in 
the air and I holds my breath, then all of a sudden I sees it stop l ike 
somebody done reached down through the roof and caught it, and I s ees her 
face have a spasm and I sees the ax fall, back of her this time, a nd hit the 
floor, and Kate spews out some puke and I close my eyes and waits . I can 
hear her moanin' and stumblin' out of the door and fallin' off the porch into 
the yard. Then I hears her pukin' like all her guts is coming up by the roots.
Then I looks down and seen blood runnin' all over Matty Lou. It' s my blood,
my face is bleedin'. That gits me to movin'. I gits up and stumb les out to 
find Kate, and there she is under the cottonwood tree out there, o n her 
knees, and she's moanin'.
" 'What have I done, Lawd! What have I done!'
"She's droolin' green stuff and gits to pukin' agin, and when I g oes 
to touch her it gits worse. I stands there holdin' my face and try in' to keep 
the blood from flowin' and wonders what on earth is gonna happen. I looks 
up at the mornin' sun and expects somehow for it to thunder. But i t's already 
bright and clear and the sun comin' up and the birds is chirpin' an d I gits 
more afraid then than if a bolt of lightnin' had struck me. I yells , 'Have 
mercy, Lawd! Lawd, have mercy!' and waits. And there's nothin' b ut the clear 
bright mornin' sun.
"But don't nothin' happen and I knows then that somethin' wors e 
than anything I ever heard 'bout is in store for me. I musta stood there stark 
stone still for half an hour. I was still standin' there when Kat e got off her 
knees and went back into the house. The blood was runnin' all ov er my 
clothes and the flies was after me, and I went back inside to tr y and stop it.
"When I see Matty Lou stretched out there I think she's dead. Ain 't 
no color in her face and she ain't hardly breathin'. She gray in th e face. I 
tries to help her but I can't do no good and Kate won't speak to me nor 
look at me even; and I thinks maybe she plans to try to kill me ag in, but 
she don't. I'm in such a daze I just sits there the whole time whi le she 
bundles up the younguns and takes 'em down the road to Will Nich ols'. I can 
see but I caint do nothin'.
"And I'm still settin' there when she comes back with some wome n 
to see 'bout Matty Lou. Won't nobody speak to me, though they l ooks at me 
like I'm some new kinda cotton-pickin' machine. I feels bad. I tells them how 
it happened in a dream, but they scorns me. I gits plum out of the h ouse 
then. I goes to see the preacher and even he don't believe me. He tells me to 
git out ot his house, that I'm the most wicked man he's ever see n and that I 
better go confess my sin and make my peace with God. I leaves tr yin' to 
pray, but I caint. I thinks and thinks, until I thinks my brain go 'n bust, 'bout 
how I'm guilty and how I ain't guilty. I don't eat nothin' and I don't drink 
nothin' and caint sleep at night. Finally, one night, way earl y in the mornin',
I looks up and sees the stars and I starts singin'. I don't mean to , I didn't 
think 'bout it, just start singin'. I don't know what it was, so me kinda church 
song, I guess. All I know is I ends up singin' the blues. I sings me some 
blues that night ain't never been sang before, and while I'm si ngin' them 
blues I makes up my mind that I ain't nobody but myself and ain' t nothin' I 
can do but let whatever is gonna happen, happen. I made up my mi nd that I 
was goin' back home and face Kate; yeah, and face Matty Lou too .
"When I gits here everybody thinks I done run off. There's a heap o f
women here with Kate and I runs 'em out. And when I runs 'em out I sen ds 
the younguns out to play and locks the door and tells Kate and M atty Lou 
'bout the dream and how I'm sorry, but that what done happen is do ne 
happen.
" 'How come you don't go on 'way and leave us?' is the first words 
Kate says to me. 'Ain't you done enough to me and this chile?'
" 'I caint leave you,' I says. 'I'm a man and man don't leave his
family.'
"She says, 'Naw, you ain't no man. No man'd do what you did.'
" 'I'm still a man,' I says.
" 'But what you gon' do after it happens?' says Kate.
" 'After what happens?' I says.
" 'When yo black 'bomination is birthed to bawl yo wicked sin be fo 
the eyes of God!' (She musta learned them words from the preacher.)
" 'Birth?' I says. 'Who birth?'
" 'Both of us. Me birth and Matty Lou birth. Both of us birth, you 
dirty lowdown wicked dog!'
"That liketa killed me. I can understand then why Matty Lou won 't 
look at me and won't speak a word to nobody.
" 'If you stay I'm goin' over an' git Aunt Cloe for both of us,' K ate 
says. She says, 'I don't aim to birth no sin for folks to look at a ll the rest of
my life, and I don't aim for Matty Lou to neither.'
"You see, Aunt Cloe is a midwife, and even weak as I am from this 
news I knows I don't want her foolin' with my womenfolks. That woulda been 
pilin' sin up on toppa sin. So I told Kate, naw, that if Aunt Clo e come near 
this house I'd kill her, old as she is. I'da done it too. That set tles it. I walks 
out of the house and leaves 'em here to cry it out between 'em. I w anted to 
go off by myself agin, but it don't do no good tryin' to run off fro m 
somethin' like that. It follows you wherever you go. Besides, to git right down 
to the facts, there wasn't nowhere I could go. I didn't have a cry in' dime!
"Things got to happenin' right off. The nigguhs up at the schoo l
come down to chase me off and that made me mad. I went to see the w hite 
folks then and they gave me help. That's what I don't understan d. I done the 
worse thing a man could ever do in his family and instead of chas in' me out 
of the county, they gimme more help than they ever give any othe r colored 
man, no matter how good a nigguh he was. Except that my wife an' daughter 
won't speak to me, I'm better off than I ever been before. And ev en if Kate 
won't speak to me she took the new clothes I brought her from up in town 
and now she's gettin' some eyeglasses made what she been need in' for so 
long. But what I don't understand is how I done the worse thing a m an can 
do in his own family and 'stead of things gittin' bad, they got better. The 
nigguhs up at the school don't like me, but the white folks trea ts me fine." 
HE WAS some farmer. As I listened I had been so torn between 
humiliation and fascination that to lessen my sense of shame I had kept my 
attention riveted upon his intense face. That way I did not hav e to look at 
Mr. Norton. But now as the voice ended I sat looking down at Mr. Nort on's 
feet. Out in the yard a woman's hoarse contralto intoned a hymn. C hildren's 
voices were raised in playful chatter. I sat bent over, smelling t he sharp dry 
odor of wood burning in the hot sunlight. I stared at the two pairs of shoes 
before me. Mr. Norton's were white, trimmed with black. They were cu stom 
made and there beside the cheap tan brogues of the farmer they had the 
elegantly slender well-bred appearance of fine gloves. Final ly someone cleared 
his throat and I looked up to see Mr. Norton staring silently into J im 
Trueblood's eyes. I was startled. His face had drained of color. W ith his 
bright eyes burning into Trueblood's black face, he looked ghos tly. Trueblood 
looked at me questioningly.
"Lissen to the younguns," he said in embarrassment. "Playin' ' London 
Bridge's Fallin' Down.' " 
Something was going on which I didn't get. I had to get Mr. Norton
away.
"Are you all right, sir?" I asked.
He looked at me with unseeing eyes. "All right?" he said.
"Yes, sir. I mean that I think it's time for the afternoon sessio n," I 
hurried on.
He stared at me blankly.
I went to him. "Are you sure you're all right, sir?" 
"Maybe it's the heat," Trueblood said. "You got to be born down h ere 
to stand this kind of heat." 
"Perhaps," Mr. Norton said, "it is the heat. We'd better go." 
He stood shakily, still staring intently at Trueblood. Then I s aw him 
removing a red Moroccan-leather wallet from his coat pocket. The
platinum-framed miniature came with it, but he did not look at i t this time.
"Here," he said, extending a banknote. "Please take this and b uy the 
children some toys for me." 
Trueblood's mouth fell agape, his eyes widened and filled wit h 
moisture as he took the bill between trembling fingers. It was a 
hundred-dollar bill.
"I'm ready, young man," Mr. Norton said, his voice a whisper.
I went before him to the car and opened the door. He stumbled a 
bit climbing in and I gave him my arm. His face was still chalk wh ite.
"Drive me away from here," he said in a sudden frenzy. "Away!" 
"Yes, sir." 
I saw Jim Trueblood wave as I threw the car into gear. "You 
bastard," I said under my breath. "You no-good bastard! You get a
hundred-dollar bill!" 
When I had turned the car and started back I saw him still standin g 
in the same place.
Suddenly Mr. Norton touched me on the shoulder. "I must have a 
stimulant, young man. A little whiskey." 
"Yes, sir. Are you all right, sir?" 
"A little faint, but a stimulant . . ." 
His voice trailed off. Something cold formed within my chest. I f
anything happened to him Dr. Bledsoe would blame me. I stepped on the 
gas, wondering where I could get him some whiskey. Not in the tow n, that 
would take too long. There was only one place, the Golden Day.
"I'll have you some in a few minutes, sir," I said.
"As soon as you can," he said.
Chapter 3 
I saw them as we approached the short stretch that lay between the
railroad tracks and the Golden Day. At first I failed to recognize t hem. They 
straggled down the highway in a loose body, blocking the way fro m the white 
line to the frazzled weeds that bordered the sun-heated concrete slab. I 
cursed them silently. They were blocking the road and Mr. Norton wa s 
gasping for breath. Ahead of the radiator's gleaming curve they looked like a 
chain gang on its way to make a road. But a chain gang marches sing le file 
and I saw no guards on horseback. As I drew nearer I recognized the lo ose 
gray shirts and pants worn by the veterans. Damn! They were heading for the 
Golden Day.
"A little stimulant," I heard behind me.
"In a few minutes, sir." 
Up ahead I saw the one who thought he was a drum major strutting 
in front, giving orders as he moved energetically in long, hip-sw inging strides,
a cane held above his head, rising and falling as though in time to music. I 
slowed the car as I saw him turn to face the men, his cane held at c hest 
level as he shortened the pace. The men continued to ignore him, walking 
along in a mass, some talking in groups and others talking and ge sticulating 
to themselves.
Suddenly, the drum major saw the car and shook his cane-baton a t 
me. I blew the horn, seeing the men move over to the side as I nose d the 
car slowly forward. He held his ground, his legs braced, hands on hips, and 
to keep from hitting him I slammed on the brakes.
The drum major rushed past the men toward the car, and I heard 
the cane bang down upon the hood as he rushed toward me.
"Who the hell you think you are, running down the army? Give the 
countersign. Who's in command of this outfit? You trucking bas tards was 
always too big for your britches. Countersign me!" 
"This is General Pershing's car, sir," I said, remembering hearing t hat 
he responded to the name of his wartime Commander-in-Chief. Sud denly the 
wild look changed in his eyes and he stepped back and saluted w ith stiff
precision. Then looking suspiciously into the back seat, he b arked,
"Where's the General?" 
"There," I said, turning and seeing Mr. Norton raising himself, we ak 
and white-faced, from the seat.
"What is it? Why have we stopped?" 
"The sergeant stopped us, sir . . ." 
"Sergeant? What sergeant?" He sat up.
"Is that you, General?" the vet said, saluting. "I didn't know you were 
inspecting the front lines today. I'm very sorry, sir." 
"What . . . ?" Mr. Norton said.
"The General's in a hurry," I said quickly.
"Sure is," the vet said. "He's got a lot to see. Discipline is ba d.
Artillery's shot to hell." Then he called to the men walking up the road, "Get 
the hell out of the General's road. General Pershing's coming thro ugh. Make 
way for General Pershing!" 
He stepped aside and I shot the car across the line to avoid the m en 
and stayed there on the wrong side as I headed for the Golden Day.
"Who was that man?" Mr. Norton gasped from the back seat.
"A former soldier, sir. A vet. They're all vets, a little shellsho cked." 
"But where is the attendant?" 
"I don't see one, sir. They're harmless though." 
"Nevertheless, they should have an attendant." 
I had to get him there and away before they arrived. This was their 
day to visit the girls, and the Golden Day would be pretty rowdy. I wondered 
where the rest of them were. There should have been about fifty. We ll, I 
would rush in and get the whiskey and leave. What was wrong with M r.
Norton anyway, why should he get that upset over Trueblood? I ha d felt 
ashamed and several times I had wanted to laugh, but it had made him sick.
Maybe he needed a doctor. Hell, he didn't ask for any doctor. Dam n that 
bastard Trueblood.
I would run in, get a pint, and run out again, I thought. Then he 
wouldn't see the Golden Day. I seldom went there myself except with some of
the fellows when word got out that a new bunch of girls had arrived f rom 
New Orleans. The school had tried to make the Golden Day respecta ble, but 
the local white folks had a hand in it somehow and they got nowh ere. The 
best the school could do was to make it hot for any student caug ht going 
there.
He lay like a man asleep as I left the car and ran into the Golden 
Day. I wanted to ask him for money but decided to use my own. At t he door 
I paused; the place was already full, jammed with vets in loose gray shirts 
and trousers and women in short, tight-fitting, stiffly starche d gingham 
aprons. The stale beer smell struck like a club through the noise of voices 
and the juke box. Just as I got inside the door a stolid-faced m an gripped 
me by the arm and looked stonily into my eyes.
"It will occur at 5:30," he said, looking straight through me.
"What?" 
"The great all-embracing, absolute Armistice, the end of the wo rld!" 
he said.
Before I could answer, a small plump woman smiled into my face 
and pulled him away.
"It's your turn, Doc," she said. "Don't let it happen till afte r me and 
you done been upstairs. How come I always have to come get you?"
"No, it is true," he said. "They wirelessed me from Paris this 
morning." 
"Then, baby, me an' you better hurry. There's lots of money I got to 
make in here before that thing happens. You hold it back a while, will you?" 
She winked at me as she pulled him through the crowd toward the 
stairs. I elbowed my way nervously toward the bar.
Many of the men had been doctors, lawyers, teachers, Civil Servi ce 
workers; there were several cooks, a preacher, a politician, and an a rtist. One 
very nutty one had been a psychiatrist. Whenever I saw them I fe lt 
uncomfortable. They were supposed to be members of the professio ns toward 
which at various times I vaguely aspired myself, and even thoug h they never 
seemed to see me I could never believe that they were really pati ents.
Sometimes it appeared as though they played some vast and comp licated 
game with me and the rest of the school folk, a game whose goal wa s 
laughter and whose rules and subtleties I could never grasp.
Two men stood directly in front of me, one speaking with intense
earnestness. ". . . and Johnson hit Jeffries at an angle of 45 deg rees from his 
lower left lateral incisor, producing an instantaneous blocki ng of his entire 
thalamic rine, frosting it over like the freezing unit of a refrige rator, thus 
shattering his autonomous nervous system and rocking the big b rick-laying 
creampuff with extreme hyperspasmic muscular tremors which dropp ed him 
dead on the extreme tip of his coccyx, which, in turn, produced a s harp 
traumatic reaction in his sphincter nerve and muscle, and then , my dear 
colleague, they swept him up, sprinkled him with quicklime an d rolled him 
away in a barrow. Naturally, there was no other therapy possible."
"Excuse me," I said, pushing past.
Big Halley was behind the bar, his dark skin showing through his 
sweat-wet shirt.
"Whatcha saying, school-boy?" 
"I want a double whiskey, Halley. Put it in something deep so I can 
get it out of here without spilling it. It's for somebody outsi de." 
His mouth shot out, "Hell, naw!" 
"Why?" I asked, surprised at the anger in his thyroid eyes.
"You still up at the school, ain't you?" 
"Sure." 
"Well, those bastards is trying to close me up agin, that's why . You 
can drink till you blue in the face in here, but I wouldn't sell yo u enough to 
spit through your teeth to take outside." 
"But I've got a sick man out in the car." 
"What car? You never had no car." 
"The white man's car. I'm driving for him." 
"Ain't you in school?" 
"He's from the school." 
"Well, who's sick?" 
"He is." 
"He too good to come in? Tell him we don't Jimcrow nobody." 
"But he's sick." 
"He can die!" 
"He's important, Halley, a trustee. He's rich and sick and if any thing 
happens to him, they'll have me packed and on my way home." 
"Can't help it, school-boy. Bring him inside and he can buy eno ugh 
to swim in. He can drink outta my own private bottle." 
He sliced the white heads off a couple of beers with an ivory pad dle 
and passed them up the bar. I felt sick inside. Mr. Norton wouldn' t want to 
come in here. He was too sick. And besides I didn't want him to se e the 
patients and the girls. Things were getting wilder as I made my w ay out.
Supercargo, the white-uniformed attendant who usually kept th e men quiet 
was nowhere to be seen. I didn't like it, for when he was upstairs they had 
absolutely no inhibitions. I made my way out to the car. What co uld I tell
Mr. Norton? He was lying very still when I opened the door.
"Mr. Norton, sir. They refuse to sell me whiskey to bring out." 
He lay very still.
"Mr. Norton." 
He lay like a figure of chalk. I shook him gently, feeling dread w ithin 
me. He barely breathed. I shook him violently, seeing his head w obble 
grotesquely. His lips parted, bluish, revealing a row of long, sl ender,
amazingly animal-like teeth.
"SIR!" 
In a panic I ran back into the Golden Day, bursting through the 
noise as through an invisible wall.
"Halley! Help me, he's dying!" 
I tried to get through but no one seemed to have heard me. I was 
blocked on both sides. They were jammed together.
"Halley!" 
Two patients turned and looked me in the face, their eyes two in ches 
from my nose.
"What is wrong with this gentleman, Sylvester?" the tall one sa id.
"A man's dying outside!" I said.
"Someone is always dying," the other one said.
"Yes, and it's good to die beneath God's great tent of sky." 
"He's got to have some whiskey!" 
"Oh, that's different," one of them said and they began pushin g a 
path to the bar. "A last bright drink to keep the anguish down. Ste p aside,
please!" 
"School-boy, you back already?" Halley said.
"Give me some whiskey. He's dying!" 
"I done told you, school-boy, you better bring him in here. He ca n 
die, but I still got to pay my bills." 
"Please, they'll put me in jail." 
"You going to college, figure it out," he said.
"You'd better bring the gentleman inside," the one called Syl vester 
said. "Come, let us assist you." 
We fought our way out of the crowd. He was just as I left him.
"Look, Sylvester, it's Thomas Jefferson!" 
"I was just about to say, I've long wanted to discourse with him ." 
I looked at them speechlessly; they were both crazy. Or were they
joking? 
"Give me a hand," I said.
"Gladly." 
I shook him. "Mr. Norton!" 
"We'd better hurry if he's to enjoy his drink," one of them said 
thoughtfully.
We picked him up. He swung between us like a sack of old clothes .
"Hurry!" 
As we carried him toward the Golden Day one of the men stopped 
suddenly and Mr. Norton's head hung down, his white hair draggin g in the 
dust.
"Gentlemen, this man is my grandfather!" 
"But he's white, his name's Norton." 
"I should know my own grandfather! He's Thomas Jefferson and I'm
his grandson -- on the 'field-nigger' side," the tall man said.
"Sylvester, I do believe that you're right. I certainly do," he sa id,
staring at Mr. Norton. "Look at those features. Exactly like yours -- from the 
identical mold. Are you sure he didn't spit you upon the earth, fu lly clothed?" 
"No, no, that was my father," the man said earnestly.
And he began to curse his father violently as we moved for the do or.
Halley was there waiting. Somehow he'd gotten the crowd to quie t down and 
a space was cleared in the center of the room. The men came close t o look 
at Mr. Norton.
"Somebody bring a chair." 
"Yeah, let Mister Eddy sit down." 
"That ain't no Mister Eddy, man, that's John D. Rockefeller,"
someone said.
"Here's a chair for the Messiah." 
"Stand back y'all," Halley ordered. "Give him some room." 
Burnside, who had been a doctor, rushed forward and felt for Mr.
Norton's pulse.
"It's solid! This man has a solid pulse! Instead of beating, i t vibrates.
That's very unusual. Very." 
Someone pulled him away. Halley reappeared with a bottle and a 
glass. "Here, some of y'all tilt his head back." 
And before I could move, a short, pock-marked man appeared and 
took Mr. Norton's head between his hands, tilting it at arm's len gth and then,
pinching the chin gently like a barber about to apply a razor, ga ve a sharp,
swift movement.
"Pow!" 
Mr. Norton's head jerked like a jabbed punching bag. Five pale red
lines bloomed on the white cheek, glowing like fire beneath tra nslucent stone.
I could not believe my eyes. I wanted to run. A woman tittered. I s aw several
men rush for the door.
"Cut it out, you damn fool!" 
"A case of hysteria," the pock-marked man said quietly.
"Git the hell out of the way," Halley said. "Somebody git that
stool-pigeon attendant from upstairs. Git him down here, quick !" 
"A mere mild case of hysteria," the pock-marked man said as they 
pushed him away.
"Hurry with the drink, Halley!" 
"Heah, school-boy, you hold the glass. This here's brandy I bee n 
saving for myself." 
Someone whispered tonelessly into my ear, "You see, I told you t hat 
it would occur at 5:30. Already the Creator has come." It was the stolid-faced 
man.
I saw Halley tilt the bottle and the oily amber of brandy sloshi ng 
into the glass. Then tilting Mr. Norton's head back, I put the gl ass to his lips 
and poured. A fine brown stream ran from the corner of his mouth, down his 
delicate chin. The room was suddenly quiet. I felt a slight mov ement against 
my hand, like a child's breast when it whimpers at the end of a spe ll of
crying. The fine-veined eyelids flickered. He coughed. I saw a slow red flush 
creep, then spurt, up his neck, spreading over his face.
"Hold it under his nose, school-boy. Let 'im smell it." 
I waved the glass beneath Mr. Norton's nose. He opened his pale 
blue eyes. They seemed watery now in the red flush that bathed h is face. He 
tried to sit up, his right hand fluttering to his chin. His eyes wi dened, moved 
quickly from face to face. Then coming to mine, the moist eyes f ocused with 
recognition.
"You were unconscious, sir," I said.
"Where am I, young man?" he asked wearily.
"This is the Golden Day, sir." 
"What?" 
"The Golden Day. It's a kind of sporting-and-gambling house, " I 
added reluctantly.
"Now give him another drinka brandy," Halley said.
I poured a drink and handed it to him. He sniffed it, closed his ey es 
as in puzzlement, then drank; his cheeks filled out like small bellows; he was 
rinsing his mouth.
"Thank you," he said, a little stronger now. "What is this plac e?" 
"The Golden Day," said several patients in unison.
He looked slowly around him, up to the balcony, with its scrolle d 
and carved wood. A large flag hung lank above the floor. He frowne d.
"What was this building used for in the past?" he said.
"It was a church, then a bank, then it was a restaurant and a fancy 
gambling house, and now we got it," Halley explained. "I thin k somebody said 
it used to be a jail-house too." 
"They let us come here once a week to raise a little hell," someon e 
said.
"I couldn't buy a drink to take out, sir, so I had to bring you 
inside," I explained in dread.
He looked about him. I followed his eyes and was amazed to see t he 
varied expressions on the patients' faces as they silently retu rned his gaze.
Some were hostile, some cringing, some horrified; some, who when among 
themselves were most violent, now appeared as submissive as ch ildren. And 
some seemed strangely amused.
"Are all of you patients?" Mr. Norton asked.
"Me, I just runs the joint," Halley said. "These here other fell ows . .
." 
"We're patients sent here as therapy," a short, fat, very 
intelligent-looking man said. "But," he smiled, "they send along an attendant,
a kind of censor, to see that the therapy fails." 
"You're nuts. I'm a dynamo of energy. I come to charge my 
batteries," one of the vets insisted.
"I'm a student of history, sir," another interrupted with dramat ic 
gestures. "The world moves in a circle like a roulette wheel. In th e beginning,
black is on top, in the middle epochs, white holds the odds, bu t soon 
Ethiopia shall stretch forth her noble wings! Then place your m oney on the 
black!" His voice throbbed with emotion. "Until then, the sun holds no heat,
there's ice in the heart of the earth. Two years from now and I'll be o ld 
enough to give my mulatto mother a bath, the half-white bitch !" he added,
beginning to leap up and down in an explosion of glassy-eyed f ury.
Mr. Norton blinked his eyes and straightened up.
"I'm a physician, may I take your pulse?" Burnside said, seizi ng Mr.
Norton's wrist.
"Don't pay him no mind, mister. He ain't been no doctor in ten 
years. They caught him trying to change some blood into money. " 
"I did too!" the man screamed. "I discovered it and John D.
Rockefeller stole the formula from me." 
"Mr. Rockefeller did you say?" Mr. Norton said. "I'm sure you must
be mistaken." 
"WHAT'S GOING ON DOWN THERE?" a voice shouted from the 
balcony. Everyone turned. I saw a huge black giant of a man, dres sed only in 
white shorts, swaying on the stairs. It was Supercargo, the atten dant. I hardly 
recognized him without his hard-starched white uniform. Usuall y he walked 
around threatening the men with a strait jacket which he always c arried over 
his arm, and usually they were quiet and submissive in his presen ce. But now 
they seemed not to recognize him and began shouting curses.
"How you gon keep order in the place if you gon git drunk?" Halley
shouted. "Charlene! Charlene!" 
"Yeah?" a woman's voice, startling in its carrying power, answe red 
sulkily from a room off the balcony.
"I want you to git that stool-pigeoning, joy-killing, nut-c rushing bum 
back in there with you and sober him up. Then git him in his white suit and 
down here to keep order. We got white folks in the house." 
A woman appeared on the balcony, drawing a woolly pink robe about
her. "Now you lissen here, Halley," she drawled, "I'm a woman. If you want 
him dressed, you can do it yourself. I don't put on but one man's c lothes 
and he's in N'Orleans." 
"Never mind all that. Git that stool pigeon sober!" 
"I want order down there," Supercargo boomed, "and if there's whit e 
folks down there, I wan's double order." 
Suddenly there was an angry roar from the men back near the bar 
and I saw them rush the stairs.
"Get him!" 
"Let's give him some order!" 
"Out of my way." 
Five men charged the stairs. I saw the giant bend and clutch the 
posts at the top of the stairs with both hands, bracing himself, his body 
gleaming bare in his white shorts. The little man who had slappe d Mr.
Norton was in front, and, as he sprang up the long flight, I saw the
attendant set himself and kick, catching the little man just as he reached the 
top, hard in the chest, sending him backwards in a curving dive i nto the 
midst of the men behind him. Supercargo got set to swing his leg a gain. It 
was a narrow stair and only one man could get up at a time. As fast a s they 
rushed up, the giant kicked them back. He swung his leg, kickin g them down 
like a fungo-hitter batting out flies. Watching him, I forgot Mr. Norton. The 
Golden Day was in an uproar. Half-dressed women appeared from the ro oms 
off the balcony. Men hooted and yelled as at a football game.
"I WANT ORDER!" the giant shouted as he sent a man flying down 
the flight of stairs.
"THEY THROWING BOTTLES OF LIQUOR!" a woman screamed.
"REAL LIQUOR!" 
"That's a order he don't want," someone said.
A shower of bottles and glasses splashing whiskey crashed aga inst the 
balcony. I saw Supercargo snap suddenly erect and grab his forehea d, his face 
bathed in whiskey, "Eeeee!" he cried, "Eeeee!" Then I saw him w aver, rigid 
from his ankles upward. For a moment the men on the stairs were 
motionless, watching him. Then they sprang forward.
Supercargo grabbed wildly at the balustrade as they snatched his feet 
from beneath him and started down. His head bounced against the steps 
making a sound like a series of gunshots as they ran dragging him b y his 
ankles, like volunteer firemen running with a hose. The crowd su rged forward.
Halley yelled near my ear. I saw the man being dragged toward the c enter of
the room.
"Give the bastard some order!" 
"Here I'm forty-five and he's been acting like he's my old man!"
"So you like to kick, huh?" a tall man said, aiming a shoe at the
attendant's head. The flesh above his right eye jumped out as t hough it had 
been inflated.
Then I heard Mr. Norton beside me shouting, "No, no! Not when 
he's down!" 
"Lissen at the white folks," someone said. "He's the white fo lks'
man!" 
Men were jumping upon Supercargo with both feet now and I felt 
such an excitement that I wanted to join them. Even the girls we re yelling,
"Give it to him good!" "He never pays me!" "Kill him!" 
"Please, y'all, not here! Not in my place!" 
"You can't speak your mind when he's on duty!" 
"Hell, no!" 
Somehow I got pushed away from Mr. Norton and found myself
beside the man called Sylvester.
"Watch this, school-boy," he said. "See there, where his ribs are
bleeding?" I nodded my head. "Now don't move your eyes." 
I watched the spot as though compelled, just beneath the lowe r rib 
and above the hip-bone, as Sylvester measured carefully with h is toe and 
kicked as though he were punting a football. Supercargo let out a groan like 
an injured horse.
"Try it, school-boy, it feels so good. It gives you relief," Sy lvester 
said. "Sometimes I get so afraid of him I feel that he's inside m y head.
There!" he said, giving Supercargo another kick.
As I watched, a man sprang on Supercargo's chest with both feet an d 
he lost consciousness. They began throwing cold beer on him, re viving him,
only to kick him unconscious again. Soon he was drenched in blo od and beer.
"The bastard's out cold." 
"Throw him out." 
"Naw, wait a minute. Give me a hand somebody." 
They threw him upon the bar, stretching him out with his arms 
folded across his chest like a corpse.
"Now, let's have a drink!" 
Halley was slow in getting behind the bar and they cursed him.
"Get back there and serve us, you big sack of fat!" 
"Gimme a rye!" 
"Up here, funk-buster!" 
"Shake them sloppy hips!" 
"Okay, okay, take it easy," Halley said, rushing to pour them d rinks.
"Just put y'all's money where your mouth is." 
With Supercargo lying helpless upon the bar, the men whirled abou t 
like maniacs. The excitement seemed to have tilted some of th e more 
delicately balanced ones too far. Some made hostile speeches at the top of
their voices against the hospital, the state and the universe . The one who 
called himself a composer was banging away the one wild piece he seemed to 
know on the out-of-tune piano, striking the keyboard with fist s and elbows 
and filling in other effects in a bass voice that moaned like a bear in agony.
One of the most educated ones touched my arm. He was a former chem ist 
who was never seen without his shining Phi Beta Kappa key.
"The men have lost control," he said through the uproar. "I think 
you'd better leave." 
"I'm trying to," I said, "as soon as I can get over to Mr. Norton."
Mr. Norton was gone from where I had left him. I rushed here and 
there through the noisy men, calling his name.
When I found him he was under the stairs. Somehow he had been 
pushed there by the scuffling, reeling men and he lay sprawled in the chair 
like an aged doll. In the dim light his features were sharp and whi te and his 
closed eyes well-defined lines in a well-tooled face. I shou ted his name above 
the roar of the men, and got no answer. He was out again. I shook hi m,
gently, then roughly, but still no flicker of his wrinkled lids . Then some of
the milling men pushed me up against him and suddenly a mass of whiteness 
was looming two inches from my eyes; it was only his face but I fe lt a 
shudder of nameless horror. I had never been so close to a white pe rson 
before. In a panic I struggled to get away. With his eyes closed h e seemed 
more threatening than with them open. He was like a formless whit e death,
suddenly appeared before me, a death which had been there all the time and 
which had now revealed itself in the madness of the Golden Day.
"Stop screaming!" a voice commanded, and I felt myself pulled away.
It was the short fat man.
I clamped my mouth shut, aware for the first time that the shrill
sound was coming from my own throat. I saw the man's face relax as h e 
gave me a wry smile.
"That's better," he shouted into my ear. "He's only a man. Remem ber 
that. He's only a man!" 
I wanted to tell him that Mr. Norton was much more than that, that 
he was a rich white man and in my charge; but the very idea that I wa s 
responsible for him was too much for me to put into words.
"Let us take him to the balcony," the man said, pushing me towa rd 
Mr. Norton's feet. I moved automatically, grasping the thin ank les as he 
raised the white man by the armpits and backed from beneath the st airs. Mr.
Norton's head lolled upon his chest as though he were drunk or dea d.
The vet started up the steps still smiling, climbing backwards a step 
at a time. I had begun to worry about him, whether he was drunk lik e the 
rest, when I saw three of the girls who had been leaning over the ba lustrade 
watching the brawl come down to help us carry Mr. Norton up.
"Looks like pops couldn't take it," one of them shouted.
"He's high as a Georgia pine." 
"Yeah, I tell you this stuff Halley got out here is too strong for white 
folks to drink." 
"Not drunk, ill!" the fat man said. "Go find a bed that's not bei ng 
used so he can stretch out awhile." 
"Sho, daddy. Is there any other little favors I can do for you?" 
"That'll be enough," he said.
One of the girls ran up ahead. "Mine's just been changed. Bring hi m 
down here," she said.
In a few minutes Mr. Norton was lying upon a three-quarter bed,
faintly breathing. I watched the fat man bend over him very prof essionally 
and feel for his pulse.
"You a doctor?" a girl asked.
"Not now, I'm a patient. But I have a certain knowledge." 
Another one, I thought, pushing him quickly aside. "He'll be all right.
Let him come to so I can get him out of here." 
"You needn't worry, I'm not like those down there, young fellow ," he 
said. "I really was a doctor. I won't hurt him. He's had a mild shoc k of some 
kind." 
We watched him bend over Mr. Norton again, feeling his pulse,
pulling back his eyelid.
"It's a mild shock," he repeated.
"This here Golden Day is enough to shock anybody," a girl said,
smoothing her apron over the smooth sensuous roll of her stomac h.
Another brushed Mr. Norton's white hair away from his forehead and
stroked it, smiling vacantly. "He's kinda cute," she said. "J ust like a little 
white baby." 
"What kinda ole baby?" the small skinny girl asked.
"That's the kind, an ole baby." 
"You just like white men, Edna. That's all," the skinny one sa id.
Edna shook her head and smiled as though amused at herself. "I s ho 
do. I just love 'em. Now this one, old as he is, he could put his s hoes under 
my bed any night." 
"Shucks, me I'd kill an old man like that." 
"Kill him nothing," Edna said. "Girl, don't you know that all t hese 
rich ole white men got monkey glands and billy goat balls? Thes e ole 
bastards don't never git enough. They want to have the whole wo rld." 
The doctor looked at me and smiled. "See, now you're learning al l
about endocrinology," he said. "I was wrong when I told you that he was 
only a man; it seems now that he's either part goat or part ape. Ma ybe he's 
both." 
"It's the truth," Edna said. "I used to have me one in Chicago -- " 
"Now you ain't never been to no Chicago, gal," the other one 
interrupted.
"How you know I ain't? Two years ago . . . Shucks, you don't know 
nothing. That ole white man right there might have him a coupla j ackass 
balls!" 
The fat man raised up with a quick grin. "As a scientist and a 
physician I'm forced to discount that," he said. "That is one o peration that 
has yet to be performed." Then he managed to get the girls out of th e room.
"If he should come around and hear that conversation," the vet s aid,
"it would be enough to send him off again. Besides, their scie ntific curiosity 
might lead them to investigate whether he really does have a mo nkey gland.
And that, I'm afraid, would be a bit obscene." 
"I've got to get him back to the school," I said.
"All right," he said, "I'll do what I can to help you. Go see if yo u 
can find some ice. And don't worry." 
I went out on the balcony, seeing the tops of their heads. They were 
still milling around, the juke box baying, the piano thumping , and over at the 
end of the room, drenched with beer, Supercargo lay like a spent hors e upon 
the bar.
Starting down, I noticed a large piece of ice glinting in the rema ins 
of an abandoned drink and seized its coldness in my hot hand and hurried 
back to the room.
The vet sat staring at Mr. Norton, who now breathed with a slightly
irregular sound.
"You were quick," the man said, as he stood and reached for the ic e.
"Swift with the speed of anxiety," he added, as if to himself. "Hand me that 
clean towel -- there, from beside the basin." 
I handed him one, seeing him fold the ice inside it and apply it to 
Mr. Norton's face.
"Is he all right?" I said.
"He will be in a few minutes. What happened to him?" 
"I took him for a drive," I said.
"Did you have an accident or something?" 
"No," I said. "He just talked to a farmer and the heat knocked hi m 
out . . . Then we got caught in the mob downstairs." 
"How old is he?" 
"I don't know, but he's one of the trustees . . ." 
"One of the very first, no doubt," he said, dabbing at the blue- veined 
eyes. "A trustee of consciousness." 
"What was that?" I asked.
"Nothing . . . There now, he's coming out of it." 
I had an impulse to run out of the room. I feared what Mr. Norton 
would say to me, the expression that might come into his eyes. A nd yet, I 
was afraid to leave. My eyes could not leave the face with its fl ickering lids.
The head moved from side to side in the pale glow of the light bul b, as 
though denying some insistent voice which I could not hear. Th en the lids 
opened, revealing pale pools of blue vagueness that finally s olidified into 
points that froze upon the vet, who looked down unsmilingly.
Men like us did not look at a man like Mr. Norton in that manner,
and I stepped hurriedly forward.
"He's a real doctor, sir," I said.
"I'll explain," the vet said. "Get a glass of water." 
I hesitated. He looked at me firmly. "Get the water," he said, tu rning 
to help Mr. Norton to sit up.
Outside I asked Edna for a glass of water and she led me down the
hall to a small kitchen, drawing it for me from a green old-fashio ned cooler.
"I got some good liquor, baby, if you want to give him a drink," sh e 
said.
"This will do," I said. My hands trembled so that the water spil led.
When I returned, Mr. Norton was sitting up unaided, carrying on a 
conversation with the vet.
"Here's some water, sir," I said, extending the glass.
He took it. "Thank you," he said.
"Not too much," the vet cautioned.
"Your diagnosis is exactly that of my specialist," Mr. Norton s aid,
"and I went to several fine physicians before one could diagnos e it. How did 
you know?" 
"I too was a specialist," the vet said.
"But how? Only a few men in the whole country possess the 
knowledge --" 
"Then one of them is an inmate of a semi-madhouse," the vet sai d.
"But there's nothing mysterious about it. I escaped for a while -- I went to 
France with the Army Medical Corps and remained there after the Armi stice 
to study and practice." 
"Oh yes, and how long were you in France?" Mr. Norton asked.
"Long enough," he said. "Long enough to forget some fundament als 
which I should never have forgotten." 
"What fundamentals?" Mr. Norton said. "What do you mean?" 
The vet smiled and cocked his head. "Things about life. Such t hings 
as most peasants and folk peoples almost always know through e xperience,
though seldom through conscious thought . . ." 
"Pardon me, sir," I said to Mr. Norton, "but now that you feel bette r,
shouldn't we go?" 
"Not just yet," he said. Then to the doctor, "I'm very intereste d.
What happened to you?" A drop of water caught in one of his eyebro ws 
glittered like a chip of active diamond. I went over and sat on a chair. Damn 
this vet to hell!
"Are you sure you would like to hear?" the vet asked.
"Why, of course." 
"Then perhaps the young fellow should go downstairs and wait . . ." 
The sound of shouting and destruction welled up from below as I 
opened the door.
"No, perhaps you should stay," the fat man said. "Perhaps had I 
overheard some of what I'm about to tell you when I was a student u p there 
on the hill, I wouldn't be the casualty that I am." 
"Sit down, young man," Mr. Norton ordered. "So you were a student 
at the college," he said to the vet.
I sat down again, worrying about Dr. Bledsoe as the fat man told 
Mr. Norton of his attending college, then becoming a physician and going to 
France during the World War.
"Were you a successful physician?" Mr. Norton said.
"Fairly so. I performed a few brain surgeries that won me some 
small attention." 
"Then why did you return?" 
"Nostalgia," the vet said.
"Then what on earth are you doing here in this . . . ?" Mr. Norton 
said, "With your ability . . ." 
"Ulcers," the fat man said.
"That's terribly unfortunate, but why should ulcers stop your ca reer?" 
"Not really, but I learned along with the ulcers that my work could
bring me no dignity," the vet said.
"Now you sound bitter," Mr. Norton said, just as the door flew ope n.
A brown-skinned woman with red hair looked in. "How's white-fo lks 
making out?" she said, staggering inside. "White-folks, bab y, you done come 
to. You want a drink?" 
"Not now, Hester," the vet said. "He's still a little weak." 
"He sho looks it. That's how come he needs a drink. Put some iron 
in his blood." 
"Now, now, Hester." 
"Okay, okay . . . But what y'all doing looking like you at a fune ral? 
Don't you know this is the Golden Day?" she staggered toward me, belching 
elegantly and reeling. "Just look at y'all. Here school-boy lo oks like he's 
scared to death. And white-folks here is acting like y'all two s trange poodles.
Be happy y'all! I'm going down and get Halley to send you up som e drinks." 
She patted Mr. Norton's cheek as she went past and I saw him turn a 
glowing red. "Be happy, white-folks." 
"Ah hah!" the vet laughed, "you're blushing, which means that you're 
better. Don't be embarrassed. Hester is a great humanitarian, a th erapist of
generous nature and great skill, and the possessor of a healing t ouch. Her 
catharsis is absolutely tremendous -- ha, ha!" 
"You do look better, sir," I said, anxious to get out of the place . I 
could understand the vet's words but not what they conveyed, an d Mr.
Norton looked as uncomfortable as I felt. The one thing which I d id know 
was that the vet was acting toward the white man with a freedom wh ich 
could only bring on trouble. I wanted to tell Mr. Norton that the ma n was 
crazy and yet I received a fearful satisfaction from hearing him ta lk as he 
had to a white man. With the girl it was different. A woman usuall y got 
away with things a man never could.
I was wet with anxiety, but the vet talked on, ignoring the 
interruption.
"Rest, rest," he said, fixing Mr. Norton with his eyes. "The cloc ks are 
all set back and the forces of destruction are rampant down below. They 
might suddenly realize that you are what you are, and then your li fe wouldn't 
be worth a piece of bankrupt stock. You would be canceled, perfora ted,
voided, become the recognized magnet attracting loose screws. Then what 
would you do? Such men are beyond money, and with Supercargo down , out 
like a felled ox, they know nothing of value. To some, you are th e great 
white father, to others the lyncher of souls, but for all, you are confusion 
come even into the Golden Day." 
"What are you talking about?" I said, thinking: Lyncher? He was
getting wilder than the men downstairs. I didn't dare look at Mr. Norton,
who made a sound of protest.
The vet frowned. "It is an issue which I can confront only by 
evading it. An utterly stupid proposition, and these hands so l ovingly trained 
to master a scalpel yearn to caress a trigger. I returned to save life and I 
was refused," he said. "Ten men in masks drove me out from the city at 
midnight and beat me with whips for saving a human life. And I w as forced 
to the utmost degradation because I possessed skilled hands a nd the belief
that my knowledge could bring me dignity -- not wealth, only di gnity -- and 
other men health!" 
Then suddenly he fixed me with his eyes. "And now, do you 
understand?" 
"What?" I said.
"What you've heard!" 
"I don't know." 
"Why?" 
I said, "I really think it's time we left." 
"You see," he said turning to Mr. Norton, "he has eyes and ears and 
a good distended African nose, but he fails to understand the si mple facts of
life. Understand. Understand? It's worse than that. He registers with his 
senses but short-circuits his brain. Nothing has meaning. He ta kes it in but 
he doesn't digest it. Already he is -- well, bless my soul! Beho ld! a walking 
zombie! Already he's learned to repress not only his emotions but his 
humanity. He's invisible, a walking personification of the N egative, the most 
perfect achievement of your dreams, sir! The mechanical man!" 
Mr. Norton looked amazed.
"Tell me," the vet said, suddenly calm. "Why have you been 
interested in the school, Mr. Norton?" 
"Out of a sense of my destined role," Mr. Norton said shakily. "I f elt,
and I still feel, that your people are in some important manner t ied to my 
destiny." 
"What do you mean, destiny?" the vet said.
"Why, the success of my work, of course." 
"I see. And would you recognize it if you saw it?" 
"Why, of course I would," Mr. Norton said indignantly. "I've wat ched 
it grow each year I've returned to the campus." 
"Campus? Why the campus?" 
"It is there that my destiny is being made." 
The vet exploded with laughter. "The campus, what a destiny!" He 
stood and walked around the narrow room, laughing. Then he stoppe d as 
suddenly as he had begun.
"You will hardly recognize it, but it is very fitting that you ca me to 
the Golden Day with the young fellow," he said.
"I came out of illness -- or rather, he brought me," Mr. Norton said.
"Of course, but you came, and it was fitting." 
"What do you mean?" Mr. Norton said with irritation.
"A little child shall lead them," the vet said with a smile. "B ut 
seriously, because you both fail to understand what is happeni ng to you. You 
cannot see or hear or smell the truth of what you see -- and you, l ooking for 
destiny! It's classic! And the boy, this automaton, he was ma de of the very 
mud of the region and he sees far less than you. Poor stumblers, n either of
you can see the other. To you he is a mark on the score-card of your 
achievement, a thing and not a man; a child, or even less -- a bl ack 
amorphous thing. And you, for all your power, are not a man to him, but a 
God, a force --" 
Mr. Norton stood abruptly. "Let us go, young man," he said angrily .
"No, listen. He believes in you as he believes in the beat of hi s 
heart. He believes in that great false wisdom taught slaves and pragmatists 
alike, that white is right. I can tell you his destiny. He'll do your bidding,
and for that his blindness is his chief asset. He's your man, f riend. Your man 
and your destiny. Now the two of you descend the stairs into cha os and get 
the hell out of here. I'm sick of both of you pitiful obscenitie s! Get out before 
I do you both the favor of bashing in your heads!" 
I saw his motion toward the big white pitcher on the washstand a nd 
stepped between him and Mr. Norton, guiding Mr. Norton swiftly th rough the 
doorway. Looking back, I saw him leaning against the wall mak ing a sound 
that was a blending of laughter and tears.
"Hurry, the man is as insane as the rest," Mr. Norton said.
"Yes, sir," I said, noticing a new note in his voice.
The balcony was now as noisy as the floor below. The girls and 
drunken vets were stumbling about with drinks in their hands. Ju st as we 
went past an open door Edna saw us and grabbed my arm.
"Where you taking white-folks?" she demanded.
"Back to school," I said, shaking her off.
"You don't want to go up there, white-folks, baby," she said. I tried 
to push past her. "I ain't lying," she said. "I'm the best littl e home-maker in 
the business." 
"Okay, but please let us alone," I pleaded. "You'll get me int o 
trouble." 
We were going down the stairs into the milling men now and she 
started to scream, "Pay me then! If he's too good for me, let him p ay!" 
And before I could stop her she had pushed Mr. Norton, and both of
us were stumbling swiftly down the stairs. I landed against a ma n who 
looked up with the anonymous familiarity of a drunk and shoved m e hard 
away. I saw Mr. Norton spin past as I sank farther into the crowd.
Somewhere I could hear the girl screaming and Halley's voice yel ling, "Hey!
Hey! Hey, now!" Then I was aware of fresh air and saw that I was nea r the 
door and pushed my way free and stood panting and preparing to plu nge 
back for Mr. Norton -- when I heard Halley calling, "Make way y'al l!" and 
saw him piloting Mr. Norton to the door.
"Whew!" he said, releasing the white man and shaking his huge h ead.
"Thanks, Halley --" I said and got no further.
I saw Mr. Norton, his face pale again, his white suit rumpled, top ple 
and fall, his head scraping against the screen of the door.
"Hey!" 
I opened the door and raised him up.
"Goddamit, out agin," Halley said. "How come you bring this wh ite 
man here, school-boy?" 
"Is he dead?" 
"DEAD!" he said, stepping back indignantly. "He caint die!"
"What'll I do, Halley?" 
"Not in my place, he caint die," he said, kneeling.
Mr. Norton looked up. "No one is dead or dying," he said acidly.
"Remove your hands!" 
Halley fell away, surprised. "I sho am glad. You sho you all right ? I 
thought sho you was dead this time." 
"For God's sake, be quiet!" I exploded nervously. "You shoul d be glad 
that he's all right." 
Mr. Norton was visibly angry now, a raw place showing on his 
forehead, and I hurried ahead of him to the car. He climbed in unaid ed, and 
I got under the wheel, smelling the heated odor of mints and ci gar smoke.
He was silent as I drove away.
Chapter 4 
The wheel felt like an alien thing in my hands as I followed the
white line of the highway. Heat rays from the late afternoon sun a rose from 
the gray concrete, shimmering like the weary tones of a distant b ugle blown 
upon still midnight air. In the mirror I could see Mr. Norton staring out 
vacantly upon the empty fields, his mouth stern, his white fore head livid 
where it had scraped the screen. And seeing him I felt the fear bal led coldly 
within me unfold. What would happen now? What would the schoo l officials 
say? In my mind I visualized Dr. Bledsoe's face when he saw Mr. No rton. I 
thought of the glee certain folks at home would feel if I were exp elled.
Tatlock's grinning face danced through my mind. What would the white folks 
think who'd sent me to college? Was Mr. Norton angry at me? In the Golden 
Day he had seemed more curious than anything else -- until the ve t had 
started talking wild. Damn Trueblood. It was his fault. If we ha dn't sat in the 
sun so long Mr. Norton would not have needed whiskey and I wouldn 't have 
gone to the Golden Day. And why would the vets act that way with a white 
man in the house? 
I headed the car through the red-brick campus gateposts with a se nse 
of cold apprehension. Now even the rows of neat dormitories seeme d to 
threaten me, the rolling lawns appearing as hostile as the gray hi ghway with 
its white dividing line. As of its own compulsion, the car slo wed as we passed 
the chapel with its low, sweeping eaves. The sun shone coolly through the 
avenue of trees, dappling the curving drive. Students strolled through the 
shade, down a hill of tender grass toward the brick-red stretch of t ennis 
courts. Far beyond, players in whites showed sharp against the re d of the 
courts surrounded by grass, a gay vista washed by the sun. In the bri ef
interval I heard a cheer arise. My predicament struck me like a sta b. I had a 
sense of losing control of the car and slammed on the brakes in th e middle 
of the road, then apologized and drove on. Here within this quiet greenness I 
possessed the only identity I had ever known, and I was losing it. In this 
brief moment of passage I became aware of the connection betwee n these 
lawns and buildings and my hopes and dreams. I wanted to stop th e car and 
talk with Mr. Norton, to beg his pardon for what he had seen; to ple ad and 
show him tears, unashamed tears like those of a child before his p arent; to 
denounce all we'd seen and heard; to assure him that far from bein g like any 
of the people we had seen, I hated them, that I believed in the p rinciples of
the Founder with all my heart and soul, and that I believed in hi s own 
goodness and kindness in extending the hand of his benevolen ce to helping 
us poor, ignorant people out of the mire and darkness. I would do hi s 
bidding and teach others to rise up as he wished them to, teach th em to be 
thrifty, decent, upright citizens, contributing to the welfare of all, shunning all
but the straight and narrow path that he and the Founder had stretc hed 
before us. If only he were not angry with me! If only he would give me 
another chance!
Tears filled my eyes, and the walks and buildings flowed and fro ze 
for a moment in mist, glittering as in winter when rain froze on th e grass 
and foliage and turned the campus into a world of whiteness, wei ghting and 
bending both trees and bushes with fruit of crystal. Then in the twinkling of
my eyes, it was gone, and the here and now of heat and greenness ret urned.
If only I could make Mr. Norton understand what the school meant t o me.
"Shall I stop at your rooms, sir?" I said. "Or shall I take you to t he 
administration building? Dr. Bledsoe might be worried." 
"To my rooms, then bring Dr. Bledsoe to me," he answered tersely.
"Yes, sir." 
In the mirror I saw him dabbing gingerly at his forehead with a 
crinkled handkerchief. "You'd better send the school physici an to me also," he 
said.
I stopped the car in front of a small building with white pillars like 
those of an old plantation manor house, got out and opened the door.
"Mr. Norton, please, sir . . . I'm sorry . . . I --" 
He looked at me sternly, his eyes narrowed, saying nothing.
"I didn't know . . . please . . ." 
"Send Dr. Bledsoe to me," he said, turning away and swinging up t he 
graveled path to the building.
I got back into the car and drove slowly to the administration 
building. A girl waved gaily as I passed, a bunch of violets in h er hand. Two 
teachers in dark suits talked decorously beside a broken fountai n.
The building was quiet. Going upstairs I visualized Dr. Bledso e, with 
his broad globular face that seemed to take its form from the fat p ressing 
from the inside, which, as air pressing against the membrane of a balloon,
gave it shape and buoyancy. "Old Bucket-head," some of the fe llows called 
him. I never had. He had been kind to me from the first, perhaps bec ause of
the letters which the school superintendent had sent to him whe n I arrived.
But more than that, he was the example of everything I hoped to b e:
Influential with wealthy men all over the country; consulte d in matters 
concerning the race; a leader of his people; the possessor of no t one, but two 
Cadillacs, a good salary and a soft, good-looking and creamy- complexioned 
wife. What was more, while black and bald and everything white folks poked 
fun at, he had achieved power and authority; had, while black a nd 
wrinkle-headed, made himself of more importance in the world tha n most 
Southern white men. They could laugh at him but they couldn't i gnore him.
"He's been looking all over for you," the girl at the desk said.
When I walked in he looked up from the telephone and said, "Neve r 
mind, he's here now," and hung up. "Where's Mr. Norton?" he demand ed 
excitedly. "Is he all right?" 
"Yes, sir. I left him at his rooms and came to drive you down. He 
wishes to see you." 
"Is anything wrong?" he said, getting up hurriedly and coming aro und 
the desk. I hesitated.
"Well, is there!" 
The panicky beating of my heart seemed to blur my vision.
"Not now, sir." 
"Now? What do you mean?" 
"Well, sir, he had some kind of fainting spell." 
"Aw, my God! I knew something was wrong. Why didn't you get in 
touch with me?" He grabbed his black homburg, starting for the do or. "Come 
on!" 
I followed him, trying to explain. "He's all over it now, sir, a nd we 
were too far away for me to phone . . ." 
"Why did you take him so far?" he said, moving with great bustlin g 
energy.
"But I drove him where he wanted to go, sir." 
"Where was that?" 
"Back of the slave-quarter section," I said with dread.
"The quarters! Boy, are you a fool? Didn't you know better than to
take a trustee out there?" 
"He asked me to, sir." 
We were going down the walk now, through the spring air, and he 
stopped to look at me with exasperation, as though I'd suddenl y told him 
black was white.
"Damn what he wants," he said, climbing in the front seat besid e me.
"Haven't you the sense God gave a dog? We take these white folk s where we 
want them to go, we show them what we want them to see. Don't you know 
that? I thought you had some sense." 
Reaching Rabb Hall, I stopped the car, weak with bewilderment.
"Don't sit there," he said. "Come with me!" 
Just inside the building I got another shock. As we approached a 
mirror Dr. Bledsoe stopped and composed his angry face like a scu lptor,
making it a bland mask, leaving only the sparkle of his eyes to b etray the 
emotion that I had seen only a moment before. He looked steadil y at himself
for a moment; then we moved quietly down the silent hall and up the stairs.
A co-ed sat at a graceful table stacked with magazines. Before a great 
window stood a large aquarium containing colored stones and a sm all replica 
of a feudal castle surrounded by goldfish that seemed to remain m otionless 
despite the fluttering of their lacy fins, a momentary motion ful suspension of
time.
"Is Mr. Norton in his room?" he said to the girl.
"Yessir, Dr. Bledsoe, sir," she said. "He said to tell you to come in 
when you got here." 
Pausing at the door I heard him clear his throat, then rap softly 
upon the panel with his fist.
"Mr. Norton?" he said, his lips already a smile. And at the answer I 
followed him inside.
It was a large light room. Mr. Norton sat in a huge wing chair with 
his jacket off. A change of clothing lay on the cool bedspread. Above a 
spacious fireplace an oil portrait of the Founder looked down at me remotely,
benign, sad, and in that hot instant, profoundly disillusion ed. Then a veil
seemed to fall.
"I've been worried about you, sir," Dr. Bledsoe said. "We expecte d 
you at the afternoon session . . ." 
Now it's beginning, I thought. Now -- 
And suddenly he rushed forward. "Mr. Norton, your head!" he cried,
a strange grandmotherly concern in his voice. "What happened, si r?" 
"It's nothing." Mr. Norton's face was immobile. "A mere scratch. " 
Dr. Bledsoe whirled around, his face outraged. "Get the doctor ov er 
here," he said. "Why didn't you tell me that Mr. Norton had been in jured?" 
"I've already taken care of that, sir," I said softly, seeing him whirl
back.
"Mr. Norton, Mister Norton! I'm so sorry," he crooned. "I thought I
had sent you a boy who was careful, a sensible young man! Why we' ve never 
had an accident before. Never, not in seventy-five years. I assu re you, sir,
that he shall be disciplined, severely disciplined!" 
"But there was no automobile accident," Mr. Norton said kindly, "nor 
was the boy responsible. You may send him away, we won't need hi m now." 
My eyes suddenly filled. I felt a wave of gratitude at his words.
"Don't be kind, sir," Dr. Bledsoe said. "You can't be soft with t hese 
people. We mustn't pamper them. An accident to a guest of this college while 
he is in the charge of a student is without question the student 's fault. That's 
one of our strictest rules!" Then to me: "Return to your dormitory and 
remain there until further notice!" 
"But it was out of my control, sir," I said, "just as Mr. Norton said .
. ." 
"I'll explain, young man," Mr. Norton said with a half-smile.
"Everything will be explained." 
"Thank you, sir," I said, seeing Dr. Bledsoe looking at me with n o 
change of expression.
"On second thought," he said, "I want you to be in chapel this 
evening, understand me, sir?" 
"Yes, sir." 
I opened the door with a cold hand, bumping into the girl who had
been at the table when we went inside.
"I'm sorry," she said. "Looks like you have old Bucket-head ki nd of
mad." 
I said nothing as she walked beside me expectantly. A red sun ca st 
its light upon the campus as I started for my dormitory.
"Will you take a message to my boy friend for me?" she said.
"Who is he?" I said, trying hard to conceal my tension and fear.
"Jack Maston," she said.
"Okay, he's in the room next to mine." 
"That's swell," she said with a big smile. "The dean put me on d uty 
so I missed him this afternoon. Just tell him that I said the gras s is green . .
." 
"What?" 
"The grass is green. It's our secret code, he'll understand." 
"The grass is green," I said.
"That's it. Thank you, lover," she said.
I felt like cursing as I watched her hurrying back into the build ing,
hearing her flat-heeled shoes crunching the graveled walk. Here she was 
playing with some silly secret code at the very minute my fate f or the resf of
my life was being decided. The grass was green and they'd meet an d she'd be 
sent home pregnant, but even so, in less disgrace than I . . . If on ly I knew 
what they were saying about me . . . Suddenly I had an idea and ran a fter 
her, into the building and up the stairs.
In the hall, fine dust played in a shaft of sunlight, stirred by h er 
hurried passing. But she had disappeared. I had thought to ask he r to listen 
at the door and tell me what was said. I gave it up; if she were dis covered,
I'd have that on my conscience too. Besides, I was ashamed for anyone to 
know of my predicament, it was too stupid to be believed. Down t he long 
length of the wide hall I heard someone unseen skipping down th e stairs 
singing. A girl's sweet, hopeful voice. I left quietly and hurri ed to my dorm.
I lay in my room with my eyes closed, trying to think. The tensio n 
gripped my insides. Then I heard someone coming up the hall and s tiffened.
Had they sent for me already? Nearby a door opened and closed, l eaving me 
as tense as ever. To whom could I turn for help? I could think of no one.
No one to whom I could even explain what had happened at the Gol den Day.
Everything was upset inside me. And Dr. Bledsoe's attitude to ward Mr.
Norton was the most confusing of all. I dared not repeat what he'd said, for 
fear that it would lessen my chances of remaining in school. It just wasn't 
true, I had misunderstood. He couldn't have said what I thought he had said.
Hadn't I seen him approach white visitors too often with his hat in hand,
bowing humbly and respectfully? Hadn't he refused to eat in the dining hall
with white guests of the school, entering only after they had f inished and 
then refusing to sit down, but remaining standing, his hat in hi s hand, while 
he addressed them eloquently, then leaving with a humble bow? Hadn't he,
hadn't he? I had seen him too often as I peeped through the door b etween 
the dining room and the kitchen, I myself. And wasn't his favori te spiritual
"Live-a-Humble"? And in the chapel on Sunday evenings upon t he platform,
hadn't he always taught us to live content in our place in a tho usand 
unambiguous words? He had and I had believed him. I had believe d without 
question his illustrations of the good which came of followin g the Founder's 
path. It was my affirmation of life and they couldn't send me aw ay for 
something I didn't do. They simply couldn't. But that vet! He was so crazy 
that he corrupted sane men. He had tried to turn the world inside out ,
goddamn him! He had made Mr. Norton angry. He had no right to talk t o a 
white man as he had, not with me to take the punishment . . .
Someone shook me and I recoiled, my legs moist and trembling. It
was my roommate.
"What the hell, roomy," he said. "Let's go to chow." 
I looked at his confident mug; he was going to be a farmer.
"I don't have an appetite," I said with a sigh.
"Okay now," he said, "you can try to kid me but don't say I didn' t 
wake you." 
"No," I said.
"Who're you expecting, a broad-butt gal with ballbearing hips? " 
"No," I said.
"You'd better stop that, roomy," he grinned. "It'll ruin your he alth,
make you a moron. You ought to take you a gal and show her how the 
moon rises over all that green grass on the Founder's grave, man . . . " 
"Go to hell," I said.
He left laughing, opening the door to the sound of many footst eps 
from the hall: supper time. The sound of departing voices. Some thing of my 
life seemed to retreat with them into a gray distance, moiling. T hen a knock 
sounded at the door and I sprang up, my heart tense.
A small student wearing a freshman's cap stuck his head in the do or,
shouting, "Dr. Bledsoe said he wants to see you down at Rabb Hal l." And 
then he was gone before I could question him, his footsteps thu ndering down 
the hall as he raced to dinner before the last bell sounded.
AT MR. NORTON'S door I stopped with my hand on the knob,
mumbling a prayer.
"Come in, young man," he said to my knock. He was dressed in 
fresh linen, the light falling upon his white hair as upon silk floss. A small
piece of gauze was plastered to his forehead. He was alone.
"I'm sorry, sir," I apologized, "but I was told that Dr. Bledsoe w anted 
to see me here . . ." 
"That's correct," he said, "but Dr. Bledsoe had to leave. You'll find 
him in his office after chapel." 
"Thank you, sir," I said and turned to go. He cleared his throat 
behind me. "Young man . . ." 
I turned hopefully.
"Young man, I have explained to Dr. Bledsoe that you were not at 
fault. I believe he understands." 
I was so relieved that at first I could only look at him, a small
silken-haired, white-suited St. Nicholas, seen through mist y eyes.
"I certainly do thank you, sir," I managed finally.
He studied me silently, his eyes slightly narrowed.
"Will you need me this evening, sir?" I asked.
"No, I won't be needing the machine. Business is taking me awa y 
sooner than I expected. I leave late tonight." 
"I could drive you to the station, sir," I said hopefully.
"Thank you, but Dr. Bledsoe has already arranged it." 
"Oh," I said with disappointment. I had hoped that by serving him 
the rest of the week I could win back his esteem. Now I would not h ave the 
opportunity.
"Well, I hope you have a pleasant trip, sir," I said.
"Thank you," he said, suddenly smiling.
"And maybe next time you come I'll be able to answer some of the
questions you asked me this afternoon." 
"Questions?" His eyes narrowed.
"Yes, sir, about . . . about your fate," I said.
"Ah, yes, yes," he said.
"And I intend to read Emerson, too . . ." 
"Very good. Self-reliance is a most worthy virtue. I shall look f orward 
with the greatest of interest to learning your contribution to my fate." He 
motioned me toward the door. "And don't forget to see Dr. Bledsoe. " 
I left somewhat reassured, but not completely. I still had to fa ce Dr.
Bledsoe. And I had to attend chapel.
Chapter 5 
At the sound of vespers I moved across the campus with groups of
students, walking slowly, their voices soft in the mellow du sk. I remember the 
yellowed globes of frosted glass making lacy silhouettes on t he gravel and the 
walk of the leaves and branches above us as we moved slow through the 
dusk so restless with scents of lilac, honeysuckle and verben a, and the feel of
spring greenness; and I recall the sudden arpeggios of laughter l ilting across 
the tender, springtime grass -- gay-welling, far-floating, flu ent, spontaneous, a 
bell-like feminine fluting, then suppressed; as though snuf fed swiftly and 
irrevocably beneath the quiet solemnity of the vespered air now vibrant with 
somber chapel bells. Dong! Dong! Dong! Above the decorous wal king around 
me, sounds of footsteps leaving the verandas of far-flung buil dings and 
moving toward the walks and over the walks to the asphalt drives lined with 
whitewashed stones, those cryptic messages for men and wome n, boys and 
girls heading quietly toward where the visitors waited, and we mo ving not in 
the mood of worship but of judgment; as though even here in the fi ltering 
dusk, here beneath the deep indigo sky, here, alive with loopin g swifts and 
darting moths, here in the hereness of the night not yet lighted b y the moon 
that looms blood-red behind the chapel like a fallen sun, its ra diance 
shedding not upon the here-dusk of twittering bats, nor on the t here-night of
cricket and whippoorwill, but focused short-rayed upon our pla ce of
convergence; and we drifting forward with rigid motions, limbs s tiff and 
voices now silent, as though on exhibit even in the dark, and th e moon a 
white man's bloodshot eye.
And I move more rigid than all the others with a sense of judgment;
the vibrations of the chapel bells stirring the depths of my turmo il, moving 
toward its nexus with a sense of doom. And I remember the chapel w ith its 
sweeping eaves, long and low as though risen bloody from the eart h like the 
rising moon; vine-covered and earth-colored as though more earth- sprung 
than man-sprung. And my mind rushing for relief away from the sprin g dusk 
and flower scents, away from the time-scene of the crucifixion to the 
time-mood of the birth; from spring-dusk and vespers to the high, clear, lucid 
moon of winter and snow glinting upon the dwarfed pines where in stead of
the bells, the organ and the trombone choir speak carols to the di stances 
drifted with snow, making of the night air a sea of crystal wate r lapping the 
slumbering land to the farthest reaches of sound, for endless mi les, bringing 
the new dispensation even to the Golden Day, even unto the hou se of
madness. But in the hereness of dusk I am moving toward the dooml ike bells 
through the flowered air, beneath the rising moon.
Into the doors and into the soft lights I go, silently, past the rows of
puritanical benches straight and torturous, finding that to whi ch I am 
assigned and bending my body to its agony. There at the head of t he 
platform with its pulpit and rail of polished brass are the banked and 
pyramided heads of the student choir, faces composed and stoli d above 
uniforms of black and white; and above them, stretching to the c eiling, the 
organ pipes looming, a gothic hierarchy of dull gilded gold.
Around me the students move with faces frozen in solemn masks,
and I seem to hear already the voices mechanically raised in the songs the 
visitors loved. (Loved? Demanded. Sung? An ultimatum accept ed and 
ritualized, an allegiance recited for the peace it imparted, an d for that 
perhaps loved. Loved as the defeated come to love the symbols o f their 
conquerors. A gesture of acceptance, of terms laid down and reluct antly 
approved.) And here, sitting rigid, I remember the evenings spen t before the 
sweeping platform in awe and in pleasure, and in the pleasure of a we;
remember the short formal sermons intoned from the pulpit there, ren dered 
in smooth articulate tones, with calm assurance purged of that w ild emotion 
of the crude preachers most of us knew in our home towns and of whom we 
were deeply ashamed, these logical appeals which reached us mo re like the 
thrust of a firm and formal design requiring nothing more than the lu cidity 
of uncluttered periods, the lulling movement of multisyllabi c words to thrill
and console us. And I remember, too, the talks of visiting speak ers, all eager 
to inform us of how fortunate we were to be a part of the "vast" and fo rmal
ritual. How fortunate to belong to this family sheltered from tho se lost in 
ignorance and darkness.
Here upon this stage the black rite of Horatio Alger was performed 
to God's own acting script, with millionaires come down to portra y 
themselves; not merely acting out the myth of their goodness, and wealth and 
success and power and benevolence and authority in cardboard ma sks, but 
themselves, these virtues concretely! Not the wafer and the wi ne, but the flesh 
and the blood, vibrant and alive, and vibrant even when stooped , ancient and 
withered. (And who, in face of this, would not believe? Could e ven doubt?) 
And I remember too, how we confronted those others, those who had
set me here in this Eden, whom we knew though we didn't know, who were 
unfamiliar in their familiarity, who trailed their words to us t hrough blood 
and violence and ridicule and condescension with drawling smi les, and who 
exhorted and threatened, intimidated with innocent words as th ey described to 
us the limitations of our lives and the vast boldness of our as pirations, the 
staggering folly of our impatience to rise even higher; who, as t hey talked,
aroused furtive visions within me of blood-froth sparkling thei r chins like 
their familiar tobacco juice, and upon their lips the curdled milk of a million 
black slave mammies' withered dugs, a treacherous and fluid kno wledge of
our being, imbibed at our source and now regurgitated foul upon u s. This 
was our world, they said as they described it to us, this our horiz on and its 
earth, its seasons and its climate, its spring and its summer, an d its fall and 
harvest some unknown millennium ahead; and these its floods and cyclones 
and they themselves our thunder and lightning; and this we mu st accept and 
love and accept even if we did not love. We must accept -- even w hen those 
were absent, and the men who made the railroads and ships and towe rs of
stone, were before our eyes, in the flesh, their voices differen t, unweighted 
with recognizable danger and their delight in our songs more si ncere seeming,
their regard for our welfare marked by an almost benign and imperso nal
indifference. But the words of the others were stronger than the st rength of
philanthropic dollars, deeper than shafts sunk in the earth for oil and gold,
more awe-inspiring than the miracles fabricated in scientific l aboratories. For 
their most innocent words were acts of violence to which we of th e campus 
were hypersensitive though we endured them not.
And there on the platform I too had stridden and debated, a studen t 
leader directing my voice at the highest beams and farthest raft ers, ringing 
them, the accents staccato upon the ridgepole and echoing bac k with a 
tinkling, like words hurled to the trees of a wilderness, or into a well of
slate-gray water; more sound than sense, a play upon the resonanc es of
buildings, an assault upon the temples of the ear:
Ha! to the gray-haired matron in the final row. Ha! Miss Susie, Mis s 
Susie Gresham, back there looking at that co-ed smiling at that he-ed -- 
listen to me, the bungling bugler of words, imitating the trump et and the 
trombone's timbre, playing thematic variations like a baritone horn. Hey! old 
connoisseur of voice sounds, of voices without messages, of newsless winds,
listen to the vowel sounds and the crackling dentals, to the lo w harsh 
gutturals of empty anguish, now riding the curve of a preacher's rh ythm I 
heard long ago in a Baptist church, stripped now of its imagery: N o suns 
having hemorrhages, no moons weeping tears, no earthworms refusin g the 
sacred flesh and dancing in the earth on Easter morn. Ha! singing
achievement, Ha! booming success, intoning, Ha! acceptanc e, Ha! a river of
word-sounds filled with drowned passions, floating, Ha! with wrecks of
unachievable ambitions and stillborn revolts, sweeping thei r ears, Ha! ranged 
stiff before me, necks stretched forward with listening ears, Ha ! a-spraying the 
ceiling and a-drumming the dark-stained after rafter, that seas oned crossarm 
of torturous timber mellowed in the kiln of a thousand voices; p laying Ha! as 
upon a xylophone; words marching like the student band, up the c ampus and 
down again, blaring triumphant sounds empty of triumphs. Hey, M iss Susie!
the sound of words that were no words, counterfeit notes singing 
achievements yet unachieved, riding upon the wings of my voic e out to you,
old matron, who knew the voice sounds of the Founder and knew th e accents 
and echo of his promise; your gray old head cocked with the young around 
you, your eyes closed, face ecstatic, as I toss the word sounds in my breath,
my bellows, my fountain, like bright-colored balls in a water s pout -- hear 
me, old matron, justify now this sound with your dear old nod of affirmation,
your closed-eye smile and bow of recognition, who'll never be fooled with the 
mere content of words, not my words, not these pinfeathered fligh ters that 
stroke your lids till they flutter with ecstasy with but the me re echoed noise 
of the promise. And after the singing and outward marching, you s eize my 
hand and sing out quavering, "Boy, some day you'll make the Fou nder 
proud." Ha! Susie Gresham, Mother Gresham, guardian of the hot yo ung 
women on the puritan benches who couldn't see your Jordan's wat er for their 
private steam; you, relic of slavery whom the campus loved but d id not 
understand, aged, of slavery, yet bearer of something warm and v ital and 
all-enduring, of which in that island of shame we were not asham ed -- it was 
to you on the final row I directed my rush of sound, and it was you of
whom I thought with shame and regret as I waited for the ceremony t o 
begin.
The honored guests moved silently upon the platform, herded tow ard 
their high, carved chairs by Dr. Bledsoe with the decorum of a port ly head 
waiter. Like some of the guests, he wore striped trousers and a swal low-tail
coat with black-braided lapels topped by a rich ascot tie. It wa s his regular 
dress for such occasions, yet for all its elegance, he managed to make himself
look humble. Somehow, his trousers inevitably bagged at the kn ees and the 
coat slouched in the shoulders. I watched him smiling at first o ne and then 
another of the guests, of whom all but one were white; and as I sa w him 
placing his hand upon their arms, touching their backs, whisp ering to a tall
angular-faced trustee who in turn touched his arm familiarly, I fe lt a shudder.
I too had touched a white man today and I felt that it had been di sastrous,
and I realized then that he was the only one of us whom I knew -- ex cept 
perhaps a barber or a nursemaid -- who could touch a white man wit h 
impunity. And I remembered too that whenever white guests came upon the 
platform he placed his hand upon them as though exercising a pow erful
magic. I watched his teeth flash as he took a white hand; then, with all
seated, he went to his place at the end of the row of chairs.
Several terraces of students' faces above them, the organist, hi s eyes 
glinting at the console, was waiting with his head turned over his shoulder,
and I saw Dr. Bledsoe, his eyes roaming over the audience, sudde nly nod 
without turning his head. It was as though he had given a downbe at with an 
invisible baton. The organist turned and hunched his shoulders . A high 
cascade of sound bubbled from the organ, spreading, thick and cl inging, over 
the chapel, slowly surging. The organist twisted and turned on h is bench,
with his feet flying beneath him as though dancing to rhythms t otally 
unrelated to the decorous thunder of his organ.
And Dr. Bledsoe sat with a benign smile of inward concentration. Yet 
his eyes were darting swiftly, first over the rows of students, th en over the 
section reserved for teachers, his swift glance carrying a threa t for all. For he 
demanded that everyone attend these sessions. It was here tha t policy was 
announced in broadest rhetoric. I seemed to feel his eyes resting upon my 
face as he swept the section in which I sat. I looked at the gues ts on the 
platform; they sat with that alert relaxation with which they al ways met our 
upturned eyes. I wondered to which of them I might go to intercede for me 
with Dr. Bledsoe, but within myself I knew that there was no one.
In spite of the array of important men beside him, and despite the
posture of humility and meekness which made him seem smaller t han the 
others (although he was physically larger), Dr. Bledsoe made his presence felt 
by us with a far greater impact. I remembered the legend of how he h ad 
come to the college, a barefoot boy who in his fervor for educat ion had 
trudged with his bundle of ragged clothing across two states. An d how he was 
given a job feeding slop to the hogs but had made himself the be st slop 
dispenser in the history of the school; and how the Founder ha d been 
impressed and made him his office boy. Each of us knew of his rise over 
years of hard work to the presidency, and each of us at some time wis hed 
that he had walked to the school or pushed a wheelbarrow or perform ed 
some other act of determination and sacrifice to attest his eag erness for 
knowledge. I remembered the admiration and fear he inspired in ev eryone on 
the campus; the pictures in the Negro press captioned "EDUCATOR ," in type 
that exploded like a rifle shot, his face looking out at you wit h utmost 
confidence. To us he was more than just a president of a college. He was a 
leader, a "statesman" who carried our problems to those above us, even unto 
the White House; and in days past he had conducted the Presiden t himself
about the campus. He was our leader and our magic, who kept the
endowment high, the funds for scholarships plentiful and pub licity moving 
through the channels of the press. He was our coal-black daddy o f whom we 
were afraid.
As the organ voices died, I saw a thin brown girl arise noiselessly
with the rigid control of a modern dancer, high in the upper rows of t he 
choir, and begin to sing a cappella. She began softly, as thoug h singing to 
herself of emotions of utmost privacy, a sound not addressed to t he gathering,
but which they overheard almost against her will. Gradually she increased its 
volume, until at times the voice seemed to become a disembodi ed force that 
sought to enter her, to violate her, shaking her, rocking her rhyth mically, as 
though it had become the source of her being, rather than the flu id web of
her own creation.
I saw the guests on the platform turn to look behind them, to see 
the thin brown girl in white choir robe standing high against the organ pipes,
herself become before our eyes a pipe of contained, controlled a nd sublimated 
anguish, a thin plain face transformed by music. I could not und erstand the 
words, but only the mood, sorrowful, vague and ethereal, of the si nging. It 
throbbed with nostalgia, regret and repentance, and I sat with a l ump in my 
throat as she sank slowly down; not a sitting but a controlled co llapsing, as 
though she were balancing, sustaining the simmering bubble of her final tone 
by some delicate rhythm of her heart's blood, or by some mystic 
concentration of her being, focused upon the sound through the contained 
liquid of her large uplifted eyes.
There was no applause, only the appreciation of a profound silen ce.
The white guests exchanged smiles of approval. I sat thinking of the dread 
possibility of having to leave all this, of being expelled; i magining the return 
home and the rebukes of my parents. I looked out at the scene now f rom far 
back in my despair, seeing the platform and its actors as through a reversed 
telescope; small doll-like figures moving through some meani ngless ritual.
Someone up there, above the alternating moss-dry and grease-sl ick heads of
the students rowed before me, was making announcements from a le ctern on 
which a dim light shone. Another figure rose and led a prayer. Some one 
spoke. Then around me everyone was singing Lead me, lead me to a rock 
that is higher than I. And as though the sound contained some f orce more 
imperious than the image of the scene of which it was the living connective 
tissue, I was pulled back to its immediacy.
One of the guests had risen to speak. A man of striking ugliness; fat,
with a bullet-head set on a short neck, with a nose much too wide for its 
face, upon which he wore black-lensed glasses. He had been sea ted next to 
Dr. Bledsoe, but so concerned had I been with the president that I hadn't 
really seen him. My eyes had focused only upon the white men and Dr.
Bledsoe. So that now as he arose and crossed slowly to the center of the 
platform, I had the notion that part of Dr. Bledsoe had arisen and m oved 
forward, leaving his other part smiling in the chair.
He stood before us relaxed, his white collar gleaming like a ban d 
between his black face and his dark garments, dividing his head from his 
body; his short arms crossed before his barrel, like a black little B uddha's.
For a moment he stood with his large head lifted, as though thin king; then 
he began speaking, his voice round and vibrant as he told of his p leasure in 
being allowed to visit the school once more after many years. Ha ving been 
preaching in a northern city, he had seen it last in the final days of the 
Founder, when Dr. Bledsoe was the "second in command." "Those w ere 
wonderful days," he droned. "Significant days. Days filled wi th great portent." 
As he talked he made a cage of his hands by touching his fingerti ps,
then with his small feet pressing together, he began a slow, rhyt hmic rocking;
tilting forward on his toes until it seemed he would fall, then back on his 
heels, the lights catching his black-lensed glasses until i t seemed that his head 
floated free of his body and was held close to it only by the whit e band of
his collar. And as he tilted he talked until a rhythm was establi shed.
Then he was renewing the dream in our hearts:
". . . this barren land after Emancipation," he intoned, "this l and of
darkness and sorrow, of ignorance and degradation, where the hand o f
brother had been turned against brother, father against son, and son against 
father; where master had turned against slave and slave against master; where 
all was strife and darkness, an aching land. And into this land c ame a 
humble prophet, lowly like the humble carpenter of Nazareth, a s lave and a 
son of slaves, knowing only his mother. A slave born, but marked f rom the 
beginning by a high intelligence and princely personality; bo rn in the lowest 
part of this barren, war-scarred land, yet somehow shedding light u pon it 
where'er he passed through. I'm sure you have heard of his precariou s 
infancy, his precious life almost destroyed by an insane cousi n who splashed 
the babe with lye and shriveled his seed and how, a mere babe, he l ay nine 
days in a deathlike coma and then suddenly and miraculously rec overed. You 
might say that it was as though he had risen from the dead or been re born.
"Oh, my young friends," he cried, beaming, "my young friends, it is 
indeed a beautiful story. I'm sure you've heard it many times: R ecall how he 
came upon his initial learning through shrewd questioning of hi s little 
masters, the elder masters never suspecting; and how he learned his alphabet 
and taught himself to read and solve the secret of words, going in stinctively 
to the Holy Bible with its great wisdom for his first knowledge. And you 
know how he escaped and made his way across mountain and valley to that 
place of learning and how he persisted and worked noontimes, nig hts and 
mornings for the privilege of studying, or, as the old folk would say, of
'rubbing his head against the college wall.' You know of his bri lliant career,
how already he was a moving orator; then his penniless graduation and his 
return after years to this country.
"And then his great struggle beginning. Picture it, my young frie nds:
The clouds of darkness all over the land, black folk and white f olk full of
fear and hate, wanting to go forward, but each fearful of the oth er. A whole 
region is caught in a terrible tension. Everyone is perplexed wit h the question 
of what must be done to dissolve this fear and hatred that crouch ed over the 
land like a demon waiting to spring, and you know how he came and showed 
them the way. Oh, yes, my friends. I'm sure you've heard it time an d time 
again; of this godly man's labors, his great humility and his un dimming 
vision, the fruits of which you enjoy today; concrete, made fle sh; his dream,
conceived in the starkness and darkness of slavery, fulfilled now even in the 
air you breathe, in the sweet harmonies of your blended voices, in the 
knowledge which each of you -- daughters and granddaughters, so ns and 
grandsons, of slaves -- all of you partaking of it in bright and we ll-equipped 
classrooms. You must see this slave, this black Aristotle, mov ing slowly, with 
sweet patience, with a patience not of mere man, but of God-ins pired faith -- 
see him moving slowly as he surmounts each and every oppositio n. Rendering 
unto Caesar that which was Caesar's, yes; but steadfastly see king for you that 
bright horizon which you now enjoy . . .
"All this," he said, spreading his fingers palm down before him, "has 
been told and retold throughout the land, inspiring a humble but fast-rising 
people. You have heard it, and it -- this true story of rich implic ation, this 
living parable of proven glory and humble nobility -- and it, as I say, has 
made you free. Even you who have come to this shrine only this sem ester 
know it. You have heard his name from your parents, for it was he wh o led 
them to the path, guiding them like a great captain; like that g reat pilot of
ancient times who led his people safe and unharmed across the bo ttom of the 
blood-red sea. And your parents followed this remarkable man acro ss the 
black sea of prejudice, safely out of the land of ignorance, thro ugh the storms 
of fear and anger, shouting, LET MY PEOPLE GO! when it was neces sary,
whispering it during those times when whispering was wisest. An d he was 
heard." 
I listened, my back pressing against the hard bench, with a 
numbness, my emotions woven into his words as upon a loom.
"And remember how," he said, "when he entered a certain state at 
cotton-picking time, his enemies had plotted to take his lif e. And recall how 
during his journey he was stopped by the strange figure of a man who se 
pitted features revealed no inkling of whether he was black or w hite . . .
Some say he was a Greek. Some a Mongolian. Others a mulatto -- and others 
still, a simple white man of God. Whoever, and whatsoever, and w e must not 
rule out the possibility of an emissary direct from above -- oh, y es! -- and 
remember how he appeared suddenly, startling both Founder and h orse as he 
gave warning, telling the Founder to leave the horse and buggy t here in the 
road and proceed immediately to a certain cabin, then slipped si lently away,
so silently, my young friends, that the Founder doubted his ve ry existence.
And you know how the great man continued through the dusk, determ ined 
though puzzled as he approached the town. He was lost, lost in re verie until
the crack of the first rifle sounded, then the almost fatal volle y that creased 
his skull -- oh my! -- and left him stunned and apparently lifel ess.
"I have heard him tell with his own lips how consciousness return ed 
while they were still upon him examining their foul deed, and h ow he lay 
biting his heart lest they hear it and wipe out their failure wit h a 
coup-de-grace, as the French would say. Ha! And I'm sure you've e ach of you 
lived with him through his escape," he said, seeming to look di rectly into my 
watered eyes. "You awakened when he awakened, rejoiced when he rejoiced at 
their leaving without further harm; arising when he arose; seein g with his 
eyes the prints of their milling footsteps and the cartridges dro pped in the 
dust about the imprint of his fallen body; yes, and the cold, du st-encrusted,
but not quite fatal blood. And you hurried with him full of doubt to the 
cabin designated by the stranger, where he met that seemingly de mented 
black man . . . You remember that old one, laughed at by the child ren in the 
town's square, old, comic-faced, crafty, cotton-headed. And yet it was he who 
bound up your wounds with the wounds of the Founder. He, the old slave,
showing a surprising knowledge of such matters -- germology and s cabology -- 
ha! ha! -- he called it, and what a youthful skill of the hands! For he shaved 
our skull, and cleansed our wound and bound it neat with banda ges stolen 
from the home of an unsuspecting leader of the mob, ha! And you re call how 
you plunged with the Founder, the Leader, deep into the black art of escape,
guided at first, indeed, initiated, by the seemingly demente d one who had 
learned his craft in slavery. You left with the Founder in the bl ack of night,
and I know it. You hurried silently along the river bottom, stung by 
mosquitoes, hooted by owls, zoomed by bats, buzzed by snakes that rattled 
among the rocks, mud and fever, darkness and sighing. You hid all the 
following day in the cabin where thirteen slept in three small roo ms, standing 
until darkness in the fireplace chimney, back in all the soot an d ashes -- ha!
ha! -- guarded by the granny who dozed at the hearth seemingly wit hout a 
fire. You stood in the blackness and when they came with their b aying 
hounds they thought her demented. But she knew, she knew! She knew the 
fire! She knew the fire! She knew the fire that burned without cons uming!
My God, yes!" 
"My God, yes!" a woman's voice responded, adding to the structu re 
of his vision within me.
"And you left with him in the morning, hidden in a wagonload of
cotton, in the very center of the fleece, where you breathed the hot air 
through the barrel of the emergency shotgun; the cartridges, which thank God 
it was unnecessary to use, held fanwise and ready between the s pread fingers 
of your hand. And you went into this town with him and were hidde n by the 
friendly aristocrat one night, and on the next by the white black smith who 
held no hatred -- surprising contradictions of the underground. Es caping, yes!
helped by those who knew you and those who didn't know. Becaus e for some 
it was enough to see him; others helped without even that, blac k and white.
But mostly it was our own who aided, because you were their own a nd we 
have always helped our own. And so, my young friends, my sisters and 
brothers, you went with him, in and out of cabins, by night and ea rly 
morning, through swamps and hills. On and on, passed from black h and to 
black hand and some white hands, and all the hands molding the Founder's 
freedom and our own freedom like voices shaping a deep-felt son g. And you,
each of you, were with him. Ah, how well you know it, for it was yo u who 
escaped to freedom. Ah, yes, and you know the story." 
I saw him resting now, and beaming out across the chapel, his hug e 
head turning to all its corners like a beacon, his voice still ech oing as I 
fought back my emotion. For the first time the evocation of the Founder 
saddened me, and the campus seemed to rush past me, fast retreati ng, like 
the fading of a dream at the sundering of slumber. Beside me, the s tudent's 
eyes swam with a distorting cataract of tears, his features rigid a s though he 
struggled within himself. The fat man was playing upon the who le audience 
without the least show of exertion. He seemed completely comp osed, hidden 
behind his black-lensed glasses, only his mobile features ge sturing his vocal
drama. I nudged the boy beside me.
"Who is he?" I whispered.
He gave me a look of annoyance, almost of outrage. "Reverend 
Homer A. Barbee, Chicago," he said.
Now the speaker rested his arm upon the lectern and turned toward 
Dr. Bledsoe:
"You've heard the bright beginning of the beautiful story, my f riends.
But there is the mournful ending, and perhaps in many ways the rich er side.
The setting of this glorious son of the morning." 
He turned to Dr. Bledsoe, "It was a fateful day, Dr. Bledsoe, sir, i f I 
may recall it to you, for we were there. Oh yes, my young friends," h e said,
turning to face us again with a sad proud smile. "I knew him well a nd loved 
him, and I was there.
"We had toured through several states to which he was carrying the
message. The people had come to hear the prophet, the multitud e had 
responded. The old-fashioned people; women in aprons and Moth er Hubbards 
of calico and gingham, men in their overalls and patched alpac as; a sea of
upturned and puzzled faces looking out from beneath old battere d straw hats 
and limp sunbonnets. They who had come by oxen and mule team an d by 
walking long distances. It was the month of September and uns easonably 
cold. He had spoken peace and confidence into their troubled s ouls, had set a 
star before them and we were passing on to other scenes, still ca rrying the 
message.
"Ah, those days of ceaseless travel, those youthful days, tho se 
springtime days; fertile, blossomy, sun-filled days of promis e. Ah, yes, those 
indescribably glorious days, in which the Founder was buildin g the dream not 
only here in this then barren valley, but hither and yonder throug hout the 
land, instilling the dream in the hearts of the people. Erecting the scaffolding 
of a nation. Broadcasting his message that fell like seed on ta llow ground,
sacrificing himself, fighting and forgiving his enemies of bo th complexions-oh 
yes, he had them, of both complexions. But going forward fille d with the 
importance of his message, filled with his dedicated mission ; and in his zeal,
perhaps in his mortal pride, ignoring the advice of his physician . I see in my 
mind's eye the fatal atmosphere of that jam-packed auditorium : The Founder 
holds the audience within the gentle palm of his eloquence, ro cking it,
soothing it, instructing it; and there below, the rapt faces blu shed by the glow 
of the big pot-bellied stove now turned cherry-red with its glow ing; yes, the 
spellbound rows caught in the imperious truth of his message. An d I hear 
now, again, the great humming hush as his voice reached the end o f a 
mighty period, and one of the listeners, a snowy-headed man, le aps to his 
feet crying out, 'Tell us what is to be done, sir! For God's sake , tell us! Tell
us in the name of the son they snatched from me last week!' And al l through 
the room the voices arising, imploring, 'Tell us, tell us!' And t he Founder is 
suddenly mute with tears." 
Old Barbee's voice rang out, as suddenly he made charged and 
incomplete movements about the platform, acting out his words . And I 
watched with a sick fascination, knowing part of the story, ye t a part of me 
fighting against its sad inevitable conclusion.
"And the Founder pauses, then steps forward with his eyes spil ling 
his great emotion. With his arm upraised, he begins to answer and totters.
Then all is commotion. We rush forward and lead him away.
"The audience leaps to its feet in consternation. All is terror a nd 
turmoil, a moan and a sighing. Until, like a clap of thunder, I he ar Dr.
Bledsoe's voice ring out whip-like with authority, a song of ho pe. And as we 
stretch the Founder upon a bench to rest, I hear Dr. Bledsoe stomp ing out 
the time with mighty strokes upon the hollow platform, command ing not in 
words but in the great gut-tones of his magnificent basso -- oh, but wasn't he 
a singer? Isn't he a singer still today? -- and they stand, they calm, and with 
him they sing out against the tottering of their giant. Sing ou t their long 
black songs of blood and bones:
"Meaning HOPE!
"Of hardship and pain:
"Meaning FAITH!
"Of humbleness and absurdity:
"Meaning ENDURANCE!
"Of ceaseless struggle in darkness, meaning:
"TRIUMPH . . .
"Ha!" Barbee cried, slapping his hands, "Ha! Singing verse aft er 
verse, until the leader revived!" (Slap, slap of his hands.) 
"Addressed them" -- 
(Slap!) "My God, my God!
"Assured them" -- (Slap!) 
"That" -- (Slap!) 
"He was only tired of his ceaseless efforts." (Slap!) "Yes, and
dismisses them, sending each on his way rejoicing, giving eac h a parting 
handshake of fellowship . . ." 
I watched Barbee pace in a semicircle, his lips compressed, his face 
working with emotion, his palms meeting but making no sound.
"Ah, those days in which he tilled his mighty fields, those da ys in 
which he watched the crops take hold and grow, those youthful, s ummery,
sun-bright days . . ." 
Barbee's voice sighed off in nostalgia. The chapel hardly brea thed as 
he sighed deeply. Then I watched him produce a snowy handkerchi ef, remove 
his dark glasses and wipe his eyes, and through the increasing di stance of my 
isolation, I watched the men in the seats of honor slowly shak e their 
spellbound heads. Then Barbee's voice began again, disembo died now, and it 
was as though he had never paused, as though his words, reverbera ting 
within us, had continued their rhythmic flow though their sou rce was for a 
moment stilled:
"Oh, yes, my young friends, oh, yes," he continued with a great 
sadness. "Man's hope can paint a purple picture, can transform a s oaring 
vulture into a noble eagle or a moaning dove. Oh, yes! But I knew ," he 
shouted, startling me. "In spite of that great, anguished hope within me, I 
knew -- knew that the great spirit was declining, was approachin g its lonely 
winter; the great sun going down. For sometimes it is given one t o know 
these things . . . And I staggered under the awful burden of that k nowledge 
and I cursed myself because I bore it. But such was the Founder's e nthusiasm 
-- oh, yes! -- that as we sped from country town to country town t hrough the 
glorious Indian summer, I soon forgot. And then . . . And then . . . a nd . . .
then . . ." 
I listened to his voice fall to a whisper; his hands were outsprea d as 
though he were leading an orchestra into a profound and final dimi nuendo.
Then his voice rose again, crisply, almost matter-of-factly, a ccelerated:
"I remember the start of the train, how it seemed to groan as it 
started up the steep grade into the mountain. It was cold. Frost f ormed its 
icy patterns upon the window's edges. And the whistle of the tra in was 
long-drawn and lonely, a sigh issuing from the depths of the mou ntain.
"In the car up ahead, in the Pullman assigned him by the very 
president of the line, the Leader lay tossing. He had been struc k with a 
sudden and mysterious sickness. And I knew in spite of the angu ish within 
me that the sun goeth down, for the heavens themselves convey ed that 
knowledge. The rush of the train, the clicking of wheels upon th e steel. I 
remember how I looked out of the frosted pane and saw the looming great 
North Star and lost it, as though the sky had shut its eye. The tra in was 
curving the mountain, the engine loping like a great black hou nd, parallel
with the last careening cars, panting forth its pale white vapor as it hurled us 
ever higher. And shortly the sky was black, without a moon . . ." 
As his "mooo-o-on" echoed over the chapel, he drew his chin aga inst 
his chest until his white collar disappeared, leaving him a fi gure of balanced 
unbroken blackness, and I could hear the rasp of air as he inhale d.
"It was as though the very constellations knew our impending
sorrow," he bugled, his head raised to the ceiling, his voice ful l-throated. "For 
against that great -- wide -- sweep of sable there came the burst o f a single 
jewel-like star, and I saw it shimmer, and break, and streak down t he cheek 
of that coal-black sky like a reluctant and solitary tear . . ."
He shook his head with great emotion, his lips pursed as he moane d,
"Mmmmmmmmmm," turning toward Dr. Bledsoe as though he did not qu ite 
see him. "At that fateful moment . . . Mmmmmm, I sat with your gre at 
president . . . Mmmmmmmmmm! He was deep in meditation as we awai ted 
word from the men of science, and he said to me of that dying star,
" 'Barbee, friend, did you see?'
"And I answered, 'Yes, Doctor, I saw.'
"And at our throats already we felt the cold hands of sorrow. And I 
said to Dr. Bledsoe, 'Let us pray.' And as we knelt there on the swa ying floor 
our words were less prayers than sounds of mute and terrible sorrow. An d it 
was then, as we pulled to our feet, staggering with the motion o f that 
speeding train, that we saw the physician moving toward us. And we looked 
with bated breath into the blank and expressionless features of the man of
science, asking with our total beings: Do you bring us hope or d isaster? And 
it was then and there he informed us that the Leader was nearing hi s 
destination . . .
"It was said, the cruel blow had fallen and we were left numb, but
the Founder was still for the moment with us and still in comma nd. And, of
all in the traveling party, he sent for him who sits there before yo u, and for 
me as a man of God. But he wanted mainly his friend of midnight 
consultations, his comrade of many battles, who over the wear y years had 
remained steadfast in defeat as in victory.
"Even now I can see it, the dark passage lit with dim lights and D r.
Bledsoe swaying as he went before me. At the door stood the porte r and the 
conductor, a black man and a white man of the South, both crying . Both 
weeping. And he looked up as we entered, his great eyes resigned b ut still
aflame with nobility and courage against the white of his pill ow; and he 
looked at his friend and smiled. Smiled warmly at his old campai gner, his 
loyal champion, his adjunct, that marvelous singer of the ol d songs who had 
rallied his spirit during times of distress and discouragement, w ho with his 
singing of the old familiar melodies soothed the doubts and f ears of the 
multitude; he who had rallied the ignorant, the fearful and susp icious, those 
still wrapped in the rags of slavery; him, there, your leader, who calmed the 
children of the storm. And as the Founder looked up at his compan ion, he 
smiled. And reaching out his hand to his friend and companion as I now 
stretch out my hand to you, he said, 'Come closer. Come closer.' A nd he 
moved closer, until he stood beside the berth, and the light sla nting across 
his shoulder as he knelt beside him. And the hand reached out an d gently 
touched him and he said, 'Now, you must take on the burden. Lead them the 
rest of the way.' And oh, the cry of that train and the pain too big for tears!
"When the train reached the summit of the mountain, he was no 
longer with us. And as the train dropped down the grade he had depa rted.
"It had become a veritable train of sorrow. Dr. Bledsoe there, sat 
weary in mind and heavy of heart. What should he do? The Leader w as dead 
and he thrown suddenly at the head of the troops like a cavalryma n 
catapulted into the saddle of his general felled in a charge of b attle-vaulted 
onto the back of his fiery and half-broken charger. Ah! And that g reat, black,
noble beast, wall-eyed with the din of battle and twitching a lready with its 
sense of loss. What command should he give? Should he return wit h his 
burden, home, to where already the hot wires were flashing, speaki ng, rattling 
the mournful message? Should he turn and bear the fallen soldie r down the 
cold and alien mountain to this valley home? Return with the de ar eyes 
dulled, the firm hand still, the magnificent voice silent, th e Leader cold? 
Return to the warm valley, to the green grounds he could no longer l ight 
with his mortal vision? Should he follow his Leader's vision th ough he had 
now himself departed? 
"Ah, of course you know the story: How he bore the body into the 
strange city, and the speech he made as his Leader lay in state, and how 
when the sad news spread, a day of mourning was declared for the wh ole 
municipality. Oh, and how rich and poor, black and white, weak a nd 
powerful, young and old, all came to pay their homage-many real izing the 
Leader's worth and their loss only now with his passing. And how , with his 
mission done, Dr. Bledsoe returned, keeping his sorrowful vigil w ith his friend 
in an humble baggage car; and how the people came to pay their res pects at 
the stations . . . A slow train. A sorrowful train. And all along the line, in 
mountain and valley, wherever the rails found their fateful co urse, the people 
were one in their common mourning, and like the cold steel rails, were 
spiked down to their sorrow. Oh, what a sad departure!
"And what an even sadder arrival. See with me, my young friends,
hear with me: The weeping and wailing of those who shared his la bors. Their 
sweet Leader returned to them, rock-cold in the iron immobility o f death. He 
who had left them quick, in the prime of his manhood, author of t heir own 
fire and illumination, returned to them cold, already a bronzed st atue. Oh,
the despair, my young friends. The black despair of black peopl e! I see them 
now; wandering about these grounds, where each brick, each bird, e ach blade 
of grass was a reminder of some precious memory; and each memory a
hammer stroke driving home the blunt spikes of their sorrow. Oh, y es, some 
now are here gray-haired among you, still dedicated to his vision , still
laboring in the vineyard. But then with the black-draped coffin lying in state 
among them -- inescapably reminding them -- they felt the dark n ight of
slavery settling once more upon them. They smelt that old obsc ene stink of
darkness, that old slavery smell, worse than the rank halitosis of hoary death.
Their sweet light enclosed in a black-draped coffin, their ma jestic sun 
snatched behind a cloud.
"Oh, and the sad sound of weeping bugles! I can hear them now,
stationed at the four corners of the campus, sounding taps for t he fallen 
general; announcing and re-announcing the sad tidings, telli ng and retelling 
the sad revelation one to the other across the still numbness of the air, as 
though they could not believe it, could neither comprehend no r accept it;
bugles weeping like a family of tender women lamenting their loved one. And 
the people came to sing the old songs and to express their unspe akable 
sorrow. Black, black, black! Black people in blacker mourning, the funeral
crape hung upon their naked hearts; singing unashamedly their black folk's 
songs of sorrow, moving painfully, overflowing the curving wal ks, weeping and 
wailing beneath the drooping trees and their low murmuring voice s like the 
moans of winds in a wilderness. And finally they gathered on the hill slope 
and as far as the tear-wet eyes could see, they stood with their heads bowed,
singing.
"Then silence. The lonesome hole banked with poignant flowe rs. The 
dozen white-gloved hands waiting taut upon the silken ropes. That awful
silence. The final words are spoken. A single wild rose tossed fa rewell, bursts 
slowly, its petals drifting snowlike upon the reluctantly low ered coffin. Then 
down into the earth; back to the ancient dust; back to the cold b lack clay . .
. mother . . . of us all." 
As Barbee paused the silence was so complete that I could hear the 
power engines far across the campus throbbing the night like an excited 
pulse. Somewhere in the audience an old woman's voice began a p laintive 
wail; the birth of a sad, untormulated song that died stillborn i n a sob.
Barbee stood with his head thrown back, his arms rigid at his side s,
his fists clenched as though fighting desperately for control . Dr. Bledsoe sat 
with his face in his hands. Near me someone blew his nose. Barb ee took a 
tottering step forward.
"Oh, yes. Oh, yes," he said. "Oh, yes. That too is part of the glo rious 
story. But think of it not as a death, but as a birth. A great seed h ad been 
planted. A seed which has continued to put forth its fruit in its season as 
surely as if the great creator had been resurrected. For in a sense he was, if
not in the flesh, in the spirit. And in a sense in the flesh too. F or has not 
your present leader become his living agent, his physical pres ence? Look 
about you if you doubt it. My young friends, my dear young friend s! How 
can I tell you what manner of man this is who leads you? How can I convey 
to you how well he has kept his pledge to the Founder, how consci entious 
has been his stewardship? 
"First, you must see the school as it was. Already a great institu tion,
to be sure; but then the buildings were eight, now they are twenty ; then the 
faculty was fifty, now it is two hundred; then the student body was a few 
hundred, where now I'm told you are three thousand. And now where yo u 
have roads of asphalt for the passage of rubber tires, then the roa ds were of
crushed stone for the passage of oxen, and mule teams, and horse -drawn 
wagons. I have not the words to tell you how my heart swelled to ret urn to 
this great institution after so great a while to move among its w ealth of green 
things, its fruitful farmland and fragrant campus. Ah! and the ma rvelous plant 
supplying power to an area larger than many towns -- all operated by black 
hands. Thus, my young friends, does the light of the Founder st ill burn. Your 
leader has kept his promise a thousandfold. I commend him in hi s own right,
for he is the co-architect of a great and noble experiment. He is a worthy 
successor to his great friend and it is no accident that his great and 
intelligent leadership has made him our leading statesman. T his is a form of
greatness worthy of your imitation. I say to you, pattern yoursel ves upon him.
Aspire, each of you, to some day follow in his footsteps. Great d eeds are yet 
to be performed. For we are a young, though a fast-rising, people. Legends 
are still to be created. Be not afraid to undertake the burdens of yo ur leader,
and the work of the Founder will be one of ever unfolding glory, the history 
of the race a saga of mounting triumphs." 
Barbee stood with his arms outstretched now, beaming over the 
audience, his Buddha-like body still as an onyx boulder. There was sniffling 
throughout the chapel. Voices murmured with admiration and I fel t more lost 
than ever. For a few minutes old Barbee had made me see the visio n and 
now I knew that leaving the campus would be like the parting of f lesh. I 
watched him lower his arms now and start back to his chair, moving slowly 
with his head cocked as though listening to distant music. I h ad lowered my 
head to wipe my eyes when I heard the shocked gasp arise.
Looking up, I saw two of the white trustees moving swiftly acros s the 
platform to where Barbee floundered upon Dr. Bledsoe's legs. The old man 
slid forward upon his hands and knees as the two white men took h is arms;
and now as he stood I saw one of them reach for something on the fl oor 
and place it in his hands. It was when he raised his head that I sa w it. For 
a swift instant, between the gesture and the opaque glitter of his glasses, I 
saw the blinking of sightless eyes. Homer A. Barbee was blind .
Uttering apologies, Dr. Bledsoe helped him to his chair. Then as the 
old man rested back with a smile, Dr. Bledsoe walked to the edge o f the 
platform and lifted his arms. I closed my eyes as I heard the deep m oaning 
sound that issued from him, and the rising crescendo of the stude nt body 
joining in. This time it was music sincerely felt, not rendered f or the guests,
but for themselves; a song of hope and exaltation. I wanted to rush from the 
building, but didn't dare. I sat stiff and erect, supported by th e hard bench,
relying upon it as upon a form of hope.
I could not look at Dr. Bledsoe now, because old Barbee had made
me both feel my guilt and accept it. For although I had not inte nded it, any 
act that endangered the continuity of the dream was an act of trea son.
I did not listen to the next speaker, a tall white man who kept 
dabbing at his eyes with a handkerchief and repeating his phrase s in an 
emotional and inarticulate manner. Then the orchestra played ex cerpts from 
Dvorak's New World Symphony and I kept hearing "Swing Low Sweet 
Chariot" resounding through its dominant theme -- my mother's an d 
grandfather's favorite spiritual. It was more than I could stand, and before the 
next speaker could begin I hurried past the disapproving eyes of teachers and 
matrons, out into the night.
A mockingbird trilled a note from where it perched upon the hand of
the moonlit Founder, flipping its moon-mad tail above the hea d of the 
eternally kneeling slave. I went up the shadowy drive, heard it t rill behind 
me. The street lamps glowed brilliant in the moonlit dream of the campus,
each light serene in its cage of shadows.
I might well have waited until the end of the services, for I ha dn't 
gone far when I heard the dim, bright notes of the orchestra strikin g up a 
march, followed by a burst of voices as the students filed out in to the night.
With a feeling of dread I headed for the administration buildin g, and upon 
reaching it, stood in the darkened doorway. My mind fluttered li ke the moths 
that veiled the street lamp which cast shadows upon the bank of grass below 
me. I would now have my real interview with Dr. Bledsoe, and I reca lled 
Barbee's address with resentment. With such words fresh in his mi nd, I was 
sure Dr. Bledsoe would be far less sympathetic to my plea. I stoo d in that 
darkened doorway trying to probe my future if I were expelled. Whe re would 
I go, what would I do? How could I ever return home? 
Chapter 6 
Down the sloping lawn below me the male students moved toward 
their dormitories, seeming far away from me now, remote, and each shadowy 
form vastly superior to me, who had by some shortcoming cast myse lf into 
the darkness away from all that was worthwhile and inspiring. I li stened to 
one group harmonize quietly as they passed. The smell of fresh bre ad being 
prepared in the bakery drifted to me. The good white bread of breakf ast; the 
rolls dripping with yellow butter that I had slipped into my poc ket so often 
to be munched later in my room with wild blackberry jam from home.
Lights began to appear in the girls' dormitories, like the bursti ng of
luminous seeds flung broadside by an invisible hand. Several c ars rolled by. I 
saw a group of old women who lived in the town approaching. One us ed a 
cane which from time to time she tapped hollowly upon the walk l ike a blind 
man. Snatches of their conversation fluttered to me as they dis cussed Barbee's 
talk with enthusiasm, recalled the times of the Founder, their quavering voices 
weaving and embroidering his story. Then down the long avenue o f trees I 
saw the familiar Cadillac approaching and started inside the b uilding,
suddenly filled with panic. I hadn't gone two steps before I tu rned and 
hurried out into the night again. I couldn't stand to face Dr. Ble dsoe 
immediately. I was fairly shivering as I fell in behind a group of boys going 
up the drive. They were arguing some point heatedly, but I was too agitated 
to listen and simply followed in their shadows, noticing the dull gleam of
their polished shoe-leather in the rays of the street lamps. I k ept trying to 
formulate what I would say to Dr. Bledsoe, and the boys must have turned 
into their building, for suddenly finding myself outside th e gates of the 
campus and heading down the highway, I turned and ran back to the
building.
When I went in he was wiping his neck with a blue-bordered 
handkerchief. The shaded lamp catching the lenses of his glas ses left half of
his broad face in shadow as his clenched fists stretched full fo rth in the light 
before him. I stood, hesitating in the door, aware suddenly of th e old heavy 
furnishings, the relics from the times of the Founder, the framed p ortrait 
photographs and relief plaques of presidents and industrialist s, men of
power-fixed like trophies or heraldic emblems upon the walls.
"Come in," he said from the half-shadow; then I saw him move and
his head coming forward, his eyes burning.
He began mildly, as if quietly joking, throwing me off balance .
"Boy," he said, "I understand that you not only carried Mr. Norton 
out to the Quarters but that you wound up at that sinkhole, that G olden 
Day." 
It was a statement, not a question. I said nothing and he looke d at 
me with the same mild gaze. Had Barbee helped Mr. Norton soften h im? 
"No," he said, "it wasn't enough to take him to the Quarters, you
had to make the complete tour, to give him the full treatment. Wa s that it?" 
"No, sir . . . I mean that he was ill, sir," I said. "He had to have 
some whiskey . . ." 
"And that was the only place you knew to go," he said. "So you we nt 
there because you were taking care of him . . ." 
"Yes, sir . . ." 
"And not only that," he said in a voice that both mocked and 
marveled, "you took him out and sat him down on the gallery, ve randa -- 
piazza -- whatever they call it now'days -- and introduced him to the quality!" 
"Quality?" I frowned. "Oh -- but he insisted that I stop, sir. Th ere 
was nothing I could do . . ." 
"Of course," he said. "Of course." 
"He was interested in the cabins, sir. He was surprised that there 
were any left." 
"So naturally you stopped," he said, bowing his head again.
"Yes, sir." 
"Yes, and I suppose the cabin opened up and told him its life hi story 
and all the choice gossip?" 
I started to explain.
"Boy!" he exploded. "Are you serious? Why were you out on that 
road in the first place? Weren't you behind the wheel?" 
"Yes, sir . . ." 
"Then haven't we bowed and scraped and begged and lied enough 
decent homes and drives for you to show him? Did you think that w hite man 
had to come a thousand miles -- all the way from New York and Bosto n and 
Philadelphia just for you to show him a slum? Don't just stand there, say 
something!" 
"But I was only driving him, sir. I only stopped there after he 
ordered me to . . ." 
"Ordered you?" he said. "He ordered you. Dammit, white folk are 
always giving orders, it's a habit with them. Why didn't you mak e an excuse? 
Couldn't you say they had sickness -- smallpox -- or picked an other cabin? 
Why that Trueblood shack? My God, boy! You're black and living i n the 
South -- did you forget how to lie?" 
"Lie, sir? Lie to him, lie to a trustee, sir? Me?" 
He shook his head with a kind of anguish. "And me thinking I'd 
picked a boy with brain," he said. "Didn't you know you were enda ngering 
the school?" 
"But I was only trying to please him . . ." 
"Please him? And here you are a junior in college! Why, the dumbe st 
black bastard in the cotton patch knows that the only way to ple ase a white 
man is to tell him a lie! What kind of education are you getting a round 
here? Who really told you to take him out there?" he said.
"He did, sir. No one else." 
"Don't lie to me!" 
"That's the truth, sir." 
"I warn you now, who suggested it?" 
"I swear, sir. No one told me." 
"Nigger, this isn't the time to lie. I'm no white man. Tell me th e 
truth!" 
It was as though he'd struck me. I stared across the desk thinking ,
He called me that . . .
"Answer me, boy!" 
That, I thought, noticing the throbbing of a vein that rose betw een 
his eyes, thinking, He called me that.
"I wouldn't lie, sir," I said.
"Then who was that patient you were talking with?" 
"I never saw him before, sir." 
"What was he saying?" 
"I can't recall it all," I muttered. "The man was raving." 
"Speak up. What did he say?" 
"He thinks that he lived in France and that he's a great doctor . . ." 
"Continue." 
"He said that I believed that white was right," I said.
"What?" Suddenly his face twitched and cracked like the surfac e of
dark water. "And you do, don't you?" Dr. Bledsoe said, suppressin g a nasty 
laugh. "Well, don't you?" 
I did not answer, thinking, You, you . . .
"Who was he, did you ever see him before?" 
"No, sir, I hadn't." 
"Was he northern or southern?" 
"I don't know, sir." 
He struck his desk. "College for Negroes! Boy, what do you know 
other than how to ruin an institution in half an hour that it too k over half a 
hundred years to build? Did he talk northern or southern?" 
"He talked like a white man," I said, "except that his voice so unded 
southern, like one of ours . . ." 
"I'll have to investigate him," he said. "A Negro like that sho uld be 
under lock and key." 
Across the campus a clock struck the quarter hour and something 
inside me seemed to muffle its sound. I turned to him desperatel y. "Dr.
Bledsoe, I'm awfully sorry. I had no intention of going there bu t things just 
got out of hand. Mr. Norton understands how it happened . . ." 
"Listen to me, boy," he said loudly. "Norton is one man and I'm 
another, and while he might think he's satisfied, I know that h e isn't! Your 
poor judgment has caused this school incalculable damage. I nstead of uplifting 
the race, you've torn it down." 
He looked at me as though I had committed the worst crime 
imaginable. "Don't you know we can't tolerate such a thing? I g ave you an 
opportunity to serve one of our best white friends, a man who cou ld make 
your fortune. But in return you dragged the entire race into the slim e!" 
Suddenly he reached for something beneath a pile of papers, an o ld leg 
shackle from slavery which he proudly called a "symbol of our pro gress." 
"You've got to be disciplined, boy," he said. "There's no ifs a nd ands 
about it." 
"But you gave Mr. Norton your word . . ." 
"Don't stand there and tell me what I already know. Regardless of
what I said, as the leader of this institution I can't possibl y let this pass. Boy,
I'm getting rid of you!" It must have happened when the metal st ruck the 
desk, for suddenly I was leaning toward him, shouting with out rage.
"I'll tell him," I said. "I'll go to Mr. Norton and tell him. You' ve lied 
to both of us . . ." 
"What!" he said. "You have the nerve to threaten me . . . in my own
office?" 
"I'll tell him," I screamed. "I'll tell everybody. I'll fight you. I swear 
it, I'll fight!" 
"Well," he said, sitting back, "well, I'll be damned!" For a m oment he 
looked me up and down and I saw his head go back into the shadow,
hearing a high, thin sound like a cry of rage; then his face came f orward and 
I saw his laughter. For an instant I stared; then I wheeled and st arted for 
the door, hearing him sputter, "Wait, wait," behind me.
I turned. He gasped for breath, propping his huge head up with his
hands as tears streamed down his face.
"Come on, come," he said, removing his glasses and wiping his e yes.
"Come on, son," his voice amused and conciliatory. It was as t hough I were 
being put through a fraternity initiation and found myself goin g back. He 
looked at me, still laughing with agony. My eyes burned.
"Boy, you are a fool," he said. "Your white folk didn't teach yo u 
anything and your mother-wit has left you cold. What has happe ned to you 
young Negroes? I thought you had caught on to how things are done down 
here. But you don't even know the difference between the way thi ngs are and 
the way they're supposed to be. My God," he gasped, "what is the race 
coming to? Why, boy, you can tell anyone you like -- sit down th ere . . . Sit 
down, sir, I say!" 
Reluctantly I sat, torn between anger and fascination, hatin g myself
for obeying.
"Tell anyone you like," he said. "I don't care. I wouldn't raise my 
little finger to stop you. Because I don't owe anyone a thing, son. Who,
Negroes? Negroes don't control this school or much of anything e lse -- 
haven't you learned even that? No, sir, they don't control this s chool, nor 
white folk either. True they support it, but I control it. I's big a nd black and 
I say 'Yes, suh' as loudly as any burr-head when it's convenient , but I'm still
the king down here. I don't care how much it appears otherwise. Po wer 
doesn't have to show off. Power is confident, self-assuring, self-starting and 
self-stopping, self-warming and self-justifying. When you have it, you know it.
Let the Negroes snicker and the crackers laugh! Those are the fact s, son. The 
only ones I even pretend to please are big white folk, and even th ose I 
control more than they control me. This is a power set-up, son, an d I'm at 
the controls. You think about that. When you buck against me, y ou're bucking 
against power, rich white folk's power, the nation's power -- wh ich means 
government power!" 
He paused to let it sink in and I waited, feeling a numb, violen t 
outrage.
"And I'll tell you something your sociology teachers are afraid to tell
you," he said. "If there weren't men like me running schools like this, there'd 
be no South. Nor North, either. No, and there'd be no country -- no t as it is 
today. You think about that, son." He laughed. "With all your speechmaking 
and studying I thought you understood something. But you . . . A ll right, go 
ahead. See Norton. You'll find that he wants you disciplined; he might not 
know it, but he does. Because he knows that I know what is best f or his 
interests. You're a black educated fool, son. These white folk have newspapers,
magazines, radios, spokesmen to get their ideas across. If the y want to tell
the world a lie, they can tell it so well that it becomes the truth ; and if I tell
them that you're lying, they'll tell the world even if you prove y ou're telling 
the truth. Because it's the kind of lie they want to hear . . ." 
I heard the high thin laugh again. "You're nobody, son. You don' t 
exist -- can't you see that? The white folk tell everybody wha t to think -- 
except men like me. I tell them; that's my life, telling white folk how to think 
about the things I know about. Shocks you, doesn't it? Well, t hat's the way it 
is. It's a nasty deal and I don't always like it myself. But you listen to me: I 
didn't make it, and I know that I can't change it. But I've made my place in 
it and I'll have every Negro in the country hanging on tree limbs by morning 
if it means staying where I am." 
He was looking me in the eye now, his voice charged and sincere, a s 
though uttering a confession, a fantastic revelation which I c ould neither 
believe nor deny. Cold drops of sweat moved at a glacier's pace d own my 
spine . . .
"I mean it, son," he said. "I had to be strong and purposeful to ge t 
where I am. I had to wait and plan and lick around . . . Yes, I had to a ct 
the nigger!" he said, adding another fiery, "Yes!
"I don't even insist that it was worth it, but now I'm here and I 
mean to stay -- after you win the game, you take the prize and you keep it,
protect it; there's nothing else to do." He shrugged. "A man gets old winning 
his place, son. So you go ahead, go tell your story; match your truth against 
my truth, because what I've said is truth, the broader truth. Test it, try it out 
. . . When I started out I was a young fellow . . ." 
But I no longer listened, nor saw more than the play of light upo n 
the metallic disks of his glasses, which now seemed to float w ithin the 
disgusting sea of his words. Truth, truth, what was truth? Nobody I knew,
not even my own mother, would believe me if I tried to tell them. N or would 
I tomorrow, I thought, nor would I . . . I gazed helplessly at the g rain of the 
desk, then past his head to the case of loving cups behind his c hair. Above 
the case a portrait of the Founder looked noncommittally down.
"Hee, hee!" Bledsoe laughed. "Your arms are too short to box with
me, son. And I haven't had to really clip a young Negro in years. No ," he 
said getting up, "they haven't been so cocky as they used to."
This time I could barely move, my stomach was knotted and my 
kidneys ached. My legs were rubbery. For three years I had thought of myself
as a man and here with a few words he'd made me as helpless as an inf ant.
I pulled myself up . . .
"Wait, hold on a second," he said, looking at me like a man abou t to 
flip a coin. "I like your spirit, son. You're a fighter, and I like that; you just 
lack judgment, though lack of judgment can ruin you. That's wh y I have to 
penalize you, son. I know how you feel, too. You don't want to g o home to 
be humiliated, I understand that, because you have some vague notions about 
dignity. In spite of me, such notions seep in along with the gi mcrack teachers 
and northern-trained idealists. Yes, and you have some white fo lk backing you 
and you don't want to face them because nothing is worse for a bl ack man 
than to be humiliated by white folk. I know all about that too; ole doc's been 
'buked and scorned and all of that. I don't just sing about it in chapel, I 
know about it. But you'll get over it; it's foolish and expens ive and a lot of
dead weight. You let the white folk worry about pride and dignit y -- you 
learn where you are and get yourself power, influence, contacts wi th powerful
and influential people -- then stay in the dark and use it!" 
How long will I stand here and let him laugh at me, I thought,
holding on to the back of the chair, how long? 
"You're a nervy little fighter, son," he said, "and the race need s good,
smart, disillusioned fighters. Therefore I'm going to give you a hand -- maybe 
you'll feel that I'm giving you my left hand after I've struck y ou with my 
right -- if you think I'm the kind of man who'd lead with his right , which 
I'm most certainly not. But that's all right too, take it or leav e it. I want you 
to go to New York for the summer and save your pride -- and your mon ey.
You go there and earn your next year's fees, understand?" 
I nodded, unable to speak, whirling about furiously within mys elf,
trying to deal with him, to fit what he was saying to what he had said . . .
"I'll give you letters to some of the school's friends to see tha t you 
get work," he said. "But this time, use your judgment, keep you r eyes open,
get in the swing of things! Then, if you make good, perhaps . . . w ell,
perhaps . . . It's up to you." 
His voice stopped as he stood, tall and black and disk-eyed, h uge.
"That's all, young man," he said, his tone abrupt, official. " You have 
two days in which to close your affairs." 
"Two days?" 
"Two days!" he said.
I went down the steps and up the walk in the dark, making it out of
the building just before it bent me double beneath the wisteria that hung 
from the trees on rope-like vines. Almost a total disembowelmen t and when it 
paused I looked up through the trees arched high and cool above me to see 
a whirling, double-imaged moon. My eyes were out of focus. I sta rted toward 
my room, covering one eye with my hand to avoid crashing into trees and 
lampposts projected into my path. I went on, tasting bile and t hankful that it 
was night with no one to witness my condition. My stomach felt raw. From 
somewhere across the quiet of the campus the sound of an old guit ar-blues 
plucked from an out-of-tune piano drifted toward me like a lazy, shimmering 
wave, like the echoed whistle of a lonely train, and my head wen t over again,
against a tree this time, and I could hear it splattering the flo wering vines.
When I could move, my head started to whirl in a circle. The day's 
events flowed past. Trueblood, Mr. Norton, Dr. Bledsoe and the Go lden Day 
swept around my mind in a mad surreal whirl. I stood in the path hold ing 
my eye and trying to push back the day, but each time I floundere d upon 
Dr. Bledsoe's decision. It still echoed in my mind and it was rea l and it was 
final. Whatever my responsibility was for what had occurred, I k new that I 
would pay for it, knew that I would be expelled, and the very id ea stabbed 
my insides again. I stood there on the moonlit walk, trying to t hink ahead to 
its effects, imagining the satisfaction of those who envied my success, the 
shame and disappointment of my parents. I would never live dow n my 
disgrace. My white friends would be disgusted and I recalled the fear that 
hung over all those who had no protection from powerful whites.
How had I come to this? I had kept unswervingly to the path plac ed 
before me, had tried to be exactly what I was expected to be, had d one 
exactly what I was expected to do -- yet, instead of winning th e expected 
reward, here I was stumbling along, holding on desperately to one of my eyes 
in order to keep from bursting out my brain against some familiar o bject 
swerved into my path by my distorted vision. And now to drive me w ild I 
felt suddenly that my grandfather was hovering over me, grinnin g 
triumphantly out of the dark. I simply could not endure it. For, de spite my 
anguish and anger, I knew of no other way of living, nor other fo rms of
success available to such as me. I was so completely a part of th at existence 
that in the end I had to make my peace. It was either that or admi t that my 
grandfather had made sense. Which was impossible, for though I still believed 
myself innocent, I saw that the only alternative to permanentl y facing the 
world of Trueblood and the Golden Day was to accept the responsib ility for 
what had happened. Somehow, I convinced myself, I had violat ed the code 
and thus would have to submit to punishment. Dr. Bledsoe is righ t, I told 
myself, he's right; the school and what it stands for have to be protected.
There was no other way, and no matter how much I suffered I would p ay my 
debt as quickly as possible and return to building my career . . .
Back in my room I counted my savings, some fifty dollars, and 
decided to get to New York as quickly as possible. If Dr. Bledsoe didn't 
change his mind about helping me get a job, it would be enough t o pay my 
room and board at Men's House, about which I had learned from fello ws who 
lived there during their summer vacations. I would leave in the morning.
So while my roommate grinned and mumbled unaware in his sleep I 
packed my bags.
NEXT morning I was up before the bugle sounded and already on a 
bench in Dr. Bledsoe's outer office when he appeared. The jacke t of his blue 
serge suit was open, revealing a heavy gold chain linked betwee n his vest 
pockets as he moved toward me with a noiseless tread. He passed w ithout 
seeming to see me. Then as he reached his office door he said, "I haven't 
changed my mind about you, boy. And I don't intend to!" 
"Oh, I didn't come for that, sir," I said, seeing him turn quickl y,
looking down upon me, his eyes quizzical.
"Very well, as long as you understand that. Come in and state yo ur 
business. I have work to do." 
I waited before the desk, watching him place his homburg on an ol d 
brass hall-tree. Then he sat before me, making a cage of his finge rs and 
nodding for me to begin.
My eyes burned and my voice sounded unreal. "I'd like to leave th is 
morning, sir," I said.
His eyes retreated. "Why this morning?" he said. "I gave you unti l
tomorrow. Why the hurry?" 
"It isn't hurry, sir. But since I have to leave I'd like to get goi ng.
Staying until tomorrow won't change matters . . ." 
"No, it won't," he said. "That's good sense and you have my 
permission. And what else?" 
"That's all, sir, except that I want to say that I'm sorry for wha t I 
did and that I hold no hard feelings. What I did was unintention al, but I'm 
in agreement with my punishment." 
He touched his fingertips together, the thick fingers meeting 
delicately, his face without expression. "That's the proper a ttitude," he said.
"In other words, you don't intend to become bitter, is that it?"
"Yes, sir." 
"Yes, I can see that you're beginning to learn. That's good. Two
things our people must do is accept responsibility for their a cts and avoid 
becoming bitter." His voice rose with the conviction of his cha pel speeches.
"Son, if you don't become bitter, nothing can stop you from succ ess.
Remember that." 
"I shall, sir," I said. Then my throat thickened and I hoped he wo uld 
bring up the matter of a job himself.
Instead, he looked at me impatiently and said, "Well? I have w ork to 
do. My permission is granted." 
"Well, sir, I'd like to ask a favor of you . . ." 
"Favor," he said shrewdly. "Now that's another matter. What kin d of
favor?" 
"It isn't much, sir. You suggested that you would put me in touc h 
with some of the trustees who would give me a job. I'm willing to do 
anything." 
"Oh, yes," he said, "yes, of course." .
He seemed to think for a moment, his eyes studying the objects on 
his desk. Then touching the shackle gently with his index fin ger, he said,
"Very well. When do you intend to leave?" 
"By the first bus, if possible, sir." 
"Are you packed?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"Very well. Go get your bags and return here in thirty minutes. My 
secretary will give you some letters addressed to several friends of the school.
One of them will do something for you." 
"Thanks, sir. Thank you very much," I said as he stood.
"That's all right," he said. "The school tries to look out for it s own.
Only one thing more. These letters will be sealed; don't open th em if you 
want help. White folk are strict about such things. The letters w ill introduce 
you and request them to help you with a job. I'll do my best for yo u and it 
isn't necessary for you to open them, understand?" 
"Oh, I wouldn't think of opening them, sir," I said.
"Very well, the young lady will have them for you when you return .
What about your parents, have you informed them?" 
"No, sir, it might make them feel too bad if I told them I was 
expelled, so I plan to write them after I get there and get a job . . ." 
"I see. Perhaps that is best." 
"Well, good-bye, sir," I said, extending my hand.
"Good-bye," he said. His hand was large and strangely limp.
He pressed a buzzer as I turned to leave. His secretary brushed pas t 
me as I went through the door.
The letters were waiting when I returned, seven of them, addressed
to men with impressive names. I looked for Mr. Norton's but his wa s not 
among them. Placing them carefully in my inside pocket, I grabb ed my bags 
and hurried for the bus.
Chapter 7 
The station was empty, but the ticket window was open and a port er 
in a gray uniform was pushing a broom. I bought my ticket and climb ed into 
the bus. There were only two passengers seated at the rear of the red and 
nickel interior, and I suddenly felt that I was dreaming. It was t he vet, who 
gave me a smile of recognition; an attendant sat beside him.
"Welcome, young man," he called. "Imagine, Mr. Crenshaw," he s aid 
to the attendant, "we have a traveling companion!" 
"Morning," I said reluctantly. I looked around for a seat away fro m 
them, but although the bus was almost empty, only the rear was re served for 
us and there was nothing to do but move back with them. I didn't l ike it;
the vet was too much a part of an experience which I was already try ing to 
blot out of my consciousness. His way of talking to Mr. Norton ha d been a 
foreshadowing of my misfortune -- just as I had sensed that it wo uld be.
Now having accepted my punishment, I wanted to remember nothi ng 
connected with Trueblood or the Golden Day.
Crenshaw, a much smaller man than Supercargo, said nothing. He 
was not the type usually sent out to accompany violent cases a nd I was glad 
until I remembered that the only violent thing about the vet was his tongue.
His mouth had already gotten me into trouble and now I hoped he wo uldn't 
turn it upon the white driver -- that was apt to get us killed. Wha t was he 
doing on the bus anyway? God, how had Dr. Bledsoe worked that fas t? I 
stared at the fat man.
"How did your friend Mr. Norton make out?" he asked.
"He's okay," I said.
"No more fainting spells?" 
"No." 
"Did he bawl you out for what happened?" 
"He didn't blame me," I said.
"Good. I think I shocked him more than anything else he saw at th e 
Golden Day. I hoped I hadn't caused you trouble. School isn't o ut so soon, is 
it?" 
"Not quite," I said lightly. "I'm leaving early in order to take a job." 
"Wonderful! At home?" 
"No, I thought I might make more money in New York." 
"New York!" he said. "That's not a place, it's a dream. When I was
your age it was Chicago. Now all the little black boys run away t o New York.
Out of the fire into the melting pot. I can see you after you've l ived in 
Harlem for three months. Your speech will change, you'll talk a lot about 
'college,' you'll attend lectures at the Men's House . . . you m ight even meet 
a few white folks. And listen," he said, leaning close to whis per, "you might 
even dance with a white girl!" 
"I'm going to New York to work," I said, looking around me. "I won' t 
have time for that." 
"You will though," he teased. "Deep down you're thinking abou t the 
freedom you've heard about up North, and you'll try it once, just to see if
what you've heard is true." 
"There's other kinds of freedom beside some ole white trash wome n," 
Crenshaw said. "He might want to see him some shows and eat in so me of
them big restaurants." 
The vet grinned. "Why, of course, but remember, Crenshaw, he's onl y 
going to be there a few months. Most of the time he'll be working, and so 
much of his freedom will have to be symbolic. And what will be hi s or any 
man's most easily accessible symbol of freedom? Why, a woman, of course. In 
twenty minutes he can inflate that symbol with all the freedom which he'll be 
too busy working to enjoy the rest of the time. He'll see." 
I tried to change the subject. "Where are you going?" I asked.
"To Washington, D. C.," he said.
"Then you're cured?" 
"Cured? There is no cure --" 
"He's being transferred," said Crenshaw.
"Yes, I'm headed for St. Elizabeth's," the vet said. "The way s of
authority are indeed mysterious. For a year I've tried to get trans ferred, then 
this morning I'm suddenly told to pack. I can't but wonder if ou r little 
conversation with your friend Mr. Norton had something to do with it." 
"How could he have anything to do with it?" I said, remembering D r.
Bledsoe's threat.
"How could he have anything to do with your being on this bus?" he 
said.
He winked. His eyes twinkled. "All right, forget what I've said . But 
for God's sake, learn to look beneath the surface," he said. "Co me out of the 
fog, young man. And remember you don't have to be a complete foo l in 
order to succeed. Play the game, but don't believe in it -- that much you owe 
yourself. Even if it lands you in a strait jacket or a padded cell . Play the 
game, but play it your own way -- part of the time at least. Play t he game,
but raise the ante, my boy. Learn how it operates, learn how you ope rate -- I 
wish I had time to tell you only a fragment. We're an ass-backward people,
though. You might even beat the game. It's really a very crude af fair. Really 
Pre-Renaissance -- and that game has been analyzed, put down i n books. But 
down here they've forgotten to take care of the books and that's y our 
opportunity. You're hidden right out in the open -- that is, you w ould be if
you only realized it. They wouldn't see you because they don't expect you to 
know anything, since they believe they've taken care of that . . ." 
"Man, who's this they you talking so much about?" said Crensha w.
The vet looked annoyed. "They?" he said. "They? Why, the same they 
we always mean, the white folks, authority, the gods, fate, ci rcumstances -- 
the force that pulls your strings until you refuse to be pulled an y more. The 
big man who's never there, where you think he is." 
Crenshaw grimaced. "You talk too damn much, man," he said. "You
talk and you don't say nothing." 
"Oh, I have a lot to say, Crenshaw. I put into words things which 
most men feel, if only slightly. Sure, I'm a compulsive talker of a kind, but 
I'm really more clown than fool. But, Crenshaw," he said, rolling a wand of
the newspaper which lay across his knees, "you don't realize wh at's 
happening. Our young friend is going North for the first time! It is for the 
first time, isn't it?" 
"You're right," I said.
"Of course. Were you ever North before, Crenshaw?" 
"I been all over the country," Crenshaw said. "I know how they d o it,
wherever they do it. And I know how to act too. Besides, you ain' t going 
North, not the real North. You going to Washington. It's just ano ther 
southern town." 
"Yes, I know," the vet said, "but think of what this means for t he 
young fellow. He's going free, in the broad daylight and alone. I can 
remember when young fellows like him had first to commit a crime, or be 
accused of one, before they tried such a thing. Instead of leavi ng in the light 
of morning, they went in the dark of night. And no bus was fast eno ugh -- 
isn't that so, Crenshaw?" 
Crenshaw stopped unwrapping a candy bar and looked at him 
sharply, his eyes narrowed. "How the hell I know?" he said.
"I'm sorry, Crenshaw," the vet said. "I thought that as a man of
experience . . ." 
"Well, I ain't had that experience. I went North of my own free wil l." 
"But haven't you heard of such cases?" 
"Hearing ain't 'speriencing," Crenshaw said.
"No, it isn't. But since there's always an element of crime in fre edom 
--" 
"I ain't committed no crime!" 
"I didn't mean that you had," the vet said. "I apologize. Forge t it." 
Crenshaw took an angry bite from his candy bar, mumbling, "I wish
you'd hurry up and git depressive, maybe then you won't talk so d amn 
much." 
"Yes, doctor," the vet said mockingly. "I'll be depressive soo n enough,
but while you eat your candy just allow me to chew the rag; there' s a kind of
substance in it." 
"Aw, quit trying to show off your education," Crenshaw said. " You 
riding back here in the Jim Crow just like me. Besides, you're a nut ." 
The vet winked at me, continuing his flow of words as the bus got
under way. We were going at last and I took a last longing look as the bus 
shot around the highway which circled the school. I turned and wa tched it 
recede from the rear window; the sun caught its treetops, bathed i ts low-set 
buildings and ordered grounds. Then it was gone. In less than fiv e minutes 
the spot of earth which I identified with the best of all possib le worlds was 
gone, lost within the wild uncultivated countryside. A flas h of movement drew 
my eye to the side of the highway now, and I saw a moccasin wiggl e swiftly 
along the gray concrete, vanishing into a length of iron pipe tha t lay beside 
the road. I watched the flashing past of cotton fields and cabi ns, feeling that 
I was moving into the unknown.
The vet and Crenshaw prepared to change busses at the next stop,
and upon leaving, the vet placed his hand upon my shoulder and looked at 
me with kindness, and, as always, he smiled.
"Now is the time for offering fatherly advice," he said, "but I' ll have 
to spare you that -- since I guess I'm nobody's father except my own.
Perhaps that's the advice to give you: Be your own father, young man. And 
remember, the world is possibility if only you'll discover it. L ast of all, leave 
the Mr. Nortons alone, and if you don't know what I mean, think ab out it.
Farewell." 
I watched him following Crenshaw through the group of passengers
waiting to get on, a short, comical figure turning to wave, then d isappearing 
through the door of the red brick terminal. I sat back with a sigh of relief,
yet once the passengers were aboard and the bus under way again, I felt sad 
and utterly alone.
NOT until we were sailing through the Jersey countryside did my 
spirits begin to rise. Then my old confidence and optimism reviv ed, and I 
tried to plan my time in the North. I would work hard and serve my 
employer so well that he would shower Dr. Bledsoe with favorabl e reports.
And I would save my money and return in the fall full of New York cul ture.
I'd be indisputably the leading campus figure. Perhaps I would attend Town 
Meeting, which I had heard over the radio. I'd learn the platform t ricks of
the leading speakers. And I would make the best of my contacts. When I met 
the big men to whom my letters were addressed I would put on my best
manner. I would speak softly, in my most polished tones, smile agreeably and 
be most polite; and I would remember that if he ("he" meant any o f the 
important gentlemen) should begin a topic of conversation (I w ould never 
begin a subject of my own) which I found unfamiliar, I would smi le and 
agree. My shoes would be polished, my suit pressed, my hair dress ed (not too 
much grease) and parted on the right side; my nails would be clean and my 
armpits well deodorized -- you had to watch the last item. You co uldn't allow 
them to think all of us smelled bad. The very thought of my cont acts gave 
me a feeling of sophistication, of worldliness, which, as I fi ngered the seven 
important letters in my pocket, made me feel light and expansiv e.
I dreamed with my eyes gazing blankly upon the landscape until I 
looked up to see a Red Cap frowning down. "Buddy, are you getting off
here?" he said. "If so, you better get started." 
"Oh, sure," I said, beginning to move. "Sure, but how do you get t o 
Harlem?" 
"That's easy," he said. "You just keep heading north." 
And while I got down my bags and my prize brief case, still as shin y 
as the night of the battle royal, he instructed me how to take the subway,
then I struggled through the crowd.
Moving into the subway I was pushed along by the milling 
salt-and-pepper mob, seized in the back by a burly, blue-unif ormed attendant 
about the size of Supercargo, and crammed, bags and all, into a tra in that 
was so crowded that everyone seemed to stand with his head back and his 
eyes bulging, like chickens frozen at the sound of danger. Then the door 
banged behind me and I was crushed against a huge woman in black who 
shook her head and smiled while I stared with horror at a large mole that 
arose out of the oily whiteness of her skin like a black mountai n sweeping 
out of a rainwet plain. And all the while I could feel the rubbery softness of
her flesh against the length of my body. I could neither turn si deways nor 
back away, nor set down my bags. I was trapped, so close that sim ply by 
nodding my head, I might have brushed her lips with mine. I want ed 
desperately to raise my hands to show her that it was against my w ill. I kept 
expecting her to scream, until finally the car lurched and I was able to free 
my left arm. I closed my eyes, holding desperately to my lapel. T he car 
roared and swayed, pressing me hard against her, but when I took a fu rtive 
glance around no one was paying me the slightest attention. An d even she 
seemed lost in her own thoughts. The train seemed to plunge dow nhill now,
only to lunge to a stop that shot me out upon a platform feeling l ike 
something regurgitated from the belly of a frantic whale. Wrestli ng with my 
bags, I swept along with the crowd, up the stairs into the hot stre et. I didn't 
care where I was, I would walk the rest of the way.
For a moment I stood before a shop window staring at my own 
reflection in the glass, trying to recover from the ride against t he woman. I 
was limp, my clothing wet. "But you're up North now," I told myse lf, "up 
North." Yes, but suppose she had screamed . . . The next time I use d the 
subway I'd always be sure to enter with my hands grasping my lape ls and I'd 
keep them there until I left the train. Why, my God, they must hav e riots on 
those things all the time. Why hadn't I read about them? 
I had never seen so many black people against a background of bri ck 
buildings, neon signs, plate glass and roaring traffic -- not ev en on trips I 
had made with the debating team to New Orleans, Dallas or Birmin gham.
They were everywhere. So many, and moving along with so much ten sion and 
noise that I wasn't sure whether they were about to celebrate a ho liday or 
join in a street fight. There were even black girls behind the coun ters of the 
Five and Ten as I passed. Then at the street intersection I had th e shock of
seeing a black policeman directing traffic -- and there were whit e drivers in 
the traffic who obeyed his signals as though it was the most nat ural thing in 
the world. Sure I had heard of it, but this was real. My courage returne d.
This really was Harlem, and now all the stories which I had heard of the 
city-within-a-city leaped alive in my mind. The vet had been right: For me 
this was not a city of realities, but of dreams; perhaps because I had always 
thought of my life as being confined to the South. And now as I s truggled 
through the lines of people a new world of possibility suggeste d itself to me 
faintly, like a small voice that was barely audible in the roar o f city sounds. I 
moved wide-eyed, trying to take the bombardment of impression s. Then I 
stopped still.
It was ahead of me, angry and shrill, and upon hearing it I had a 
sensation of shock and fear such as I had felt as a child when su rprised by 
my father's voice. An emptiness widened in my stomach. Before m e a 
gathering of people were almost blocking the walk, while above them a short 
squat man shouted angrily from a ladder to which were attached a c ollection 
of small American flags.
"We gine chase 'em out," the man cried. "Out!" 
"Tell 'em about it, Ras, mahn," a voice called.
And I saw the squat man shake his fist angrily over the uplifted
faces, yelling something in a staccato West Indian accent, a t which the crowd 
yelled threateningly. It was as though a riot would break any min ute, against 
whom I didn't know. I was puzzled, both by the effect of his voi ce upon me 
and by the obvious anger of the crowd. I had never seen so many bl ack men 
angry in public before, and yet others passed the gathering by wi thout even a 
glance. And as I came alongside, I saw two white policemen tal king quietly 
with one another, their backs turned as they laughed at some jok e. Even 
when the shirt-sleeved crowd cried out in angry affirmation of so me remark 
of the speaker, they paid no attention. I was stunned. I stood g aping at the 
policemen, my bags settling upon the middle of the walk, unti l one of them 
happened to see me and nudged the other, who chewed lazily upon a wad of
gum.
"What can we do for you, bud?" he said.
"I was just wondering . . ." I said, before I caught myself.
"Yeah?" 
"I was just wondering how to get to Men's House, sir," I said.
"Is that all?" 
"Yes, sir," I stammered.
"You sure?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"He's a stranger," the other said. "Just coming to town, bud?" 
"Yes, sir," I said, "I just got off the subway." 
"You did, huh? Well, you want to be careful." 
"Oh, I will, sir." 
"That's the idea. Keep it clean," he said, and directed me to Me n's 
House.
I thanked them and hurried on. The speaker had become more 
violent than before and his remarks were about the government. The clash 
between the calm of the rest of the street and the passion of the v oice gave 
the scene a strange out-of-joint quality, and I was careful not to look back 
lest I see a riot flare.
I reached Men's House in a sweat, registered, and went immediate ly 
to my room. I would have to take Harlem a little at a time.
Chapter 8 
It was a clean little room with a dark orange bedspread. The chair 
and dresser were maple and there was a Gideon Bible lying upon a sm all
table. I dropped my bags and sat on the bed. From the street below c ame 
the sound of traffic, the larger sound of the subway, the smalle r, more varied 
sounds of voices. Alone in the room, I could hardly believe that I was so far 
away from home, yet there was nothing familiar in my surroundings . Except 
the Bible; I picked it up and sat back on the bed, allowing its 
blood-red-edged pages to ripple beneath my thumb. I remembered h ow Dr.
Bledsoe could quote from the Book during his speeches to the stu dent body 
on Sunday nights. I turned to the book of Genesis, but could not read. I 
thought of home and the attempts my father had made to institu te family 
prayer, the gathering around the stove at mealtime and kneeling w ith heads 
bowed over the seats of our chairs, his voice quavering and full of
church-house rhetoric and verbal humility. But this made me hom esick and I 
put the Bible aside. This was New York. I had to get a job and earn m oney.
I took off my coat and hat and took my packet of letters and lay 
back upon the bed, drawing a feeling of importance from reading th e 
important names. What was inside, and how could I open them und etected? 
They were tightly sealed. I had read that letters were sometimes s teamed 
open, but I had no steam. I gave it up, I really didn't need to kno w their 
contents and it would not be honorable or safe to tamper with Dr. Bledsoe. I 
knew already that they concerned me and were addressed to some of t he 
most important men in the whole country. That was enough. I cau ght myself
wishing for someone to show the letters to, someone who could g ive me a 
proper reflection of my importance. Finally, I went to the mirror a nd gave 
myself an admiring smile as I spread the letters upon the dresser l ike a hand 
of high trump cards.
Then I began to map my campaign for the next day. First, I would 
have a shower, then get breakfast. All this very early. I'd have t o move fast.
With important men like that you had to be on time. If you made an
appointment with one of them, you couldn't bring them any slow c.p. (colored 
people's) time. Yes, and I would have to get a watch. I would do everything 
to schedule. I recalled the heavy gold chain that hung between Dr. Bledsoe's 
vest pockets and the air with which he snapped his watch open t o consult 
the time, his lips pursed, chin pulled in so that it multiplied , his forehead 
wrinkled. Then he'd clear his throat and give a deeply intoned o rder, as 
though each syllable were pregnant with nuances of profoundly i mportant 
meaning. I recalled my expulsion, feeling quick anger and att empting to 
suppress it immediately; but now I was not quite successful, m y resentment 
stuck out at the edges, making me uncomfortable. Maybe it was b est, I 
thought hastily. Maybe if it hadn't happened I would never ha ve received an 
opportunity to meet such important men face to face. In my mind' s eye I 
continued to see him gazing into his watch, but now he was join ed by 
another figure; a younger figure, myself; become shrewd, suave and dressed 
not in somber garments (like his old-fashioned ones) but in a d apper suit of
rich material, cut fashionably, like those of the men you saw in magazine ads,
the junior executive types in Esquire. I imagined myself maki ng a speech and 
caught in striking poses by flashing cameras, snapped at the en d of some 
period of dazzling eloquence. A younger version of the doctor, l ess crude,
indeed polished. I would hardly ever speak above a whisper and I would 
always be -- yes, there was no other word, I would be charming. Lik e Ronald 
Colman. What a voice! Of course you couldn't speak that way in t he South,
the white folks wouldn't like it, and the Negroes would say tha t you were 
"putting on." But here in the North I would slough off my southern ways of
speech. Indeed, I would have one way of speaking in the North an d another 
in the South. Give them what they wanted down South, that was t he way. If
Dr. Bledsoe could do it, so could I. Before going to bed that nigh t I wiped 
off my brief case with a clean towel and placed the letters carefu lly inside.
The next morning I took an early subway into the Wall Street 
district, selecting an address that carried me almost to the end o f the island.
It was dark with the tallness of the buildings and the narrow stree ts.
Armored cars with alert guards went past as I looked for the number. T he 
streets were full of hurrying people who walked as though they ha d been 
wound up and were directed by some unseen control. Many of the men
carried dispatch cases and brief cases and I gripped mine with a se nse of
importance. And here and there I saw Negroes who hurried along with 
leather pouches strapped to their wrists. They reminded me flee tingly of
prisoners carrying their leg irons as they escaped from a chain gan g. Yet they 
seemed aware of some self-importance, and I wished to stop one a nd ask him 
why he was chained to his pouch. Maybe they got paid well for th is, maybe 
they were chained to money. Perhaps the man with rundown heels ah ead of
me was chained to a million dollars!
I looked to see if there were policemen or detectives with drawn 
guns following, but there was no one. Or if so, they were hidden i n the 
hurrying crowd. I wanted to follow one of the men to see where he wa s 
going. Why did they trust him with all that money? And what woul d happen 
if he should disappear with it? But of course no one would be tha t foolish.
This was Wall Street. Perhaps it was guarded, as I had been told po st offices 
were guarded, by men who looked down at you through peepholes in t he 
ceiling and walls, watching you constantly, silently waiti ng for a wrong move.
Perhaps even now an eye had picked me up and watched my every 
movement. Maybe the face of that clock set in the gray building across the 
street hid a pair of searching eyes. I hurried to my address and was 
challenged by the sheer height of the white stone with its scu lptured bronze 
fa?de. Men and women hurried inside, and after staring for a mome nt I 
followed, taking the elevator and being pushed to the back of the car. It rose 
like a rocket, creating a sensation in my crotch as though an impo rtant part 
of myself had been left below in the lobby.
At the last stop I left the car and went down a stretch of marble 
hallway until I found the door marked with the trustee's name. B ut starting 
to enter I lost my nerve and backed away. I looked down the hall . It was 
empty. White folks were funny; Mr. Bates might not wish to see a N egro the 
first thing in the morning. I turned and walked down the hall and l ooked out 
of the window. I would wait awhile.
Below me lay South Ferry, and a ship and two barges were passing 
out into the river, and far out and to the right I could make out the Statue 
of Liberty, her torch almost lost in the fog. Back along the shore , gulls soared 
through the mist above the docks, and down, so far below that it made me 
dizzy, crowds were moving. I looked back to a ferry passing the St atue of
Liberty now, its backwash a curving line upon the bay and three g ulls 
swooping down behind it.
Behind me the elevator was letting off passengers, and I heard t he 
cheery voices of women going chattering down the hall. Soon I w ould have to 
go in. My uncertainty grew. My appearance worried me. Mr. Bates migh t not 
like my suit, or the cut of my hair, and my chance of a job would be lost. I 
looked at his name typed neatly across the envelope and wondere d how he 
earned his money. He was a millionaire, I knew. Maybe he had alwa ys been;
maybe he was born a millionaire. Never before had I been so curious about 
money as now that I believed I was surrounded by it. Perhaps I woul d get a 
job here and after a few years would be sent up and down the streets with 
millions strapped to my arms, a trusted messenger. Then I'd be sen t South 
again to head the college -- just as the mayor's cook had been ma de principal
of the school after she'd become too lame to stand before her st ove. Only I 
wouldn't stay North that long; they'd need me before that . . . Bu t now for 
the interview.
Entering the office I found myself face to face with a young wom an 
who looked up from her desk as I glanced swiftly over the large li ght room,
over the comfortable chairs, the ceiling-high bookcases with gold and leather 
bindings, past a series of portraits and back again, to meet her q uestioning 
eyes. She was alone and I thought, Well, at least I'm not too ea rly . . .
"Good morning," she said, betraying none of the antagonism I ha d 
expected.
"Good morning," I said, advancing. How should I begin? 
"Yes?" 
"Is this Mr. Bates' office?" I said.
"Why, yes, it is," she said. "Have you an appointment?" 
"No, ma'm," I said, and quickly hated myself for saying "ma'm " to so 
young a white woman, and in the North too. I removed the letter fro m my 
brief case, but before I could explain, she said,
"May I see it, please?" 
I hesitated. I did not wish to surrender the letter except to Mr.
Bates, but there was a command in the extended hand, and I obeye d. I 
surrendered it, expecting her to open it, but instead, after loo king at the 
envelope she rose and disappeared behind a paneled door withou t a word.
Back across the expanse of carpet to the door which I had entered I
noticed several chairs but was undecided to go there. I stood, my hat in my 
hand, looking around me. One wall caught my eyes. It was hung wi th three 
portraits of dignified old gentlemen in winged collars who look ed down from 
their frames with an assurance and arrogance that I had never seen in any 
except white men and a few bad, razor-scarred Negroes. Not even Dr.
Bledsoe, who had but to look around him without speaking to set the 
teachers to trembling, had such assurance. So these were the kind of men 
who stood behind him. How did they fit in with the southern whit e folks,
with the men who gave me my scholarship? I was still staring, cau ght in the 
spell of power and mystery, when the secretary returned.
She looked at me oddly and smiled. "I'm very sorry," she said, " but 
Mr. Bates is just too busy to see you this morning and asks that yo u leave 
your name and address. You'll hear from him by mail." 
I stood silent with disappointment. "Write it here," she said, giving 
me a card.
"I'm sorry," she said again as I scribbled my address and prepared t o 
leave.
"I can be reached here at any time," I said.
"Very good," she said. "You should hear very soon." 
She seemed very kind and interested, and I left in good spirits. My 
fears were groundless, there was nothing to it. This was New York.
I succeeded in reaching several trustees' secretaries during the d ays 
that followed, and all were friendly and encouraging. Some look ed at me 
strangely, but I dismissed it since it didn't appear to be anta gonism. Perhaps 
they're surprised to see someone like me with introductions to su ch important 
men, I thought. Well, there were unseen lines that ran from North to South,
and Mr. Norton had called me his destiny . . . I swung my brief case w ith 
confidence.
With things going so well I distributed my letters in the morning s,
and saw the city during the afternoons. Walking about the street s, sitting on 
subways beside whites, eating with them in the same cafeteria s (although I 
avoided their tables) gave me the eerie, out-of-focus sensat ion of a dream. My 
clothes felt ill-fitting; and for all my letters to men of powe r, I was unsure of
how I should act. For the first time, as I swung along the streets , I thought 
consciously of how I had conducted myself at home. I hadn't wo rried too 
much about whites as people. Some were friendly and some were not , and 
you tried not to offend either. But here they all seemed impersona l; and yet 
when most impersonal they startled me by being polite, by beggi ng my 
pardon after brushing against me in a crowd. Still I felt that eve n when they 
were polite they hardly saw me, that they would have begged the p ardon of
Jack the Bear, never glancing his way if the bear happened to be walking 
along minding his business. It was confusing. I did not know i f it was 
desirable or undesirable . . .
But my main concern was seeing the trustees and after more than a 
week of seeing the city and being vaguely encouraged by secreta ries, I became 
impatient. I had distributed all but the letter to a Mr. Emerson, who I knew 
from the papers was away from the city. Several times I started down to see 
what had happened but changed my mind. I did not wish to seem to o 
impatient. But time was becoming short. Unless I found work soo n I would 
never earn enough to enter school by fall. I had already written h ome that I 
was working for a member of the trustee board, and the only letter I had 
received so far was one telling me how wonderful they thought it was and 
warning me against the ways of the wicked city. Now I couldn't w rite them 
for money without revealing that I had been lying about the job .
Finally I tried to reach the important men by telephone, only to 
receive polite refusals by their secretaries. But fortunately I s till had the letter 
to Mr. Emerson. I decided to use it, but instead of handing it ove r to a 
secretary, I wrote a letter explaining that I had a message from D r. Bledsoe 
and requesting an appointment. Maybe I've been wrong about the secretaries,
I thought; maybe they destroyed the letters. I should have been more careful.
I thought of Mr. Norton. If only the last letter had been addresse d to 
him. If only he lived in New York so that I could make a personal ap peal!
Somehow I felt closer to Mr. Norton, and felt that if he should se e me, he 
would remember that it was I whom he connected so closely to his fate. Now 
it seemed ages ago and in a different season and a distant land. Actually, it 
was less than a month. I became energetic and wrote him a letter, e xpressing 
my belief that my future would be immeasurably different if only I could 
work for him; that he would be benefited as well as I. I was espec ially 
careful to allow some indication of my ability to come through t he appeal. I 
spent several hours on the typing, destroying copy after copy un til I had 
completed one that was immaculate, carefully phrased and most respectful. I 
hurried down and posted it before the final mail collection, sud denly seized 
with the dizzy conviction that it would bring results. I remaine d about the 
building for three days awaiting an answer. But the letter broug ht no reply.
Nor, any more than a prayer unanswered by God, was it returned.
My doubts grew. Perhaps all was not well. I remained in my room 
all the next day. I grew conscious that I was afraid; more afraid he re in my 
room than I had ever been in the South. And all the more, because h ere 
there was nothing concrete to lay it to. All the secretaries had be en 
encouraging. In the evening I went out to a movie, a picture of fro ntier life 
with heroic Indian fighting and struggles against flood, storm and forest fire,
with the out-numbered settlers winning each engagement; an ep ic of wagon 
trains rolling ever westward. I forgot myself (although there was no one like 
me taking part in the adventures) and left the dark room in a lighte r mood.
But that night I dreamed of my grandfather and awoke depressed. I walked 
out of the building with a queer feeling that I was playing a pa rt in some 
scheme which I did not understand. Somehow I felt that Bledsoe and Norton 
were behind it, and all day I was inhibited in both speech and co nduct, for 
fear that I might say or do something scandalous. But this was all fantastic, I 
told myself. I was being too impatient. I could wait for the tru stees to make 
a move. Perhaps I was being subjected to a test of some kind. The y hadn't 
told me the rules, I knew, but the feeling persisted. Perhaps my e xile would 
end suddenly and I would be given a scholarship to return to the ca mpus.
But when? How long? 
Something had to happen soon. I would have to find a job to tide
me over. My money was almost gone and anything might happen. I h ad been 
so confident that I had failed to put aside the price of train fare home. I was 
miserable and I dared not talk to anyone about my problems; not ev en the 
officials at Men's House, for since they had learned that I was to be assigned 
to an important job, they treated me with a certain deference; the refore I was 
careful to hide my growing doubts. After all, I thought, I might have to ask 
for credit and I'll have to appear a good risk. No, the thing to do was to 
keep faith. I'd start out once more in the morning. Something was certain to 
happen tomorrow. And it did. I received a letter from Mr. Emerson.
Chapter 9 
It was a clear, bright day when I went out, and the sun burned 
warm upon my eyes. Only a few flecks of snowy cloud hung high in t he 
morning-blue sky, and already a woman was hanging wash on a roof. I felt 
better walking along. A feeling of confidence grew. Far down t he island the 
skyscrapers rose tall and mysterious in the thin, pastel haze. A m ilk truck 
went past. I thought of the school. What were they doing now on t he 
campus? Had the moon sunk low and the sun climbed clear? Had the
breakfast bugle blown? Did the bellow of the big seed bull awak en the girls 
in the dorms this morning as on most spring mornings when I was there -- 
sounding clear and full above bells and bugles and early workad ay sounds? I 
hurried along, encouraged by the memories, and suddenly I was sei zed with a 
certainty that today was the day. Something would happen. I pa tted my brief
case, thinking of the letter inside. The last had been first -- a good sign.
Close to the curb ahead I saw a man pushing a cart piled high with
rolls of blue paper and heard him singing in a clear ringing voice . It was a 
blues, and I walked along behind him remembering the times that I had 
heard such singing at home. It seemed that here some memories sli pped 
around my life at the campus and went far back to things I had lon g ago 
shut out of my mind. There was no escaping such reminders.
"She's got feet like a monkey 
Legs like a frog -- Lawd, Lawd!
But when she starts to loving me 
I holler Whoooo, God-dog!
Cause I loves my baabay,
Better than I do myself . . ." 
And as I drew alongside I was startled to hear him call to me:
"Looka-year, buddy . . ." 
"Yes," I said, pausing to look into his reddish eyes.
"Tell me just one thing this very fine morning -- Hey! Wait a 
minute, daddy-o, I'm going your way!" 
"What is it?" I said.
"What I want to know is," he said, "is you got the dog?" 
"Dog? What dog?" 
"Sho," he said, stopping his cart and resting it on its support. " That's 
it. Who --" he halted to crouch with one foot on the curb like a co untry 
preacher about to pound his Bible -- "got . . . the . . . dog," his h ead 
snapping with each word like an angry rooster's.
I laughed nervously and stepped back. He watched me out of shre wd 
eyes. "Oh, goddog, daddy-o," he said with a sudden bluster, "w ho got the 
damn dog? Now I know you from down home, how come you trying to ac t 
like you never heard that before! Hell, ain't nobody out here thi s morning but 
us colored -- Why you trying to deny me?" 
Suddenly I was embarrassed and angry. "Deny you? What do you 
mean?" 
"Just answer the question. Is you got him, or ain't you?" 
"A dog?" 
"Yeah, the dog." 
I was exasperated. "No, not this morning," I said and saw a grin 
spread over his face.
"Wait a minute, daddy. Now don't go get mad. Damn, man! I 
thought sho you had him," he said, pretending to disbelieve me . I started 
away and he pushed the cart beside me. And suddenly I felt uncom fortable.
Somehow he was like one of the vets from the Golden Day . . .
"Well, maybe it's the other way round," he said. "Maybe he got h olt 
to you." 
"Maybe," I said.
"If he is, you lucky it's just a dog -- 'cause, man, I tell you I b elieve 
it's a bear that's got holt to me." 
"A bear?" 
"Hell, yes! The bear. Caint you see these patches where he's bee n 
clawing at my behind?" 
Pulling the seat of his Charlie Chaplin pants to the side, he bro ke 
into deep laughter.
"Man, this Harlem ain't nothing but a bear's den. But I tell you o ne 
thing," he said with swiftly sobering face, "it's the best pla ce in the world for 
you and me, and if times don't get better soon I'm going to grab t hat bear 
and turn him every way but loose!" 
"Don't let him get you down," I said.
"No, daddy-o, I'm going to start with one my own size!" 
I tried to think of some saying about bears to reply, but remembered
only Jack the Rabbit, Jack the Bear . . . who were both long forgot ten and 
now brought a wave of homesickness. I wanted to leave him, and y et I found 
a certain comfort in walking along beside him, as though we'd wa lked this 
way before through other mornings, in other places . . .
"What is all that you have there?" I said, pointing to the rolls o f
blue paper stacked in the cart.
"Blueprints, man. Here I got 'bout a hundred pounds of blueprints
and I couldn't build nothing!" 
"What are they blueprints for?" I said.
"Damn if I know -- everything. Cities, towns, country clubs. Some 
just buildings and houses. I got damn near enough to build me a house if I 
could live in a paper house like they do in Japan. I guess someb ody done 
changed their plans," he added with a laugh. "I asked the man w hy they 
getting rid of all this stuff and he said they get in the way so ev ery once in 
a while they have to throw 'em out to make place for the new plans . Plenty 
of these ain't never been used, you know." 
"You have quite a lot," I said.
"Yeah, this ain't all neither. I got a coupla loads. There's a da y's 
work right here in this stuff. Folks is always making plans and ch anging 'em." 
"Yes, that's right," I said, thinking of my letters, "but that' s a 
mistake. You have to stick to the plan." 
He looked at me, suddenly grave. "You kinda young, daddy-o," h e 
said.
I did not answer. We came to a corner at the top of a hill.
"Well, daddy-o, it's been good talking with a youngster from t he old 
country but I got to leave you now. This here's one of them good o le 
downhill streets. I can coast a while and won't be worn out at the end of the 
day. Damn if I'm-a let 'em run me into my grave. I be seeing you aga in 
sometime -- And you know something?" 
"What's that?" 
"I thought you was trying to deny me at first, but now I be pretty 
glad to see you . . ." 
"I hope so," I said. "And you take it easy." 
"Oh, I'll do that. All it takes to get along in this here man's to wn is 
a little shit, grit and mother-wit. And man, I was bawn with all t hree. In 
f a c t ,
I'maseventhsonofaseventhsonbawnwithacauloverbotheye sandraisedonblackcat-bon 
eshighjohntheconquerorandgreasygreens --" he spieled with tw inkling eyes, his 
lips working rapidly. "You dig me, daddy?" 
"You're going too fast," I said, beginning to laugh.
"Okay, I'm slowing down. I'll verse you but I won't curse you -- M y 
name is Peter Wheatstraw, I'm the Devil's only son-in-law, so roll 'em! You a 
southern boy, ain't you?" he said, his head to one side like a be ar's.
"Yes," I said.
"Well, git with it! My name's Blue and I'm coming at you with a 
pitchfork. Fe Fi Fo Fum. Who wants to shoot the Devil one, Lord Go d 
Stingeroy!" 
He had me grinning despite myself. I liked his words though I did n't 
know the answer. I'd known the stuff from childhood, but had forg otten it;
had learned it back of school . . .
"You digging me, daddy?" he laughed. "Haw, but look me up 
sometimes, I'm a piano player and a rounder, a whiskey drinker an d a 
pavement pounder. I'll teach you some good bad habits. You'll need 'em.
Good luck," he said.
"So long," I said and watched him going. I watched him push arou nd 
the corner to the top of the hill leaning sharp against the cart ha ndle, and 
heard his voice arise, muffled now, as he started down.
She's got feet like a monkeeee 
Legs 
Legs, Legs like a maaad 
Bulldog . . .
What does it mean, I thought. I'd heard it all my life but sudden ly 
the strangeness of it came through to me. Was it about a woman or a bout 
some strange sphinxlike animal? Certainly his woman, no woman , fitted that 
description. And why describe anyone in such contradictory word s? Was it a 
sphinx? Did old Chaplin-pants, old dusty-butt, love her or h ate her; or was 
he merely singing? What kind of woman could love a dirty fellow l ike that,
anyway? And how could even he love her if she were as repulsive as the 
song described? I moved ahead. Perhaps everyone loved someone ; I didn't 
know. I couldn't give much thought to love; in order to travel fa r you had to 
be detached, and I had the long road back to the campus before me. I strode 
along, hearing the cartman's song become a lonesome, broad-ton ed whistle 
now that flowered at the end of each phrase into a tremulous, blue -toned 
chord. And in its flutter and swoop I heard the sound of a railroad t rain 
highballing it, lonely across the lonely night. He was the Dev il's son-in-law,
all right, and he was a man who could whistle a three-toned chord . . . God 
damn, I thought, they're a hell of a people! And I didn't know wh ether it was 
pride or disgust that suddenly flashed over me.
At the corner I turned into a drugstore and took a seat at the 
counter. Several men were bent over plates of food. Glass globes of coffee 
simmered above blue flames. I could feel the odor of frying bac on reach deep 
into my stomach as I watched the counterman open the doors of the grill
and turn the lean strips over and bang the doors shut again. Above , facing 
the counter, a blonde, sun-burned college girl smiled down, inv iting all and 
sundry to drink a coke. The counterman came over.
"I've got something good for you," he said, placing a glass of water 
before me. "How about the special?" 
"What's the special?" 
"Pork chops, grits, one egg, hot biscuits and coffee!" He leane d over 
the counter with a look that seemed to say, There, that ought to excite you,
boy. Could everyone see that I was southern? 
"I'll have orange juice, toast and coffee," I said coldly.
He shook his head, "You fooled me," he said, slamming two piec es of
bread into the toaster. "I would have sworn you were a pork chop man. Is 
that juice large or small?" 
"Make it large," I said.
I looked silently at the back of his head as he sliced an orange,
thinking, I should order the special and get up and walk out. Wh o does he 
think he is? 
A seed floated in the thick layer of pulp that formed at the top o f
the glass. I fished it out with a spoon and then downed the acid drink, proud 
to have resisted the pork chops and grits. It was an act of discipl ine, a sign 
of the change that was coming over me and which would return me to
college a more experienced man. I would be basically the same, I thought,
stirring my coffee, yet so subtly changed as to intrigue those wh o had never 
been North. It always helped at the college to be a little diffe rent, especially 
if you wished to play a leading role. It made the folks talk abou t you, try to 
figure you out. I had to be careful though, not to speak too much l ike a 
northern Negro; they wouldn't like that. The thing to do, I thoug ht with a 
smile, was to give them hints that whatever you did or said was weighted 
with broad and mysterious meanings that lay just beneath the su rface. They'd 
love that. And the vaguer you told things, the better. You had t o keep them 
guessing -- just as they guessed about Dr. Bledsoe: Did Dr. Bled soe stop at 
an expensive white hotel when he visited New York? Did he go on p arties 
with the trustees? And how did he act? 
"Man, I bet he has him a fine time. They tell me when Ole Doc gets
to New York he don't stop for the red lights. Say he drinks his good red 
whiskey and smokes his good black cigars and forgets all about y ou ole 
know-nothing-Negroes down here on the campus. Say when he gets up North 
he makes everybody call him Mister Doctor Bledsoe." 
I smiled as the conversation came back to my mind. I felt good.
Perhaps it was all to the best that I had been sent away. I had lea rned more.
Heretofore all the campus gossip had seemed merely malicious an d 
disrespectful; now I could see the advantage for Dr. Bledsoe. W hether we 
liked him or not, he was never out of our minds. That was a secret of
leadership. Strange I should think of it now, for although I'd n ever given it 
any thought before, I seemed to have known it all along. Only he re the 
distance from the campus seemed to make it clear and hard, and I t hought it 
without fear. Here it came to hand just as easily as the coin whic h I now 
placed on the counter for my breakfast. It was fifteen cents an d as I felt for 
a nickel I took out another dime, thinking, Is it an insult whe n one of us 
tips one of them? 
I looked for the counterman, seeing him serving a plate of pork 
chops and grits to a man with a pale blond mustache, and stared; t hen I 
slapped the dime on the counter and left, annoyed that the dim e did not ring 
as loud as a fifty-cent piece.
WHEN I reached the door of Mr. Emerson's office it occurred to me 
that perhaps I should have waited until the business of the day was under 
way, but I disregarded the idea and went ahead. My being early wou ld be, I 
hoped, an indication of both how badly I wanted work, and how pro mptly I 
would perform any assignment given me. Besides, wasn't there a s aying that 
the first person of the day to enter a business would get a bargain ? Or was 
that said only of Jewish business? I removed the letter from my b rief case.
Was Emerson a Christian or a Jewish name? 
Beyond the door it was like a museum. I had entered a large 
reception room decorated with cool tropical colors. One wall was a lmost 
covered by a huge colored map, from which narrow red silk ribbons stret ched 
tautly from each division of the map to a series of ebony pedesta ls, upon 
which sat glass specimen jars containing natural products of th e various 
countries. It was an importing firm. I looked around the room, amaz ed. There 
were paintings, bronzes, tapestries, all beautifully arranged. I was dazzled and 
so taken aback that I almost dropped my brief case when I heard a vo ice 
say, "And what would your business be?" 
I saw the figure out of a collar ad: ruddy face with blond hair 
faultlessly in place, a tropical weave suit draped handsomely from his broad 
shoulders, his eyes gray and nervous behind clear-framed glasse s.
I explained my appointment. "Oh, yes," he said. "May I see the
letter, please?" 
I handed it over, noticing the gold links in the soft white cuff s as he 
extended his hand. Glancing at the envelope he looked back at me with a 
strange interest in his eyes and said, "Have a seat, please. I'l l be with you in 
a moment." 
I watched him leave noiselessly, moving with a long hip-swin ging 
stride that caused me to frown. I went over and took a teakwood ch air with 
cushions of emerald-green silk, sitting stiffly with my brief c ase across my 
knees. He must have been sitting there when I came in, for on a ta ble that 
held a beautiful dwarf tree I saw smoke rising from a cigarette in a j ade ash 
tray. An open book, something called Totem and Taboo, lay besi de it. I 
looked across to a lighted case of Chinese design which held de licate-looking 
statues of horses and birds, small vases and bowls, each set upo n a carved 
wooden base. The room was quiet as a tomb -- until suddenly there was a 
savage beating of wings and I looked toward the window to see an eruption 
of color, as though a gale had whipped up a bundle of brightly col ored rags.
It was an aviary of tropical birds set near one of the broad window s, through 
which, as the clapping of wings settled down, I could see two s hips plying far 
out upon the greenish bay below. A large bird began a song, drawing my 
eyes to the throbbing of its bright blue, red and yellow throat. It was 
startling and I watched the surge and flutter of the birds as thei r colors 
flared for an instant like an unfurled oriental fan. I wanted to g o and stand 
near the cage for a better view, but decided against it. It mig ht seem 
unbusinesslike. I observed the room from the chair.
These folks are the Kings of the Earth! I thought, hearing the bird
make an ugly noise. There was nothing like this at the college m useum -- or 
anywhere else that I had ever been. I recalled only a few cracked re lics from 
slavery times: an iron pot, an ancient bell, a set of ankle-iron s and links of
chain, a primitive loom, a spinning wheel, a gourd for drinking, an ugly 
ebony African god that seemed to sneer (presented to the school by some 
traveling millionaire), a leather whip with copper brads, a bran ding iron with 
the double letter MM. Though I had seen them very seldom, they were vivid 
in my mind. They had not been pleasant and whenever I had visit ed the 
room I avoided the glass case in which they rested, preferring inst ead to look 
at photographs of the early days after the Civil War, the times cl ose to those 
blind Barbee had described. And I had not looked even at these t oo often.
I tried to relax; the chair was beautiful but hard. Where had the 
man gone? Had he shown any antagonism when he saw me? I was anno yed 
that I had failed to see him first. One had to watch such details . Suddenly 
there came a harsh cry from the cage, and once more I saw a mad flashi ng 
as though the birds had burst into spontaneous flame, flutterin g and beating 
their wings maliciously against the bamboo bars, only to sett le down just as 
suddenly when the door opened and the blond man stood beckoni ng, his 
hand upon the knob. I went over, tense inside me. Had I been acce pted or 
rejected? 
There was a question in his eyes. "Come in, please," he said.
"Thank you," I said, waiting to follow him.
"Please," he said with a slight smile.
I moved ahead of him, sounding the tone of his words for a sign.
"I want to ask you a few questions," he said, waving my letter a t two 
chairs.
"Yes, sir?" I said.
"Tell me, what is it that you're trying to accomplish?" he said .
"I want a job, sir, so that I can earn enough money to return to 
college in the fall." 
"To your old school?" 
"Yes, sir." 
"I see." For a moment he studied me silently. "When do you expe ct 
to graduate?" 
"Next year, sir. I've completed my junior classes . . ." 
"Oh, you have? That's very good. And how old are you?" 
"Almost twenty, sir." 
"A junior at nineteen? You are a good student." 
"Thank you, sir," I said, beginning to enjoy the interview.
"Were you an athlete?" he asked.
"No, sir . . ." 
"You have the build," he said, looking me up and down. "You'd 
probably make an excellent runner, a sprinter." 
"I've never tried, sir." 
"And I suppose it's silly even to ask what you think of your Alm a 
Mater?" he said.
"I think it's one of the best in the world," I said, hearing my voi ce 
surge with deep feeling.
"I know, I know," he said, with a swift displeasure that surprise d me.
I became alert again as he mumbled something incomprehensible
about "nostalgia for Harvard yard." 
"But what if you were offered an opportunity to finish your work at
some other college," he said, his eyes widening behind his gl asses. His smile 
had returned.
"Another college?" I asked, my mind beginning to whirl.
"Why, yes, say some school in New England . . ." 
I looked at him speechlessly. Did he mean Harvard? Was this goo d 
or bad. Where was it leading? "I don't know, sir," I said cautiou sly. "I've 
never thought about it. I've only a year more, and, well, I know everyone at 
my old school and they know me . . ." 
I came to a confused halt, seeing him look at me with a sigh of
resignation. What was on his mind? Perhaps I had been too frank ab out 
returning to the college, maybe he was against our having a high er education 
. . . But hell, he's only a secretary . . . Or is he? 
"I understand," he said calmly. "It was presumptuous of me to ev en 
suggest another school. I guess one's college is really a kind of mother and 
father . . . a sacred matter." 
"Yes, sir. That's it," I said in hurried agreement.
His eyes narrowed. "But now I must ask you an embarrassing 
question. Do you mind?" 
"Why, no, sir," I said nervously.
"I don't like to ask this, but it's quite necessary . . ." He lea ned 
forward with a pained frown. "Tell me, did you read the letter whi ch you 
brought to Mr. Emerson? This," he said, taking the letter from the table.
"Why, no, sir! It wasn't addressed to me, so naturally I wouldn't
think of opening it . . ." 
"Of course not, I know you wouldn't," he said, fluttering his ha nd 
and sitting erect. "I'm sorry and you must dismiss it, like one o f those 
annoying personal questions you find so often nowadays on sup posedly 
impersonal forms." 
I didn't believe him. "But was it opened, sir? Someone might ha ve 
gone into my things . . ." 
"Oh, no, nothing like that. Please forget the question . . . And tell
me, please, what are your plans after graduation?" 
"I'm not sure, sir. I'd like to be asked to remain at the college as a 
teacher, or as a member of the administrative staff. And . . . Wel l . . ." 
"Yes? And what else?" 
"Well -- er, I guess I'd really like to become Dr. Bledsoe's assis tant .
. ." 
"Oh, I see," he said, sitting back and forming his mouth into a 
thin-lipped circle. "You're very ambitious." 
"I guess I am, sir. But I'm willing to work hard." 
"Ambition is a wonderful force," he said, "but sometimes it can be 
blinding . . . On the other hand, it can make you successful -- l ike my father 
. . ." A new edge came into his voice and he frowned and looked dow n at 
his hands, which were trembling. "The only trouble with ambitio n is that it 
sometimes blinds one to realities . . . Tell me, how many of thes e letters do 
you have?" 
"I had about seven, sir," I replied, confused by his new turn. "Th ey're 
-- " 
"Seven!" He was suddenly angry.
"Yes, sir, that was all he gave me . . ." 
"And how many of these gentlemen have you succeeded in seeing ,
may I ask?" 
A sinking feeling came over me. "I haven't seen any of them 
personally, sir." 
"And this is your last letter?" 
"Yes, sir, it is, but I expect to hear from the others . . . They said
--" 
"Of course you will, and from all seven. They're all loyal America ns." 
There was unmistakable irony in his voice now, and I didn't know
what to say.
"Seven," he repeated mysteriously. "Oh, don't let me upset you ," he 
said with an elegant gesture of self-disgust. "I had a difficu lt session with my 
analyst last evening and the slightest thing is apt to set me o ff. Like an 
alarm clock without control -- Say!" he said, slapping his palm against his 
thighs. "What on earth does that mean?" Suddenly he was in a sta te. One 
side of his face had begun to twitch and swell.
I watched him light a cigarette, thinking, What on earth is this all
about? 
"Some things are just too unjust for words," he said, expelling a 
plume of smoke, "and too ambiguous for either speech or ideas . By the way,
have you ever been to the Club Calamus?" 
"I don't think I've ever heard of it, sir," I said.
"You haven't? It's very well known. Many of my Harlem friends go
there. It's a rendezvous for writers, artists and all kinds of cele brities. There's 
nothing like it in the city, and by some strange twist it has a tru ly 
continental flavor." 
"I've never been to a night club, sir. I'll have to go there to see what 
it's like after I've started earning some money," I said, hopin g to bring the 
conversation back to the problem of jobs.
He looked at me with a jerk of his head, his face beginning to twi tch 
again.
"I suppose I've been evading the issue again -- as always. Loo k," he 
burst out impulsively. "Do you believe that two people, two st rangers who 
have never seen one another before can speak with utter frankne ss and 
sincerity?" 
"Sir?" 
"Oh, damn! What I mean is, do you believe it possible for us, th e 
two of us, to throw off the mask of custom and manners that insula te man 
from man, and converse in naked honesty and frankness?" 
"I don't know what you mean exactly, sir." I said.
"Are you sure?" 
"I . . ." 
"Of course, of course. If I could only speak plainly! I'm confus ing 
you. Such frankness just isn't possible because all our motiv es are impure.
Forget what I just said. I'll try to put it this way -- and remembe r this,
please . . ." 
My head spun. He was addressing me, leaning forward confidenti ally,
as though he'd known me for years, and I remembered something my 
grandfather had said long ago: Don't let no white man tell you h is business,
'cause after he tells you he's liable to git shame he tole it to you and then 
he'll hate you. Fact is, he was hating you all the time. . .
". . . I want to try to reveal a part of reality that is most important
to you -- but I warn you, it's going to hurt. No, let me finish," he said,
touching my knee lightly and quickly removing his hand as I shi fted my 
position.
"What I want to do is done very seldom, and, to be honest, it 
wouldn't happen now if I hadn't sustained a series of impossib le frustrations.
You see -- well, I'm thwarted . . . Oh, damn, there I go again, thin king only 
of myself . . . We're both frustrated, understand? Both of us, and I want to 
help you . . ." 
"You mean you'll let me see Mr. Emerson?" 
He frowned. "Please don't seem so happy about it, and don't lea p to 
conclusions. I want to help, but there is a tyranny involved . . . " 
"A tyranny?" My lungs tightened.
"Yes. That's a way of putting it. Because to help you I must 
disillusion you . . ." 
"Oh, I don't think I mind, sir. Once I see Mr. Emerson, it'll be up t o 
me. All I want to do is speak to him." 
"Speak to him," he said, getting quickly to his feet and mashi ng his 
cigarette into the tray with shaking fingers. "No one speaks to h im. He does 
the speaking --" Suddenly he broke off. "On second thought, pe rhaps you'd 
better leave me your address and I'll mail you Mr. Emerson's reply in the 
morning. He's really a very busy man." 
His whole manner had changed.
"But you said . . ." I stood up, completely confused. Was he hav ing 
fun with me? "Couldn't you let me talk to him for just five minu tes?" I 
pleaded. "I'm sure I can convince him that I'm worthy of a job. An d if
there's someone who has tampered with my letter, I'll prove my ide ntity . . .
Dr. Bledsoe would --" 
"Identity! My God! Who has any identity any more anyway? It isn 't 
so perfectly simple. Look," he said with an anguished gesture. "Will you trust 
me?" 
"Why, yes, sir, I trust you." 
He leaned forward. "Look," he said, his face working violently , "I was 
trying to tell you that I know many things about you -- not you p ersonally,
but fellows like you. Not much, either, but still more than the a verage. With 
us it's still Jim and Huck Finn. A number of my friends are jazz mu sicians,
and I've been around. I know the conditions under which you liv e -- Why go 
back, fellow? There is so much you could do here where there is more 
freedom. You won't find what you're looking for when you return an yway;
because so much is involved that you can't possibly know. Ple ase don't 
misunderstand me; I don't say all this to impress you. Or to give myself
some kind of sadistic catharsis. Truly, I don't. But I do know th is world 
you're trying to contact -- all its virtues and all its unspeaka bles -- Ha, yes,
unspeakables. I'm afraid my father considers me one of the unsp eakables . . .
I'm Huckleberry, you see . . ." 
He laughed drily as I tried to make sense of his ramblings.
Huckleberry? Why did he keep talking about that kid's story? I was puzzled 
and annoyed that he could talk to me this way because he stood b etween me 
and a job, the campus . . .
"But I only want a job, sir," I said. "I only want to make enough 
money to return to my studies." 
"Of course, but surely you suspect there is more to it than that.
Aren't you curious about what lies behind the face of things?" 
"Yes, sir, but I'm mainly interested in a job." 
"Of course," he said, "but life isn't that simple . . ." 
"But I'm not bothered about all the other things, whatever the y are,
sir. They're not for me to interfere with and I'll be satisfied to g o back to 
college and remain there as long as they'll allow me to." 
"But I want to help you do what is best," he said. "What's best,
mind you. Do you wish to do what's best for yourself?" 
"Why, yes, sir. I suppose I do . . ." 
"Then forget about returning to the college. Go somewhere else . . ." 
"You mean leave?" 
"Yes, forget it . . ." 
"But you said that you would help me!" 
"I did and I am --" 
"But what about seeing Mr. Emerson?" 
"Oh, God! Don't you see that it's best that you do not see him?"
Suddenly I could not breathe. Then I was standing, gripping my b rief
case. "What have you got against me?" I blurted. "What did I eve r do to 
you? You never intended to let me see him. Even though I present ed my 
letter of introduction. Why? Why? I'd never endanger your job --" 
"No, no, no! Of course not," he cried, getting to his feet. "You' ve 
misunderstood me. You mustn't do that! God, there's too much 
misunderstanding. Please don't think I'm trying to prevent yo u from seeing 
my -- from seeing Mr. Emerson out of prejudice . . ." 
"Yes, sir, I do," I said angrily. "I was sent here by a friend of his.
You read the letter, but still you refuse to let me see him, and now you're 
trying to get me to leave college. What kind of man are you, anyw ay? What 
have you got against me? You, a northern white man!" 
He looked pained. "I've done it badly," he said, "but you must
believe that I am trying to advise you what is best for you." He snatched off
his glasses.
"But I know what's best for me," I said. "Or at least Dr. Bledsoe
does, and if I can't see Mr. Emerson today, just tell me when I can and I'll
be here . . ." 
He bit his lips and shut his eyes, shaking his head from side to s ide 
as though fighting back a scream. "I'm sorry, really sorry that I s tarted all of
this," he said, suddenly calm. "It was foolish of me to try to a dvise you, but 
please, you mustn't believe that I'm against you . . . or your ra ce. I'm your 
friend. Some of the finest people I know are Neg -- Well, you see, Mr.
Emerson is my father." 
"Your father!" 
"My father, yes, though I would have preferred it otherwise. But h e 
is, and I could arrange for you to see him. But to be utterly frank, I 'm 
incapable of such cynicism. It would do you no good." 
"But I'd like to take my chances, Mr. Emerson, sir . . . This is ver y 
important to me. My whole career depends upon it." 
"But you have no chance," he said.
"But Dr. Bledsoe sent me here," I said, growing more excited. "I 
must have a chance . . ." 
"Dr. Bledsoe," he said with distaste. "He's like my . . . he ough t to 
be horsewhipped! Here," he said, sweeping up the letter and thru sting it 
crackling toward me. I took it, looking into his eyes that burned back at me.
"Go on, read it," he cried excitedly. "Go on!" 
"But I wasn't asking for this," I said.
"Read it!" 
My dear Mr. Emerson:
The bearer of this letter is a former student of ours (I say former 
because he shall never, under any circumstances, be enrolled as a student 
here again) who has been expelled for a most serious defection f rom our 
strictest rules of deportment.
Due, however, to circumstances the nature of which I shall expla in to 
you in person on the occasion of the next meeting of the board, it is to the 
best interests of the college that this young man have no knowl edge of the 
finality of his expulsion. For it is indeed his hope to return he re to his 
classes in the fall. However, it is to the best interests of the g reat work which 
we are dedicated to perform, that he continue undisturbed in the se vain 
hopes while remaining as far as possible from our midst.
This case represents, my dear Mr. Emerson, one of the rare, delicate
instances in which one for whom we held great expectations has gone 
grievously astray, and who in his fall threatens to upset certain delicate 
relationships between certain interested individuals and the school. Thus,
while the bearer is no longer a member of our scholastic family , it is highly 
important that his severance with the college be executed as pa inlessly as 
possible. I beg of you, sir, to help him continue in the directio n of that 
promise which, like the horizon, recedes ever brightly and dista ntly beyond 
the hopeful traveler.
Respectfully, I am your humble servant,
A. Herbert Bledsoe 
I raised my head. Twenty-five years seemed to have lapsed betwe en 
his handing me the letter and my grasping its message. I could n ot believe it,
tried to read it again. I could not believe it, yet I had a feeling that it all
had happened before. I rubbed my eyes, and they felt sandy as tho ugh all the 
fluids had suddenly dried.
"I'm sorry," he said. "I'm terribly sorry." 
"What did I do? I always tried to do the right thing 
"That you must tell me," he said. "To what does he refer?" 
"I don't know, I don't know . . ." 
"But you must have done something." 
"I took a man for a drive, showed him into the Golden Day to help 
him when he became ill ... I don't know 
I told him falteringly of the visit to Trueblood's and the trip to the 
Golden Day and of my expulsion, watching his mobile face refle cting his 
reaction to each detail.
"It's little enough," he said when I had finished. "I don't un derstand 
the man. He is very complicated." 
"I only wanted to return and help," I said.
"You'll never return. You can't return now," he said. "Don't you s ee? 
I'm terribly sorry and yet I'm glad that I gave in to the impulse to speak to 
you. Forget it; though that's advice which I've been unable to accept myself,
it's still good advice. There is no point in blinding yourself t o the truth. Don't 
blind yourself . . ." 
I got up, dazed, and started toward the door. He came behind me 
into the reception room where the birds flamed in the cage, their s quawks 
like screams in a nightmare.
He stammered guiltily, "Please, I must ask you never to mentio n this 
conversation to anyone." 
"No," I said.
"I wouldn't mind, but my father would consider my revelation t he 
most extreme treason . . . You're free of him now. I'm still his priso ner. You 
have been freed, don't you understand? I've still my battle." H e seemed near 
tears.
"I won't," I said. "No one would believe me. I can't myself. Th ere 
must be some mistake. There must be . . ." 
I opened the door.
"Look, fellow," he said. "This evening I'm having a party at th e 
Calamus. Would you like to join my guests? It might help you -- " 
"No, thank you, sir. I'll be all right." 
"Perhaps you'd like to be my valet?" 
I looked at him. "No, thank you, sir," I said.
"Please," he said. "I really want to help. Look, I happen to kno w of a 
possible job at Liberty Paints. My father has sent several fell ows there . . .
You should try --" 
I shut the door.
The elevator dropped me like a shot and I went out and walked 
along the street. The sun was very bright now and the people alon g the walk 
seemed far away. I stopped before a gray wall where high above me t he 
headstones of a church graveyard arose like the tops of buildings . Across the 
street in the shade of an awning a shoeshine boy was dancing for pennies. I 
went on to the corner and got on a bus and went automatically to t he rear.
In the seat in front of me a dark man in a panama hat kept whistling a tune 
between his teeth. My mind, flew in circles, to Bledsoe, Emerso n and back 
again. There was no sense to be made of it. It was a joke. Hell, it couldn't 
be a joke. Yes, it is a joke . . . Suddenly the bus jerked to a stop a nd I 
heard myself humming the same tune that the man ahead was whist ling, and 
the words came back:
O well they picked poor Robin clean 
O well they picked poor Robin clean 
Well they tied poor Robin to a stump 
Lawd, they picked all the feathers round from Robin's rump 
Well they picked poor Robin clean.
Then I was on my feet, hurrying to the door, hearing the thin,
tissue-paper-against-the-teeth-of-a-comb whistle follo wing me outside at the 
next stop. I stood trembling at the curb, watching and half exp ecting to see 
the man leap from the door to follow me, whistling the old forgot ten jingle 
about a bare-rumped robin. My mind seized upon the tune. I took th e 
subway and it still droned through my mind after I had reached my ro om at 
Men's House and lay across the bed. What was the 
who-what-when-why-where of poor old Robin? What had he done a nd who 
had tied him and why had they plucked him and why had we sung of h is 
fate? It was for a laugh, for a laugh, all the kids had laughed a nd laughed,
and the droll tuba player of the old Elk's band had rendered it sol o on his 
helical horn; with comical flourishes and doleful phrasing, "B oo boo boo 
booooo, Poor Robin clean" -- a mock funeral dirge . . . But who was Robin 
and for what had he been hurt and humiliated? 
Suddenly I lay shaking with anger. It was no good. I thought of
young Emerson. What if he'd lied out of some ulterior motive of h is own? 
Everyone seemed to have some plan for me, and beneath that som e more 
secret plan. What was young Emerson's plan -- and why should it h ave 
included me? Who was I anyway? I tossed fitfully. Perhaps it wa s a test of
my good will and faith -- But that's a lie, I thought. It's a lie and you know 
it's a lie. I had seen the letter and it had practically ordered me killed. By 
slow degrees . . .
"My dear Mr. Emerson," I said aloud. "The Robin bearing this lett er 
is a former student. Please hope him to death, and keep him runni ng. Your 
most humble and obedient servant, A. H. Bledsoe . . ." 
Sure, that's the way it was, I thought, a short, concise verbal c oup de 
grace, straight to the nape of the neck. And Emerson would write in reply? 
Sure: "Dear Bled, have met Robin and shaved tail. Signed, Emers on." 
I sat on the bed and laughed. They'd sent me to the rookery, all
right. I laughed and felt numb and weak, knowing that soon the p ain would 
come and that no matter what happened to me I'd never be the sam e. I felt 
numb and I was laughing. When I stopped, gasping for breath, I d ecided that 
I would go back and kill Bledsoe. Yes, I thought, I owe it to the race and to 
myself. I'll kill him.
And the boldness of the idea and the anger behind it made me mov e 
with decision. I had to have a job and I took what I hoped was the quickest 
means. I called the plant young Emerson had mentioned, and it w orked. I 
was told to report the following morning. It happened so quickly and with 
such ease that for a moment I felt turned around. Had they planne d it this 
way? But no, they wouldn't catch me again. This time I had made the move.
I could hardly get to sleep for dreaming of revenge.
Chapter 10 
The plant was in Long Island, and I crossed a bridge in the fog to 
get there and came down in a stream of workers. Ahead of me a huge 
electric sign announced its message through the drifting strand s of fog:
KEEP AMERICA PURE 
WITH 
LIBERTY PAINTS 
Flags were fluttering in the breeze from each of a maze of building s 
below the sign, and for a moment it was like watching some vast patriotic 
ceremony from a distance. But no shots were fired and no bugles sou nded. I 
hurried ahead with the others through the fog.
I was worried, since I had used Emerson's name without his 
permission, but when I found my way to the personnel office it wo rked like 
magic. I was interviewed by a little droopy-eyed man named Mr. M acDuffy 
and sent to work for a Mr. Kimbro. An office boy came along to direct me.
"If Kimbro needs him," MacDuffy told the boy, "come back and ha ve 
his name entered on the shipping department's payroll." 
"It's tremendous," I said as we left the building. "It looks li ke a small
city." 
"It's big all right," he said. "We're one of the biggest outfits in the 
business. Make a lot of paint for the government." 
We entered one of the buildings now and started down a pure white 
hall.
"You better leave your things in the locker room," he said, ope ning a 
door through which I saw a room with low wooden benches and rows of
green lockers. There were keys in several of the locks, and he selec ted one 
for me. "Put your stuff in there and take the key," he said. Dress ing, I felt 
nervous. He sprawled with one foot on a bench, watching me clos ely as he 
chewed on a match stem. Did he suspect that Emerson hadn't sent me? 
"They have a new racket around here," he said, twirling the match 
between his finger and thumb. There was a note of insinuation i n his voice,
and I looked up from tying my shoe, breathing with conscious eve nness.
"What kind of racket?" I said.
"Oh, you know. The wise guys firing the regular guys and putting on 
you colored college boys. Pretty smart," he said. "That way they don't have to 
pay union wages." 
"How did you know I went to college?" I said.
"Oh, there're about six of you guys out here already. Some up in the
testing lab. Everybody knows about that." 
"But I had no idea that was why I was hired," I said.
"Forget it, Mac," he said. "It's not your fault. You new guys do n't 
know the score. Just like the union says, it's the wise guys in t he office.
They're the ones who make scabs out of you -- Hey! we better hurry ." 
We entered a long, shed-like room in which I saw a series of
overhead doors along one side and a row of small offices on the oth er. I 
followed the boy down an aisle between endless cans, buckets and drums 
labeled with the company's trademark, a screaming eagle. The pa int was 
stacked in neatly pyramided lots along the concrete floor. Then , starting into 
one of the offices, the boy stopped short and grinned.
"Listen to that!" 
Someone inside the office was swearing violently over a telep hone.
"Who's that?" I asked.
He grinned. "Your boss, the terrible Mr. Kimbro. We call him 
'Colonel,' but don't let him catch you." 
I didn't like it. The voice was raving about some failure of the 
laboratory and I felt a swift uneasiness. I didn't like the ide a of starting to 
work for a man who was in such a nasty mood. Perhaps he was angry at one 
of the men from the school, and that wouldn't make him feel too f riendly 
toward me.
"Let's go in," the boy said. "I've got to get back." 
As we entered, the man slammed down the phone and picked up 
some papers.
"Mr. MacDuffy wants to know if you can use this new man," the boy
said.
"You damn right I can use him and . . ." the voice trailed off, the 
eyes above the stiff military mustache going hard.
"Well, can you use him?" the boy said. "I got to go make out his 
card." 
"Okay," the man said finally. "I can use him. I gotta. What's h is 
name?" 
The boy read my name off a card.
"All right," he said, "you go right to work. And you," he said to th e 
boy, "get the hell out of here before I give you a chance to earn som e of the 
money wasted on you every payday!" 
"Aw, gwan, you slave driver," the boy said, dashing from the room.
Reddening, Kimbro turned to me, "Come along, let's get going."
I followed him into the long room where the lots of paint were 
stacked along the floor beneath numbered markers that hung from t he ceiling.
Toward the rear I could see two men unloading heavy buckets from a truck,
stacking them neatly on a low loading platform.
"Now get this straight," Kimbro said gruffly. "This is a busy 
department and I don't have time to repeat things. You have to fo llow 
instructions and you're going to be doing things you don't unde rstand, so get 
your orders the first time and get them right! I won't have time to s top and 
explain everything. You have to catch on by doing exactly wha t I tell you.
You got that?" 
I nodded, noting that his voice became louder when the men acro ss 
the floor stopped to listen.
"All right," he said, picking up several tools. "Now come over h ere." 
"He's Kimbro," one of the men said.
I watched him kneel and open one of the buckets, stirring a milky
brown substance. A nauseating stench arose. I wanted to step aw ay. But he 
stirred it vigorously until it became glossy white, holding the spatula like a 
delicate instrument and studying the paint as it laced off the blade, back into 
the bucket. Kimbro frowned.
"Damn those laboratory blubberheads to hell! There's got to be d ope 
put in every single sonofabitching bucket. And that's what y ou're going to do,
and it's got to be put in so it can be trucked out of here before 11:3 0." He 
handed me a white enamel graduate and what looked like a batter y 
hydrometer.
"The idea is to open each bucket and put in ten drops of this stuf f," 
he said. "Then you stir it 'til it disappears. After it's mixed you take this 
brush and paint out a sample on one of these." He produced a numbe r of
small rectangular boards and a small brush from his jacket pocket . "You 
understand?" 
"Yes, sir." But when I looked into the white graduate I hesitate d; the 
liquid inside was dead black. Was he trying to kid me? 
"What's wrong?" 
"I don't know, sir . . . I mean. Well, I don't want to start by aski ng 
a lot of stupid questions, but do you know what's in this gradua te?" 
His eyes snapped. "You damn right I know," he said. "You just do
what you're told!" 
"I just wanted to make sure, sir," I said.
"Look," he said, drawing in his breath with an exaggerated show o f
patience. "Take the dropper and fill it full . . . Go on, do it!" 
I filled it.
"Now measure ten drops into the paint . . . There, that's it, not to o 
goddam fast. Now. You want no more than ten, and no less." 
Slowly, I measured the glistening black drops, seeing them set tle 
upon the surface and become blacker still, spreading suddenly out to the 
edges.
"That's it. That's all you have to do," he said. "Never mind ho w it 
looks. That's my worry. You just do what you're told and don't tr y to think 
about it. When you've done five or six buckets, come back and s ee if the 
samples are dry . . . And hurry, we've got to get this batch back of f to 
Washington by 11:30 . . ." 
I worked fast but carefully. With a man like this Kimbro the least
thing done incorrectly would cause trouble. So I wasn't suppose d to think! To 
hell with him. Just a flunkey, a northern redneck, a Yankee cracke r! I mixed 
the paint thoroughly, then brushed it smoothly on one of the pie ces of board,
careful that the brush strokes were uniform.
Struggling to remove an especially difficult cover, I wondered i f the 
same Liberty paint was used on the campus, or if this "Optic Whi te" was 
something made exclusively for the government. Perhaps it was of a better 
quality, a special mix. And in my mind I could see the brightly t rimmed and 
freshly decorated campus buildings as they appeared on spring mo rnings -- 
after the fall painting and the light winter snows, with a clo ud riding over 
and a darting bird above -- framed by the trees and encircling vines . The 
buildings had always seemed more impressive because they were t he only 
buildings to receive regular paintings; usually, the nearby h ouses and cabins 
were left untouched to become the dull grained gray of weathered w ood. And 
I remembered how the splinters in some of the boards were raised from t he 
grain by the wind, the sun and the rain until the clapboards shone with a 
satiny, silvery, silver-fish sheen. Like Trueblood's cabin, or the Golden Day . .
. The Golden Day had once been painted white; now its paint was flaking 
away with the years, the scratch of a finger being enough to send it 
showering down. Damn that Golden Day! But it was strange how lif e 
connected up; because I had carried Mr. Norton to the old rundown bu ilding 
with rotting paint, I was here. If, I thought, one could slow dow n his 
heartbeats and memory to the tempo of the black drops falling so slowly into 
the bucket yet reacting so swiftly, it would seem like a sequen ce in a feverish 
dream . . . I was so deep in reverie that I failed to hear Kimbro approa ch.
"How's it coming?" he said, standing with hands on hips.
"All right, sir." 
"Let's see," he said, selecting a sample and running his thumb across 
the board. "That's it, as white as George Washington's Sunday- go-to-meetin'
wig and as sound as the all-mighty dollar! That's paint!" he sa id proudly.
"That's paint that'll cover just about anything!" 
He looked as though I had expressed a doubt and I hurried to say,
"It's certainly white all right." 
"White! It's the purest white that can be found. Nobody makes a
paint any whiter. This batch right here is heading for a national monument!" 
"I see," I said, quite impressed.
He looked at his watch. "Just keep it up," he said. "If I don't h urry 
I'll be late for that production conference! Say, you're nearly o ut of dope:
you'd better go in the tank room and refill it . . . And don't waste any time!
I've got to go." 
He shot away without telling me where the tank room was. It was 
easy to find, but I wasn't prepared for so many tanks. There were se ven;
each with a puzzling code stenciled on it. It's just like Kimb ro not to tell me,
I thought. You can't trust any of them. Well, it doesn't matter, I'll pick the 
tank from the contents of the drip cans hanging from the spigots.
But while the first five tanks contained clear liquids that sm elled like 
turpentine, the last two both contained something black like the dope, but 
with different codes. So I had to make a choice. Selecting the t ank with the 
drip can that smelled most like the dope, I filled the graduate, congratulating 
myself for not having to waste time until Kimbro returned.
The work went faster now, the mixing easier. The pigment and hea vy 
oils came free of the bottom much quicker, and when Kimbro returned I was 
going at top speed. "How many have you finished?" he asked.
"About seventy-five, I think, sir. I lost count." 
"That's pretty good, but not fast enough. They've been puttin g 
pressure on me to get the stuff out. Here, I'll give you a hand." 
They must have given him hell, I thought, as he got grunting to h is 
knees and began removing covers from the buckets. But he had hardl y started 
when he was called away.
When he left I took a look at the last bunch of samples and got a 
shock: Instead of the smooth, hard surface of the first, they were covered 
with a sticky goo through which I could see the grain of the wood. What on 
earth had happened? The paint was not as white and glossy as bef ore; it had 
a gray tinge. I stirred it vigorously, then grabbed a rag, wiping eac h of the 
boards clean, then made a new sample of each bucket. I grew panic ky lest 
Kimbro return before I finished. Working feverishly, I made it, but since the 
paint required a few minutes to dry I picked up two finished buck ets and 
started lugging them over to the loading platform. I dropped the m with a 
thump as the voice rang out behind me. It was Kimbro.
"What the hell!" he yelled, smearing his finger over one of the
samples. "This stuff's still wet!" 
I didn't know what to say. He snatched up several of the later 
samples, smearing them, and letting out a groan. "Of all the thi ngs to happen 
to me. First they take all my good men and then they send me you. W hat'd 
you do to it?" 
"Nothing, sir. I followed your directions," I said defensivel y.
I watched him peer into the graduate, lifting the dropper and sn iffing 
it, his face glowing with exasperation.
"Who the hell gave you this?" 
"No one . . ." 
"Then where'd you get it?" 
"From the tank room." 
Suddenly he dashed for the tank room, sloshing the liquid as he ran.
I thought, Oh, hell, and before I could follow, he burst out of th e door in a 
frenzy.
"You took the wrong tank," he shouted. "What the hell, you tryi ng to 
sabotage the company? That stuff wouldn't work in a million ye ars. It's 
remover, concentrated remover! Don't you know the difference?" 
"No, sir, I don't. It looked the same to me. I didn't know what I w as 
using and you didn't tell me. I was trying to save time and took what I 
thought was right." 
"But why this one?" 
"Because it smelled the same --" I began.
"Smelted!" he roared. "Goddamit, don't you know you can't smel l shit 
around all those fumes? Come on to my office!" 
I was torn between protesting and pleading for fairness. It was n ot 
all my fault and I didn't want the blame, but I did wish to finis h out the 
day. Throbbing with anger I followed, listening as he called p ersonnel.
"Hello? Mac? Mac, this is Kimbro. It's about this fellow you se nt me 
this morning. I'm sending him in to pick up his pay . . . What did h e do? 
He doesn't satisfy me, that's what. I don't like his work . . . So the old man 
has to have a report, so what? Make him one. Tell him goddamit thi s fellow 
ruined a batch of government stuff -- Hey! No, don't tell him tha t . . .
Listen, Mac, you got anyone else out there? . . . Okay, forget it. " 
He crashed down the phone and swung toward me. "I swear I don't 
know why they hire you fellows. You just don't belong in a paint plant. Come 
on." 
Bewildered, I followed him into the tank room, yearning to quit a nd 
tell him to go to hell. But I needed the money, and even though t his was the 
North I wasn't ready to fight unless I had to. Here I'd be one again st how 
many? 
I watched him empty the graduate back into the tank and noted 
carefully when he went to another marked SKA-3-69-T-Y and refil led it. Next 
time I would know.
"Now, for God's sake," he said, handing me the graduate, "be ca reful
and try to do the job right. And if you don't know what to do, ask 
somebody. I'll be in my office." 
I returned to the buckets, my emotions whirling. Kimbro had 
forgotten to say what was to be done with the spoiled paint. See ing it there I 
was suddenly seized by an angry impulse, and, filling the drop per with fresh 
dope, I stirred ten drops into each bucket and pressed home the cov ers. Let 
the government worry about that, I thought, and started to work on the 
unopened buckets. I stirred until my arm ached and painted the sa mples as 
smoothly as I could, becoming more skillful as I went along.
When Kimbro came down the floor and watched I glanced up silent ly 
and continued stirring.
"How is it?" he said, frowning.
"I don't know," I said, picking up a sample and hesitating.
"Well?" 
"It's nothing . . . a speck of dirt," I said, standing and holdin g out 
the sample, a tightness growing within me.
Holding it close to his face, he ran his fingers over the surface a nd 
squinted at the texture. "That's more like it," he said. "That' s the way it 
oughta be." 
I watched with a sense of unbelief as he rubbed his thumb over th e 
sample, handed it back and left without a further word.
I looked at the painted slab. It appeared the same: a gray tinge 
glowed through the whiteness, and Kimbro had failed to detect i t. I stared for 
about a minute, wondering if I were seeing things, inspected an other and 
another. All were the same, a brilliant white diffused with gray, I closed my 
eyes for a moment and looked again and still no change. Well, I thought, as 
long as he's satisfied . . .
But I had a feeling that something had gone wrong, something fa r 
more important than the paint; that either I had played a trick on Kimbro or 
he, like the trustees and Bledsoe, was playing one on me . . .
When the truck backed up to the platform I was pressing the cover 
on the last bucket -- and there stood Kimbro above me.
"Let's see your samples," he said.
I reached, trying to select the whitest, as the blue-shirted tru ckmen 
climbed through the loading door.
"How about it, Kimbro," one of them said, "can we get started?" 
"Just a minute, now," he said, studying the sample, "just a mi nute . .
." 
I watched him nervously, waiting for him to throw a fit over the gray 
tinge and hating myself for feeling nervous and afraid. What w ould I say? 
But now he was turning to the truckmen.
"All right, boys, get the hell out of here.
"And you," he said to me, "go see MacDuffy; you're through." 
I stood there, staring at the back of his head, at the pink neck 
beneath the cloth cap and the iron-gray hair. So he'd let me stay o nly to 
finish the mixing. I turned away, there was nothing that I could do. I cursed 
him all the way to the personnel office. Should I write the owners about 
what had happened? Perhaps they didn't know that Kimbro was hav ing so 
much to do with the quality of the paint. But upon reaching the o ffice I 
changed my mind. Perhaps that is how things are done here, I thoug ht,
perhaps the real quality of the paint is always determined by the man who 
ships it rather than by those who mix it. To hell with the whole t hing . . .
I'll find another job.
But I wasn't fired. MacDuffy sent me to the basement of Buildin g 
No. 2 on a new assignment.
"When you get down there just tell Brockway that Mr. Sparland 
insists that he have an assistant. You do whatever he tells yo u." 
"What is that name again, sir?" I said.
"Lucius Brockway," he said. "He's in charge." 
IT WAS a deep basement. Three levels underground I pushed upon a 
heavy metal door marked "Danger" and descended into a noisy, di mly lit 
room. There was something familiar about the fumes that filled the air and I 
had just thought pine, when a high-pitched Negro voice rang out above the 
machine sounds.
"Who you looking for down here?" 
"I'm looking for the man in charge," I called, straining to loca te the 
voice.
"You talkin' to him. What you want?" 
The man who moved out of the shadow and looked at me sullenly 
was small, wiry and very natty in his dirty overalls. And as I app roached him 
I saw his drawn face and the cottony white hair showing beneath his tight,
striped engineer's cap. His manner puzzled me. I couldn't tell whether he felt 
guilty about something himself, or thought I had committed s ome crime. I 
came closer, staring. He was barely five feet tall, his overalls l ooking now as 
though he had been dipped in pitch.
"All right," he said. "I'm a busy man. What you want?" 
"I'm looking for Lucius," I said.
He frowned. "That's me -- and don't come calling me by my first 
name. To you and all like you I'm Mister Brockway . . ." 
"You . . . ?" I began.
"Yeah, me! Who sent you down here anyway?" 
"The personnel office," I said. "I was told to tell you that Mr.
Sparland said for you to be given an assistant." 
"Assistant!" he said. "I don't need no damn assistant! Old Ma n 
Sparland must think I'm getting old as him. Here I been running th ings by 
myself all these years and now they keep trying to send me some a ssistant.
You get on back up there and tell 'em that when I want an assistan t I'll ask 
for one!" 
I was so disgusted to find such a man in charge that I turned 
without a word and started back up the stairs. First Kimbro, I thoug ht, and 
now this old . . .
"Hey! wait a minute!" 
I turned, seeing him beckon.
"Come on back here a minute," he called, his voice cutting sharp ly 
through the roar of the furnaces.
I went back, seeing him remove a white cloth from his hip pocket 
and wipe the glass face of a pressure gauge, then bend close to sq uint at the 
position of the needle.
"Here," he said, straightening and handing me the cloth, "you c an 
stay 'til I can get in touch with the Old Man. These here have to b e kept 
clean so's I can see how much pressure I'm getting." 
I took the cloth without a word and began rubbing the glasses. He
watched me critically.
"What's your name?" he said.
I told him, shouting it in the roar of the furnaces.
"Wait a minute," he called, going over and turning a valve in an
intricate network of pipes. I heard the noise rise to a higher, almo st 
hysterical pitch, somehow making it possible to hear without yelling, our 
voices moving blurrily underneath.
Returning, he looked at me sharply, his withered face an animate d 
black walnut with shrewd, reddish eyes.
"This here's the first time they ever sent me anybody like you," he 
said as though puzzled. "That's how come I called you back. Us ually they 
sends down some young white fellow who thinks he's going to wa tch me a 
few days and ask me a heap of questions and then take over. Some f olks is 
too damn simple to even talk about," he said, grimacing and wav ing his hand 
in a violent gesture of dismissal. "You an engineer?" he said, l ooking quickly 
at me.
"An engineer?" 
"Yeah, that's what I asked you," he said challengingly.
"Why, no, sir, I'm no engineer." 
"You sho?" 
"Of course I'm sure. Why shouldn't I be?" 
He seemed to relax. "That's all right then. I have to watch them 
personnel fellows. One of them thinks he's going to git me out o f here, when 
he ought to know by now he's wasting his time. Lucius Brockway n ot only 
intends to protect hisself, he knows how to do it! Everybody kn ows I been 
here ever since there's been a here -- even helped dig the first fou ndation.
The Old Man hired me, nobody else; and, by God, it'll take the Ol d Man to 
fire me!" 
I rubbed away at the gauges, wondering what had brought on this 
outburst, and was somewhat relieved that he seemed to hold noth ing against 
me personally.
"Where you go to school?" he said.
I told him.
"Is that so? What you learning down there?" 
"Just general subjects, a regular college course," I said.
"Mechanics?" 
"Oh no, nothing like that, just a liberal arts course. No trades."
"Is that so?" he said doubtfully. Then suddenly, "How much pre ssure 
I got on that gauge right there?" 
"Which?" 
"You see it," he pointed. "That one right there!" 
I looked, calling off, "Forty-three and two-tenths pounds." 
"Uh huh, uh huh, that's right." He squinted at the gauge and bac k at 
me. "Where you learn to read a gauge so good?" 
"In my high-school physics class. It's like reading a clock."
"They teach you that in high school?" 
"That's right." 
"Well, that's going to be one of your jobs. These here gauges ha ve to 
be checked every fifteen minutes. You ought to be able to do th at." 
"I think I can," I said.
"Some kin, some caint. By the way, who hired you?" 
"Mr. MacDuffy," I said, wondering why all the questions.
"Yeah, then where you been all morning?" 
"I was working over in Building No. 1." 
"That there's a heap of building. Where 'bouts?" 
"For Mr. Kimbro." 
"I see, I see. I knowed they oughtn't to be hiring anybody this l ate 
in the day. What Kimbro have you doing?" 
"Putting dope in some paint that went bad," I said wearily, ann oyed 
with all the questions.
His lips shot out belligerently. "What paint went bad?" 
"I think it was some for the government . . ." 
He cocked his head. "I wonder how come nobody said nothing to m e 
about it," he said thoughtfully. "Was it in buckets or them li ttle biddy cans?" 
"Buckets." 
"Oh, that ain't so bad, them little ones is a heap of work." He ga ve 
me a high dry laugh. "How you hear about this job?" he snapped s uddenly,
as though trying to catch me off guard.
"Look," I said slowly, "a man I know told me about the job;
MacDuffy hired me; I worked this morning for Mr. Kimbro; and I was se nt 
to you by Mr. MacDuffy." 
His face tightened. "You friends to one of those colored fellow s?" 
"Who?" 
"Up in the lab?" 
"No," I said. "Anything else you want to know?" 
He gave me a long, suspicious look and spat upon a hot pipe,
causing it to steam furiously. I watched him remove a heavy engi neer's watch 
from his breast pocket and squint at the dial importantly, then t urn to check 
it with an electric clock that glowed from the wall. "You keep on wiping them 
gauges," he said. "I got to look at my soup. And look here." He po inted to 
one of the gauges. "I wants you to keep a 'specially sharp eye on this here 
sonofabitch. The last couple of days he's 'veloped a habit of building up too 
fast. Causes me a heap of trouble. You see him gitting past 75, y ou yell, and 
yell loud!" 
He went back into the shadows and I saw a shaft of brightness mark
the opening of a door.
Running the rag over a gauge I wondered how an apparently 
uneducated old man could gain such a responsible job. He certai nly didn't 
sound like an engineer; yet he alone was on duty. And you could n ever be 
sure, for at home an old man employed as a janitor at the Water Wo rks was 
the only one who knew the location of all of the water mains. He had been 
employed at the beginning, before any records were kept, and actu ally 
functioned as an engineer though he drew a janitor's pay. Perhap s this old 
Brockway was protecting himself from something. After all, the re was 
antagonism to our being employed. Maybe he was dissimulatin g, like some of
the teachers at the college, who, to avoid trouble when driving t hrough the 
small surrounding towns, wore chauffeur caps and pretended that their cars 
belonged to white men. But why was he pretending with me? And wh at was 
his job? 
I looked around me. It was not just an engine room; I knew, for I 
had been in several, the last at college. It was something more. For one 
thing, the furnaces were made differently and the flames that fl ared through 
the cracks of the fire chambers were too intense and too blue. And t here 
were the odors. No, he was making something down here, something that had 
to do with paint, and probably something too filthy and dangero us for white 
men to be willing to do even for money. It was not paint because I had been 
told that the paint was made on the floors above, where, passing through, I 
had seen men in splattered aprons working over large vats filled w ith whirling 
pigment. One thing was certain: I had to be careful with this craz y Brockway;
he didn't like my being here . . . And there he was, entering the room now 
from the stairs.
"How's it going?" he asked.
"All right," I said. "Only it seems to have gotten louder." 
"Oh, it gets pretty loud down here, all right; this here's the uproa r 
department and I'm in charge . . . Did she go over the mark?" 
"No, it's holding steady," I said.
"That's good. I been having plenty trouble with it lately. Hav eta bust 
it down and give it a good going over soon as I can get the tank cl ear." 
Perhaps he is the engineer, I thought, watching him inspect the
gauges and go to another part of the room to adjust a series of valv es. Then 
he went and said a few words into a wall phone and called me, poin ting to 
the valves.
"I'm fixing to shoot it to 'em upstairs," he said gravely. "When I give 
you the signal I want you to turn 'em wide open. 'N when I give you the 
second signal I want you to close 'em up again. Start with this h ere red one 
and work right straight across . . ." 
I took my position and waited, as he took a stand near the gauge .
"Let her go," he called. I opened the valves, hearing the sound of
liquids rushing through the huge pipes. At the sound of a buzzer I looked up 
. . .
"Start closing," he yelled. "What you looking at? Close them v alves!
"What's wrong with you?" he asked when the last valve was close d.
"I expected you to call." 
"I said I'd signal you. Caint you tell the difference between a signal
and a call? Hell, I buzzed you. You don't want to do that no more. When I 
buzz you I want you to do something and do it quick!" 
"You're the boss," I said sarcastically.
"You mighty right, I'm the boss, and don't forgit it. Now come on
back here, we got work to do." 
We came to a strange-looking machine consisting of a huge set o f
gears connecting a series of drum-like rollers. Brockway took a sho vel and 
scooped up a load of brown crystals from a pile on the floor, pitch ing them 
skillfully into a receptacle on top of the machine.
"Grab a scoop and let's git going," he ordered briskly. "You ever d one 
this before?" he asked as I scooped into the pile.
"It's been a long time," I said. "What is this material?" 
He stopped shoveling and gave me a long, black stare, then return ed 
to the pile, his scoop ringing on the floor. You'll have to rememb er not to 
ask this suspicious old bastard any questions, I thought, sco oping into the 
brown pile.
Soon I was perspiring freely. My hands were sore and I began to 
tire. Brockway watched me out of the corner of his eye, snickering noiselessly.
"You don't want to overwork yourself, young feller," he said bla ndly.
"I'll get used to it," I said, scooping up a heavy load.
"Oh, sho, sho," he said. "Sho. But you better take a rest when yo u 
git tired." 
I didn't stop. I piled on the material until he said, "That there 's the 
scoop we been trying to find. That's what we want. You better s tand back a 
little, 'cause I'm fixing to start her up." 
I backed away, watching him go over and push a switch. Shudderi ng 
into motion, the machine gave a sudden scream like a circular sa w, and sent 
a tattoo of sharp crystals against my face. I moved clumsily aw ay, seeing 
Brockway grin like a dried prune. Then with the dying hum of the furi ously 
whirling drums, I heard the grains sifting lazily in the sudden st illness, sliding 
sand-like down the chute into the pot underneath.
I watched him go over and open a valve. A sharp new smell of oil
arose.
"Now she's all set to cook down; all we got to do is put the fire to
her," he said, pressing a button on something that looked like t he burner of
an oil furnace. There was an angry hum, followed by a slight expl osion that 
caused something to rattle, and I could hear a low roaring begin.
"Know what that's going to be when it's cooked?" 
"No, sir," I said. .
"Well that's going to be the guts, what they call the vee-hicl e of the 
paint. Least it will be by time I git through putting other stuf f with it." 
"But I thought the paint was made upstairs . . ." 
"Naw, they just mixes in the color, make it look pretty. Right do wn 
here is where the real paint is made. Without what I do they couldn 't do 
nothing, they be making bricks without straw. An' not only do I m ake up the 
base, I fixes the varnishes and lots of the oils too . . ." 
"So that's it," I said. "I was wondering what you did down here."
"A whole lots of folks wonders about that without gitting anyw here.
But as I was saying, caint a single doggone drop of paint move ou t of the 
factory lessen it comes through Lucius Brockway's hands." 
"How long have you been doing this?" 
"Long enough to know what I'm doing," he said. "And I learned it
without all that education that them what's been sent down he re is suppose 
to have. I learned it by doing it. Them personnel fellows don't w ant to face 
the facts, but Liberty Paints wouldn't be worth a plugged nicke l if they didn't 
have me here to see that it got a good strong base. Old Man Sparland know 
it though. I caint stop laughing over the time when I was down w ith a touch 
of pneumonia and they put one of them so-called engineers to po oling around 
down here. Why, they started to having so much paint go bad they d idn't 
know what to do. Paint was bleeding and wrinkling, wouldn't co ver or 
nothing -- you know, a man could make hisself all kinds of mone y if he 
found out what makes paint bleed. Anyway, everything was goi ng bad. Then 
word got to me that they done put that fellow in my place and when I got 
well I wouldn't come back. Here I been with 'em so long and loyal and 
everything. Shucks, I just sent 'em word that Lucius Brockway w as retiring!
"Next thing you know here come the Old Man. He so old hisself his
chauffeur has to help him up them steep stairs at my place. Come in 
a-puffing and a-blowing, says, 'Lucius, what's this I hear ' bout you retiring?'
" 'Well, sir, Mr. Sparland, sir,' I says, 'I been pretty sick, as you well
know, and I'm gitting kinder along in my years, as you well know , and I 
hear that this here Italian fellow you got in my place is doing s o good I 
thought I'd might as well take it easy round the house.'
"Why, you'd a-thought I'd done cursed him or something. 'What kind 
of talk is that from you, Lucius Brockway,' he said, 'taking it e asy round the 
house when we need you out to the plant? Don't you know the quic kest way 
to die is to retire? Why, that fellow out at the plant don't know a thing 
about those furnaces. I'm so worried about what he's going to do, that he's 
liable to blow up the plant or something that I took out some ex tra 
insurance. He can't do your job,' he said. 'He don't have the to uch. We 
haven't put out a first-class batch of paint since you been gon e.' Now that 
was the Old Man hisself!" Lucius Brockway said.
"So what happened?" I said.
"What you mean, what happened?" he said, looking as though it were 
the most unreasonable question in the world. "Shucks, a few day s later the 
Old Man had me back down here in full control. That engineer got s o mad 
when he found out he had to take orders from me he quit the next day. " 
He spat on the floor and laughed. "Heh, heh, heh, he was a fool,
that's what. A fool! He wanted to boss me and I know more about th is 
basement than anybody, boilers and everything. I helped lay t he pipes and 
everything, and what I mean is I knows the location of each and every pipe 
and switch and cable and wire and everything else -- both in the floors and 
in the walls and out in the yard. Yes, sir! And what's more, I got it in my 
head so good I can trace it out on paper down to the last nut and bo lt; and 
ain't never been to nobody's engineering school neither, ain' t even passed by 
one, as far as I know. Now what you think about that?" 
"I think it's remarkable," I said, thinking, I don't like this o ld man.
"Oh, I wouldn't call it that," he said. "It's just that I been ro und here 
so long. I been studying this machinery for over twenty-five years. Sho, and 
that fellow thinking 'cause he been to some school and learned how to read a 
blueprint and how to fire a boiler he knows more 'bout this plant t han 
Lucius Brockway. That fool couldn't make no engineer 'cause h e can't see 
what's staring him straight in the face . . . Say, you forgittin' t o watch them 
gauges." 
I hurried over, finding all the needles steady.
"They're okay," I called.
"All right, but I'm warning you to keep an eye on 'em. You caint 
forgit down here, 'cause if you do, you liable to blow up somethi ng. They got 
all this machinery, but that ain't everything; we are the mach ines inside the 
machine.
"You know the best selling paint we got, the one that made this here 
business?" he asked as I helped him fill a vat with a smelly sub stance.
"No, I don't." 
"Our white, Optic White." 
"Why the white rather than the others?" 
" 'Cause we started stressing it from the first. We make the best 
white paint in the world, I don't give a damn what nobody says. O ur white is 
so white you can paint a chunka coal and you'd have to crack it op en with a 
sledge hammer to prove it wasn't white clear through!" 
His eyes glinted with humorless conviction and I had to drop my 
head to hide my grin.
"You notice that sign on top of the building?" 
"Oh, you can't miss that," I said.
"You read the slogan?" 
"I don't remember, I was in such a hurry." 
"Well, you might not believe it, but I helped the Old Man make u p 
that slogan. 'If It's Optic White, It's the Right White,' " he quoted with an 
upraised finger, like a preacher quoting holy writ. "I got me a 
three-hundred-dollar bonus for helping to think that up. Thes e newfangled 
advertising folks is been tryin' to work up something about the other colors,
talking about rainbows or something, but hell, they caint get nowhere." 
" 'If It's Optic White, It's the Right White,'" I repeated and s uddenly 
had to repress a laugh as a childhood jingle rang through my mind:
" 'If you're white, you're right,' " I said.
"That's it," he said. "And that's another reason why the Old Ma n 
ain't goin' to let nobody come down here messing with me. He kno ws what a 
lot of them new fellers don't; he knows that the reason our paint is so good 
is because of the way Lucius Brockway puts the pressure on them oi ls and 
resins before they even leaves the tanks." He laughed maliciou sly. "They 
thinks 'cause everything down here is done by machinery, that 's all there is to 
it. They crazy! Ain't a continental thing that happens down he re that ain't as 
iffen I done put my black hands into it! Them machines just do t he cooking,
these here hands right here do the sweeting. Yes, sir! Lucius Brock way hit it 
square on the head! I dips my fingers in and sweets it! Come on, le t's eat . .
." 
"But what about the gauges?" I said, seeing him go over and tak e a 
thermos bottle from a shelf near one of the furnaces.
"Oh, we'll be here close enough to keep an eye on 'em. Don't you 
worry 'bout that." 
"But I left my lunch in the locker room over at Building No. 1." 
"Go on and git it and come back here and eat. Down here we have 
to always be on the job. A man don't need no more'n fifteen minut es to eat 
no-how; then I say let him git on back on the job." 
UpON opening the door I thought I had made a mistake. Men 
dressed in splattered painters' caps and overalls sat about on be nches,
listening to a thin tubercular-looking man who was addressing t hem in a 
nasal voice. Everyone looked at me and I was starting out when t he thin man 
called, "There's plenty of seats for late comers. Come in, broth er . . ." 
Brother? Even after my weeks in the North this was surprising. "I 
was looking for the locker room," I spluttered.
"You're in it, brother. Weren't you told about the meeting?" 
"Meeting? Why, no, sir, I wasn't." 
The chairman frowned. "You see, the bosses are not co-operating, " he 
said to the others. "Brother, who's your foreman?" 
"Mr. Brockway, sir," I said.
Suddenly the men began scraping their feet and cursing. I looke d 
about me. What was wrong? Were they objecting to my referring to Broc kway 
as Mister? 
"Quiet, brothers," the chairman said, leaning across his table, his 
hand cupped to his ear. "Now what was that, brother; who is your fo reman?" 
"Lucius Brockway, sir," I said, dropping the Mister.
But this seemed only to make them more hostile. "Get him the hel l
out of here," they shouted. I turned. A group on the far side of the room 
kicked over a bench, yelling, "Throw him out! Throw him out!" 
I inched backwards, hearing the little man bang on the table for
order. "Men, brothers! Give the brother a chance . . ." 
"He looks like a dirty fink to me. A first-class enameled fink!"
The hoarsely voiced word grated my ears like "nigger" in an angry 
southern mouth . . .
"Brothers, please!" The chairman was waving his hands as I reache d 
out behind me for the door and touched an arm, feeling it snatch violently 
away. I dropped my hand.
"Who sent this fink into the meeting, brother chairman? Ask him
that!" a man demanded.
"No, wait," the chairman said. "Don't ride that word too hard . . ."
"Ask him, brother chairman!" another man said.
"Okay, but don't label a man a fink until you know for sure." The
chairman turned to me. "How'd you happen in here, brother?" 
The men quieted, listening.
"I left my lunch in my locker," I said, my mouth dry.
"You weren't sent into the meeting?" 
"No, sir, I didn't know about any meeting." 
"The hell he says. None of these finks ever knows!" 
"Throw the lousy bastard out!" 
"Now, wait," I said.
They became louder, threatening.
"Respect the chair!" the chairman shouted. "We're a democratic u nion 
here, following democratic --" 
"Never mind, git rid of the fink!" 
". . . procedures. It's our task to make friends with all the workers .
And I mean all. That's how we build the union strong. Now let's h ear what 
the brother's got to say. No more of that beefing and interrupting! " 
I broke into a cold sweat, my eyes seeming to have become 
extremely sharp, causing each face to stand out vivid in its hos tility.
I heard, "When were you hired, friend?" 
"This morning," I said.
"See, brothers, he's a new man. We don't want to make the mistake
of judging the worker by his foreman. Some of you also work for 
sonsabitches, remember?" 
Suddenly the men began to laugh and curse. "Here's one right here, " 
one of them yelled.
"Mine wants to marry the boss's daughter -- a frigging eight-da y 
wonder!" 
This sudden change made me puzzled and angry, as though they 
were making me the butt of a joke.
"Order, brothers! Perhaps the brother would like to join the union.
How about it, brother?" 
"Sir . . . ?" I didn't know what to say. I knew very little about 
unions -- but most of these men seemed hostile . . . And before I c ould 
answer a fat man with shaggy gray hair leaped to his feet, shout ing angrily,
"I'm against it! Brothers, this fellow could be a fink, even if h e was 
hired right this minute! Not that I aim to be unfair to anybody, e ither.
Maybe he ain't a fink," he cried passionately, "but brothers, I w ant to remind 
you that nobody knows it; and it seems to me that anybody that w ould work 
under that sonofabitching, double-crossing Brockway for more than fifteen 
minutes is just as apt as not to be naturally fink-minded! Plea se, brothers!" 
he cried, waving his arms for quiet. "As some of you brothers have l earned,
to the sorrow of your wives and babies, a fink don't have to know a bout 
trade unionism to be a fink! Finkism? Hell, I've made a study of finkism!
Finkism is born into some guys. It's born into some guys, just li ke a good 
eye for color is born into other guys. That's right, that's the h onest, scientific 
truth! A fink don't even have to have heard of a union before," he c ried in a 
frenzy of words. "All you have to do is bring him around the neighbo rhood 
of a union and next thing you know, why, zip! he's finking his f inking ass 
off!" 
He was drowned out by shouts of approval. Men turned violently to
look at me. I felt choked. I wanted to drop my head but faced them as 
though facing them was itself a denial of his statements. Ano ther voice ripped 
out of the shouts of approval, spilling with great urgency from th e lips of a 
little fellow with glasses who spoke with the index finger of one hand 
upraised and the thumb of the other crooked in the suspender of h is overalls:
"I want to put this brother's remarks in the form of a motion: I 
move that we determine through a thorough investigation whethe r the new 
worker is a fink or no; and if he is a fink, let us discover who he' s finking 
for! And this, brother members, would give the worker time, if he a in't a 
fink, to become acquainted with the work of the union and its ai ms. After all,
brothers, we don't want to forget that workers like him aren't so hig hly 
developed as some of us who've been in the labor movement for a long time.
So I says, let's give him time to see what we've done to improve t he 
condition of the workers, and then, if he ain't a fink, we can dec ide in a 
democratic way whether we want to accept this brother into the u nion.
Brother union members, I thank you!" He sat down with a bump.
The room roared. Biting anger grew inside me. So I was not so 
highly developed as they! What did he mean? Were they all Ph.D. 's? I 
couldn't move; too much was happening to me. It was as though b y entering 
the room I had automatically applied for membership -- even tho ugh I had 
no idea that a union existed, and had come up simply to get a col d pork 
chop sandwich. I stood trembling, afraid that they would ask me to join but 
angry that so many rejected me on sight. And worst of all, I knew t hey were 
forcing me to accept things on their own terms, and I was unable t o leave.
"All right, brothers. We'll take a vote," the chairman shouted. " All in 
favor of the motion, signify by saying 'Aye' . . ." 
The ayes drowned him out.
"The ayes carried it," the chairman announced as several men turne d 
to stare at me. At last I could move. I started out, forgetting why I had 
come.
"Come in, brother," the chairman called. "You can get your lunch
now. Let him through, you brothers around the door!" 
My face stung as though it had been slapped. They had made thei r 
decision without giving me a chance to speak for myself. I fel t that every 
man present looked upon me with hostility; and though I had liv ed with 
hostility all my life, now for the first time it seemed to reach m e, as though 
I had expected more of these men than of others -- even though I ha d not 
known of their existence. Here in this room my defenses were nega ted,
stripped away, checked at the door as the weapons, the knives a nd razors and 
owlhead pistols of the country boys were checked on Saturday ni ght at the 
Golden Day. I kept my eyes lowered, mumbling "Pardon me, pardon m e," all
the way to the drab green locker, where I removed the sandwich, for w hich I 
no longer had an appetite, and stood fumbling with the bag, dre ading to face 
the men on my way out. Then still hating myself for the apologi es made 
coming over, I brushed past silently as I went back.
When I reached the door the chairman called, "Just a minute,
brother, we want you to understand that this is nothing against y ou 
personally. What you see here is the results of certain condition s here at the 
plant. We want you to know that we are only trying to protect ourse lves.
Some day we hope to have you as a member in good standing." 
From here and there came a half-hearted applause that quickly die d.
I swallowed and stared unseeing, the words spurting to me from a red , misty 
distance.
"Okay, brothers," the voice said, "let him pass." 
I STUMBLED through the bright sunlight of the yard, past the offi ce 
workers chatting on the grass, back to Building No. 2, to the base ment. I 
stood on the stairs, feeling as though my bowels had been flood ed with acid.
Why hadn't I simply left, I thought with anguish. And since I h ad 
remained, why hadn't I said something, defended myself? Sudd enly I snatched 
the wrapper off a sandwich and tore it violently with my teeth, h ardly tasting 
the dry lumps that squeezed past my constricted throat when I sw allowed.
Dropping the remainder back into the bag, I held onto the handrai l, my legs 
shaking as though I had just escaped a great danger. Finally, it went away 
and I pushed open the metal door.
"What kept you so long?" Brockway snapped from where he sat on a 
wheelbarrow. He had been drinking from a white mug now cupped in hi s 
grimy hands.
I looked at him abstractedly, seeing how the light caught on hi s 
wrinkled forehead, his snowy hair. "I said, what kept you so long !" What had 
he to do with it, I thought, looking at him through a kind of mist , knowing 
that I disliked him and that I was very tired.
"I say . . ." he began, and I heard my voice come quiet from my 
tensed throat as I noticed by the clock that I had been gone only twenty 
minutes. "I ran into a union meeting --" 
"Union!" I heard his white cup shatter against the floor as he 
uncrossed his legs, rising. "I knowed you belonged to that bunc h of
troublemaking foreigners! I knowed it! Git out!" he screamed. "G it out of my 
basement!" 
He started toward me as in a dream, trembling like the needle of
one of the gauges as he pointed toward the stairs, his voice shrie king. I 
stared; something seemed to have gone wrong, my reflexes were jam med.
"But what's the matter?" I stammered, my voice low and my mind 
understanding and yet failing exactly to understand. "What's wrong?" 
"You heard me. Git out!" 
"But I don't understand . . ." 
"Shut up and git!" 
"But, Mr. Brockway," I cried, fighting to hold something that wa s 
giving way.
"You two-bit, trouble-making union louse!" 
"Look, man," I cried, urgently now, "I don't belong to any union ." 
"If you don't git outta here, you low-down skunk," he said, loo king 
wildly about the floor, "I'm liable to kill you. The Lord being m y witness,
I'LL KILL YOU!" 
It was incredible, things were speeding up. "You'll do what?" I
stammered.
"I'LL KILL YOU, THAT'S WHAT!" 
He had said it again and something fell away from me, and I 
seemed to be telling myself in a rush: You were trained to accept t he 
foolishness of such old men as this, even when you thought the m clowns and 
fools; you were trained to pretend that you respected them and ack nowledged 
in them the same quality of authority and power in your world as t he whites 
before whom they bowed and scraped and feared and loved and imita ted, and 
you were even trained to accept it when, angered or spiteful, or d runk with 
power, they came at you with a stick or strap or cane and you made n o 
effort to strike back, but only to escape unmarked. But this was t oo much . .
. he was not grandfather or uncle or father, nor preacher or teach er.
Something uncoiled in my stomach and I was moving toward him, s houting,
more at a black blur that irritated my eyes than at a clearly denned human 
face, "YOU'LL KILL WHO?" 
"YOU, THAT'S WHO!" 
"Listen here, you old fool, don't talk about killing me! Give m e a 
chance to explain. I don't belong to anything -- Go on, pick it up! Go on!" I 
yelled, seeing his eyes fasten upon a twisted iron bar. "You're o ld enough to 
be my grandfather, but if you touch that bar, I swear I'll make you eat it!" 
"I done tole you, GIT OUTTA MY BASEMENT! You impudent 
son'bitch," he screamed.
I moved forward, seeing him stoop and reach aside for the bar; and
I was throwing myself forward, feeling him go over with a grunt, h ard against 
the floor, rolling beneath the force of my lunge. It was as though I had 
landed upon a wiry rat. He scrambled beneath me, making angry so unds and 
striking my face as he tried to use the bar. I twisted it from his gras p,
feeling a sharp pain stab through my shoulder. He's using a knife flashed 
through my mind and I slashed out with my elbow, sharp against hi s face,
feeling it land solid and seeing his head fly backwards and up a nd back again 
as I struck again, hearing something fly free and skitter across t he floor,
thinking, It's gone, the knife is gone . . . and struck again as h e tried to 
choke me, jabbing at his bobbing head, feeling the bar come fre e and 
bringing it down at his head, missing, the metal clinking agai nst the floor,
and bringing it up for a second try and him yelling, "No, no! You the best,
you the best!" 
"I'm going to beat your brains out!" I said, my throat dry, "stab bing 
me . . ." 
"No," he panted. "I got enough. Ain't you heard me say I got 
enough?" 
"So when you can't win you want to stop! Damn you, if you've cut
me bad, I'll tear your head off!" 
Watching him warily, I got to my feet. I dropped the bar, as a flash
of heat swept over me: His face was caved in.
"What's wrong with you, old man?" I yelled nervously. "Don't y ou 
know better than to attack a man a third your age?" 
He blanched at being called old, and I repeated it, adding insu lts I'd 
heard my grandfather use. "Why, you old-fashioned, slavery-t ime,
mammy-made, handkerchief-headed bastard, you should know be tter! What 
made you think you could threaten my life? You meant nothing to me, I 
came down here because I was sent. I didn't know anything about you or the 
union either. Why'd you start riding me the minute I came in? Are yo u 
people crazy? Does this paint go to your head? Are you drinking it ?" 
He glared, panting tiredly. Great tucks showed in his overalls wh ere 
the folds were stuck together by the goo with which he was covere d, and I 
thought, Tar Baby, and wanted to blot him out of my sight. But n ow my 
anger was flowing fast from action to words.
"I go to get my lunch and they ask me who I work for and when I 
tell them, they call me a fink. A fink! You people must be out of your minds.
No sooner do I get back down here than you start yelling that you' re going 
to kill me! What's going on? What have you got against me? What did I do?" 
He glowered at me silently, then pointed to the floor.
"Reach and draw back a nub," I warned.
"Caint a man even git his teeth?" he mumbled, his voice strange .
"TEETH?" 
With a shamed frown, he opened his mouth. I saw a blue flash of
shrunken gums. The thing that had skittered across the floor was not a knife,
but a plate of false teeth. For a fraction of a second I was despe rate, feeling 
some of my justification for wanting to kill him slipping awa y. My fingers 
leaped to my shoulder, finding wet cloth but no blood. The old f ool had 
bitten me. A wild flash of laughter struggled to rise from beneat h my anger.
He had bitten me! I looked on the floor, seeing the smashed mug a nd the 
teeth glinting dully across the room.
"Get them," I said, growing ashamed. Without his teeth, some o f the 
hatefulness seemed to have gone out of him. But I stayed close as he got his 
teeth and went over to the tap and held them beneath a stream of w ater. A 
tooth fell away beneath the pressure of his thumb, and I heard him
grumbling as he placed the plate in his mouth. Then, wiggling h is chin, he 
became himself again.
"You was really trying to kill me," he said. He seemed unable to
believe it.
"You started the killing. I don't go around fighting," I said. " Why 
didn't you let me explain? Is it against the law to belong to th e union?" 
"That damn union," he cried, almost in tears. "That damn union!
They after my job! I know they after my job! For one of us to join one of
them damn unions is like we was to bite the hand of the man who te ached 
us to bathe in a bathtub! I hates it, and I mean to keep on doing a ll I can 
to chase it outta the plant. They after my job, the chickenshi t bastards!" 
Spittle formed at the corners of his mouth; he seemed to boil with
hatred.
"But what have I to do with that?" I said, feeling suddenly the older.
" 'Cause them young colored fellers up in the lab is trying to joi n 
that outfit, that's what! Here the white man done give 'em jobs ," he wheezed 
as though pleading a case. "He done give 'em good jobs too, and they so 
ungrateful they goes and joins up with that backbiting union! I never seen 
such a no-good ungrateful bunch. All they doing is making thin gs bad for the 
rest of us!" 
"Well, I'm sorry," I said, "I didn't know about all that. I came here 
to take a temporary job and I certainly didn't intend to get mixe d up in any 
quarrels. But as for us, I'm ready to forget our disagreement -- if y ou are . .
." I held out my hand, causing my shoulder to pain.
He gave me a gruff look. "You ought to have more self-respect than
to fight an old man," he said. "I got grown boys older than you."
"I thought you were trying to kill me," I said, my hand still
extended. "I thought you had stabbed me." 
"Well, I don't like a lot of bickering and confusion myself," h e said,
avoiding my eyes. And it was as though the closing of his stick y hand over 
mine was a signal. I heard a shrill hissing from the boilers behind me and 
turned, hearing Brockway yell, "I tole you to watch them gauges. Git over to 
the big valves, quick!" 
I dashed for where a series of valve wheels projected from the wall
near the crusher, seeing Brockway scrambling away in the other di rection,
thinking, Where's he going? as I reached the valves, and hearing him yell,
"Turn it! Turn it!" 
"Which?" I yelled, reaching.
"The white one, fool, the white one!" 
I jumped, catching it and pulling down with all my weight, fee ling it 
give. But this only increased the noise and I seemed to hear Broc kway laugh 
as I looked around to see him scrambling for the stairs, his hands clasping 
the back of his head, and his neck pulled in close, like a small boy who has 
thrown a brick into the air.
"Hey you! Hey you!" I yelled. "Hey!" But it was too late. All my
movements seemed too slow, ran together. I felt the wheel resist ing and tried 
vainly to reverse it and tried to let go, and it sticking to my palm s and my 
fingers stiff and sticky, and I turned, running now, seeing the n eedle on one 
of the gauges swinging madly, like a beacon gone out of control , and trying 
to think clearly, my eyes darting here and there through the room of t anks 
and machines and up the stairs so far away and hearing the clear n ew note 
arising while I seemed to run swiftly up an incline and shot forw ard with 
sudden acceleration into a wet blast of black emptiness that w as somehow a 
bath of whiteness.
It was a fall into space that seemed not a fall but a suspension .
Then a great weight landed upon me and I seemed to sprawl in an int erval
of clarity beneath a pile of broken machinery, my head pressed ba ck against 
a huge wheel, my body splattered with a stinking goo. Somewhere an engine 
ground in furious futility, grating loudly until a pain shot arou nd the curve of
my head and bounced me off into blackness for a distance, only to strike 
another pain that lobbed me back. And in that clear instant of consciousness 
I opened my eyes to a blinding flash.
Holding on grimly, I could hear the sound of someone wading,
sloshing, nearby, and an old man's garrulous voice saying, "I t ole 'em these 
here young Nineteen-Hundred boys ain't no good for the job. The y ain't got 
the nerves. Naw, sir, they just ain't got the nerves." 
I tried to speak, to answer, but something heavy moved again, an d I 
was understanding something fully and trying again to answer but seemed to 
sink to the center of a lake of heavy water and pause, transfixe d and numb 
with the sense that I had lost irrevocably an important victory.
Chapter 11 
I was sitting in a cold, white rigid chair and a man was looking a t 
me out of a bright third eye that glowed from the center of his foreh ead. He 
reached out, touching my skull gingerly, and said something en couraging, as 
though I were a child. His fingers went away.
"Take this," he said. "It's good for you." I swallowed. Sudde nly my 
skin itched, all over. I had on new overalls, strange white ones. The taste ran 
bitter through my mouth. My fingers trembled.
A thin voice with a mirror on the end of it said, "How is he?" 
"I don't think it's anything serious. Merely stunned." 
"Should he be sent home now?" 
"No, just to be certain we'll keep him here a few days. Want to kee p 
him under observation. Then he may leave." 
Now I was lying on a cot, the bright eye still burning into mine,
although the man was gone. It was quiet and I was numb. I closed my eyes 
only to be awakened.
"What is your name?" a voice said.
"My head . . ." I said.
"Yes, but your name. Address?" 
"My head -- that burning eye . . ." I said.
"Eye?" 
"Inside," I said.
"Shoot him up for an X-ray," another voice said.
"My head . . ." 
"Careful!" 
Somewhere a machine began to hum and I distrusted the man and 
woman above me.
They were holding me firm and it was fiery and above it all I kept 
hearing the opening motif of Beethoven's Fifth -- three short an d one long 
buzz, repeated again and again in varying volume, and I was stru ggling and 
breaking through, rising up, to find myself lying on my back with two 
pink-faced men laughing down.
"Be quiet now," one of them said firmly. "You'll be all right." I raised 
my eyes, seeing two indefinite young women in white, looking down at me. A 
third, a desert of heat waves away, sat at a panel arrayed with coil s and 
dials. Where was I? From far below me a barber-chair thumping beg an and I 
felt myself rise on the tip of the sound from the floor. A face was n ow level
with mine, looking closely and saying something without mea ning. A whirring 
began that snapped and cracked with static, and suddenly I see med to be 
crushed between the floor and ceiling. Two forces tore savagely at my 
stomach and back. A flash of cold-edged heat enclosed me. I wa s pounded 
between crushing electrical pressures; pumped between live ele ctrodes like an 
accordion between a player's hands. My lungs were compressed lik e a bellows 
and each time my breath returned I yelled, punctuating the rhythm ical action 
of the nodes.
"Hush, goddamit," one of the faces ordered. "We're trying to get you 
started again. Now shut up!" 
The voice throbbed with icy authority and I quieted and tried to 
contain the pain. I discovered now that my head was encircled by a piece of
cold metal like the iron cap worn by the occupant of an electric ch air. I tried 
unsuccessfully to struggle, to cry out. But the people were so re mote, the pain 
so immediate. A faced moved in and out of the circle of lights, p eering for a 
moment, then disappeared. A freckled, red-haired woman with gol d 
nose-glasses appeared; then a man with a circular mirror attache d to his 
forehead -- a doctor. Yes, he was a doctor and the women were nurses ; it 
was coming clear. I was in a hospital. They would care for me. It w as all
geared toward the easing of pain. I felt thankful.
I tried to remember how I'd gotten here, but nothing came. My mind
was blank, as though I had just begun to live. When the next fac e appeared I 
saw the eyes behind the thick glasses blinking as though noti cing me for the 
first time.
"You're all right, boy. You're okay. You just be patient," said t he 
voice, hollow with profound detachment.
I seemed to go away; the lights receded like a tail-light racing down 
a dark country road. I couldn't follow. A sharp pain stabbed my sh oulder. I 
twisted about on my back, fighting something I couldn't see. Then after a 
while my vision cleared.
Now a man sitting with his back to me, manipulating dials on a 
panel. I wanted to call him, but the Fifth Symphony rhythm racke d me, and 
he seemed too serene and too far away. Bright metal bars were betwe en us 
and when I strained my neck around I discovered that I was not lyin g on an 
operating table but in a kind of glass and nickel box, the lid of which was 
propped open. Why was I here? 
"Doctor! Doctor!" I called.
No answer. Perhaps he hadn't heard, I thought, calling again and
feeling the stabbing pulses of the machine again and feeling myself going 
under and fighting against it and coming up to hear voices carr ying on a 
conversation behind my head. The static sounds became a quiet drone. Strains 
of music, a Sunday air, drifted from a distance. With closed eyes , barely 
breathing I warded off the pain. The voices droned harmoniously. Was it a 
radio I heard -- a phonograph? The vox humana of a hidden organ? If s o,
what organ and where? I felt warm. Green hedges, dazzling with red w ild 
roses appeared behind my eyes, stretching with a gentle curving to an infinity 
empty of objects, a limpid blue space. Scenes of a shaded lawn in summer 
drifted past; I saw a uniformed military band arrayed decorously i n concert,
each musician with well-oiled hair, heard a sweet-voiced trump et rendering 
"The Holy City" as from an echoing distance, buoyed by a choir o f muted 
horns; and above, the mocking obbligato of a mocking bird. I fel t giddy. The 
air seemed to grow thick with fine white gnats, filling my eyes , boiling so 
thickly that the dark trumpeter breathed them in and expelled th em through 
the bell of his golden horn, a live white cloud mixing with the t ones upon 
the torpid air.
I came back. The voices still droned above me and I disliked the m.
Why didn't they go away? Smug ones. Oh, doctor, I thought drowsi ly, did you 
ever wade in a brook before breakfast? Ever chew on sugar cane? Yo u know,
doc, the same fall day I first saw the hounds chasing black men i n stripes 
and chains my grandmother sat with me and sang with twinkling e yes:
"Godamighty made a monkey 
Godamighty made a whale 
And Godamighty made a 'gator 
With hickeys all over his tail . . ." 
Or you, nurse, did you know that when you strolled in pink organdy
and picture hat between the rows of cape jasmine, cooing to your beau in a 
drawl as thick as sorghum, we little black boys hidden snug in th e bushes 
called out so loud that you daren't hear:
"Did you ever see Miss Margaret boil water? 
Man, she hisses a wonderful stream,
Seventeen miles and a quarter,
Man, and you can't see her pot for the steam . . ." 
But now the music became a distinct wail of female pain. I open ed 
my eyes. Glass and metal floated above me.
"How are you feeling, boy?" a voice said.
A pair of eyes peered down through lenses as thick as the bottom o f
a Coca-Cola bottle, eyes protruding, luminous and veined, lik e an old biology 
specimen preserved in alcohol.
"I don't have enough room," I said angrily.
"Oh, that's a necessary part of the treatment." 
"But I need more room," I insisted. "I'm cramped." 
"Don't worry about it, boy. You'll get used to it after a while. How is 
your stomach and head?" 
"Stomach?" 
"Yes, and your head?" 
"I don't know," I said, realizing that I could feel nothing bey ond the 
pressure around my head and the tender surface of my body. Yet my se nses 
seemed to focus sharply.
"I don't feel it," I cried, alarmed.
"Aha! You see! My little gadget will solve everything!" he ex ploded.
"I don't know," another voice said. "I think I still prefer surg ery. And 
in this case especially, with this, uh . . . background, I'm not so sure that I 
don't believe in the effectiveness of simple prayer." 
"Nonsense, from now on do your praying to my little machine. I'l l
deliver the cure." 
"I don't know, but I believe it a mistake to assume that soluti ons -- 
cures, that is -- that apply in, uh . . . primitive instances, are, uh . . .
equally effective when more advanced conditions are in questi on. Suppose it 
were a New Englander with a Harvard background?" 
"Now you're arguing politics," the first voice said banteringly .
"Oh, no, but it is a problem." 
I listened with growing uneasiness to the conversation fuzzin g away 
to a whisper. Their simplest words seemed to refer to something e lse, as did 
many of the notions that unfurled through my head. I wasn't sure w hether 
they were talking about me or someone else. Some of it sounded l ike a 
discussion of history . . .
"The machine will produce the results of a prefrontal lobotomy 
without the negative effects of the knife," the voice said. " You see, instead of
severing the prefrontal lobe, a single lobe, that is, we apply pre ssure in the 
proper degrees to the major centers of nerve control -- our concep t is Gestalt 
-- and the result is as complete a change of personality as you'l l find in your 
famous fairy-tale cases of criminals transformed into amiable fellows after all
that bloody business of a brain operation. And what's more," the voice went 
on triumphantly, "the patient is both physically and neurally whole." 
"But what of his psychology?" 
"Absolutely of no importance!" the voice said. "The patient w ill live 
as he has to live, and with absolute integrity. Who could ask mo re? He'll
experience no major conflict of motives, and what is even bett er, society will
suffer no traumata on his account." 
There was a pause. A pen scratched upon paper. Then, "Why not 
castration, doctor?" a voice asked waggishly, causing me to st art, a pain 
tearing through me.
"There goes your love of blood again," the first voice laughed.
"What's that definition of a surgeon, 'A butcher with a bad con science'?" 
They laughed.
"It's not so funny. It would be more scientific to try to define the 
case. It has been developing some three hundred years --" 
"Define? Hell, man, we know all that." 
"Then why don't you try more current?" 
"You suggest it?" 
"I do, why not?" 
"But isn't there a danger . . . ?" the voice trailed off.
I heard them move away; a chair scraped. The machine droned, and 
I knew definitely that they were discussing me and steeled mys elf for the 
shocks, but was blasted nevertheless. The pulse came swift an d staccato,
increasing gradually until I fairly danced between the nodes. M y teeth 
chattered. I closed my eyes and bit my lips to smother my screams . Warm 
blood filled my mouth. Between my lids I saw a circle of hands an d faces,
dazzling with light. Some were scribbling upon charts.
"Look, he's dancing," someone called.
"No, really?" 
An oily face looked in. "They really do have rhythm, don't they? Get 
hot, boy! Get hot!" it said with a laugh.
And suddenly my bewilderment suspended and I wanted to be angr y,
murderously angry. But somehow the pulse of current smashing thro ugh my 
body prevented me. Something had been disconnected. For thou gh I had 
seldom used my capacities for anger and indignation, I had no doubt that I 
possessed them; and, like a man who knows that he must fight, w hether 
angry or not, when called a son of a bitch, I tried to imagine mys elf angry -- 
only to discover a deeper sense of remoteness. I was beyond ang er. I was 
only bewildered. And those above seemed to sense it. There was n o avoiding 
the shock and I rolled with the agitated tide, out into the blac kness.
When I emerged, the lights were still there. I lay beneath the sla b of
glass, feeling deflated. All my limbs seemed amputated. It w as very warm. A 
dim white ceiling stretched far above me. My eyes were swimming with tears.
Why, I didn't know. It worried me. I wanted to knock on the glass t o attract 
attention, but I couldn't move. The slightest effort, hardly m ore than desire,
tired me. I lay experiencing the vague processes of my body. I see med to 
have lost all sense of proportion. Where did my body end and the cr ystal and 
white world begin? Thoughts evaded me, hiding in the vast stret ch of clinical
whiteness to which I seemed connected only by a scale of recedi ng grays. No 
sounds beyond the sluggish inner roar of the blood. I couldn't open my eyes.
I seemed to exist in some other dimension, utterly alone; unti l after a while a 
nurse bent down and forced a warm fluid between my lips. I gagged,
swallowed, feeling the fluid course slowly to my vague middle . A huge 
iridescent bubble seemed to enfold me. Gentle hands moved ove r me,
bringing vague impressions of memory. I was laved with warm liqu ids, felt 
gentle hands move through the indefinite limits of my flesh. T he sterile and 
weightless texture of a sheet enfolded me. I felt myself bounc e, sail off like a 
ball thrown over the roof into mist, striking a hidden wall beyon d a pile of
broken machinery and sailing back. How long it took, I didn't k now. But now 
above the movement of the hands I heard a friendly voice, utterin g familiar 
words to which I could assign no meaning. I listened intensely , aware of the 
form and movement of sentences and grasping the now subtle rhyth mical
differences between progressions of sound that questioned and those that 
made a statement. But still their meanings were lost in the vas t whiteness in 
which I myself was lost.
Other voices emerged. Faces hovered above me like inscrutable f ish 
peering myopically through a glass aquarium wall. I saw them sus pended 
motionless above me, then two floating off, first their heads , then the tips of
their finlike fingers, moving dreamily from the top of the case. A thoroughly 
mysterious coming and going, like the surging of torpid tides. I watched the 
two make furious movements with their mouths. I didn't underst and. They 
tried again, the meaning still escaping me. I felt uneasy. I sa w a scribbled 
card, held over me. All a jumble of alphabets. They consulted h eatedly.
Somehow I felt responsible. A terrible sense of loneliness came over me; they 
seemed to enact a mysterious pantomime. And seeing them from th is angle 
was disturbing. They appeared utterly stupid and I didn't like it. It wasn't 
right. I could see smut in one doctor's nose; a nurse had two flabb y chins.
Other faces came up, their mouths working with soundless fury . But we are 
all human, I thought, wondering what I meant.
A man dressed in black appeared, a long-haired fellow, whose 
piercing eyes looked down upon me out of an intense and friendly face. The 
others hovered about him, their eyes anxious as he alternately p eered at me 
and consulted my chart. Then he scribbled something on a large ca rd and 
thrust it before my eyes:
WHAT IS YOUR NAME? 
A tremor shook me; it was as though he had suddenly given a name 
to, had organized the vagueness that drifted through my head, an d I was 
overcome with swift shame. I realized that I no longer knew my ow n name. I 
shut my eyes and shook my head with sorrow. Here was the first warm 
attempt to communicate with me and I was failing. I tried again , plunging 
into the blackness of my mind. It was no use; I found nothing bu t pain. I 
saw the card again and he pointed slowly to each word:
WHAT . . . IS . . . YOUR . . . NAME? 
I tried desperately, diving below the blackness until I was lim p with 
fatigue. It was as though a vein had been opened and my energy sy phoned 
away; I could only stare back mutely. But with an irritating burst of activity 
he gestured for another card and wrote:
WHO . . . ARE . . . YOU? 
Something inside me turned with a sluggish excitement. This p hrasing 
of the question seemed to set off a series of weak and distant li ghts where 
the other had thrown a spark that failed. Who am I? I asked myself . But it 
was like trying to identify one particular cell that coursed th rough the torpid 
veins of my body. Maybe I was just this blackness and bewilderm ent and 
pain, but that seemed less like a suitable answer than someth ing I'd read 
somewhere.
The card was back again:
WHAT IS YOUR MOTHER'S NAME? 
Mother, who was my mother? Mother, the one who screams when 
you suffer -- but who? This was stupid, you always knew your mo ther's 
name. Who was it that screamed? Mother? But the scream came from th e 
machine. A machine my mother? . . . Clearly, I was out of my head.
He shot questions at me: Where were you born? Try to think of your 
name.
I tried, thinking vainly of many names, but none seemed to fit, and 
yet it was as though I was somehow a part of all of them, had becom e 
submerged within them and lost.
You must remember, the placard read. But it was useless. Each time
I found myself back in the clinging white mist and my name just beyond my 
fingertips. I shook my head and watched him disappear for a mom ent and 
return with a companion, a short, scholarly looking man who stared at me 
with a blank expression. I watched him produce a child's slate a nd a piece of
chalk, writing upon it:
WHO WAS YOUR MOTHER? 
I looked at him, feeling a quick dislike and thinking, half in
amusement, I don't play the dozens. And how's your old lady to day? 
THINK 
I stared, seeing him frown and write a long time. The slate was fil led 
with meaningless names.
I smiled, seeing his eyes blaze with annoyance. Old Friendly F ace 
said something. The new man wrote a question at which I stared in
wide-eyed amazement:
WHO WAS BUCKEYE THE RABBIT? 
I was filled with turmoil. Why should he think of that? He point ed 
to the question, word by word. I laughed, deep, deep inside me, g iddy with 
the delight of self-discovery and the desire to hide it. Someh ow I was 
Buckeye the Rabbit . . . or had been, when as children we danced a nd sang 
barefoot in the dusty streets:
Buckeye the Rabbit 
Shake it, shake it 
Buckeye the Rabbit 
Break it, break it . . .
Yet, I could not bring myself to admit it, it was too ridiculous - - and 
somehow too dangerous. It was annoying that he had hit upon an o ld 
identity and I shook my head, seeing him purse his lips and eye m e sharply.
BOY, WHO WAS BRER RABBIT? 
He was your mother's back-door man, I thought. Anyone knew the y 
were one and the same: "Buckeye" when you were very young and hid
yourself behind wide innocent eyes; "Brer," when you were older. B ut why 
was he playing around with these childish names? Did they thin k I was a 
child? Why didn't they leave me alone? I would remember soon en ough when 
they let me out of the machine . . . A palm smacked sharply upon th e glass,
but I was tired of them. Yet as my eyes focused upon Old Friendly F ace he 
seemed pleased. I couldn't understand it, but there he was, smi ling and 
leaving witrr the new assistant.
Left alone, I lay fretting over my identity. I suspected that I was 
really playing a game with myself and that they were taking part. A kind of
combat. Actually they knew as well as I, and I for some reason pre ferred not 
to face it. It was irritating, and it made me feel sly and alert. I w ould solve 
the mystery the next instant. I imagined myself whirling abou t in my mind 
like an old man attempting to catch a small boy in some mischie f, thinking,
Who am I? It was no good. I felt like a clown. Nor was I up to being both 
criminal and detective -- though why criminal I didn't know.
I fell to plotting ways of short-circuiting the machine. Perhap s if I 
shifted my body about so that the two nodes would come togethe r -- No, not 
only was there no room but it might electrocute me. I shuddered. Wh oever 
else I was, I was no Samson. I had no desire to destroy myself even if it 
destroyed the machine; I wanted freedom, not destruction. It wa s exhausting,
for no matter what the scheme I conceived, there was one consta nt flaw -- 
myself. There was no getting around it. I could no more escape tha n I could 
think of my identity. Perhaps, I thought, the two things are inv olved with 
each other. When I discover who I am, I'll be free.
It was as though my thoughts of escape had alerted them. I looke d 
up to see two agitated physicians and a nurse, and thought, It' s too late now,
and lay in a veil of sweat watching them manipulate the control s. I was 
braced for the usual shock, but nothing happened. Instead I sa w their hands 
at the lid, loosening the bolts, and before I could react they ha d opened the 
lid and pulled me erect.
"What's happened?" I began, seeing the nurse pause to look at m e.
"Well?" she said.
My mouth worked soundlessly.
"Come on, get it out," she said.
"What hospital is this?" I said.
"It's the factory hospital," she said. "Now be quiet." 
They were around me now, inspecting my body, and I watched with 
growing bewilderment, thinking, what is a factory hospital? 
I felt a tug at my belly and looked down to see one of the 
physicians pull the cord which was attached to the stomach nod e, jerking me 
forward.
"What is this?" I said.
"Get the shears," he said.
"Sure," the other said. "Let's not waste time." 
I recoiled inwardly as though the cord were part of me. Then they 
had it free and the nurse clipped through the belly band and remove d the 
heavy node. I opened my mouth to speak but one of the physician s shook his 
head. They worked swiftly. The nodes off, the nurse went over me with 
rubbing alcohol. Then I was told to climb out of the case. I look ed from face 
to face, overcome with indecision. For now that it appeared tha t I was being 
freed, I dared not believe it. What if they were transferring me to so me even 
more painful machine? I sat there, refusing to move. Should I stru ggle against 
them? 
"Take his arm," one of them said.
"I can do it," I said, climbing fearfully out.
I was told to stand while they went over my body with the 
stethoscope.
"How's the articulation?" the one with the chart said as the oth er 
examined my shoulder.
"Perfect," he said.
I could feel a tightness there but no pain.
"I'd say he's surprisingly strong, considering," the other said .
"Shall we call in Drexel? It seems rather unusual for him to be so
strong." 
"No, just note it on the chart." 
"All right, nurse, give him his clothes." 
"What are you going to do with me?" I said. She handed me clean 
underclothing and a pair of white overalls.
"No questions," she said. "Just dress as quickly as possible. " 
The air outside the machine seemed extremenly rare. When I bent 
over to tie my shoes I thought I would faint, but fought it off. I stood 
shakily and they looked me up and down.
"Well, boy, it looks as though you're cured," one of them said.
"You're a new man. You came through fine. Come with us," he said.
We went slowly out of the room and down a long white corridor into 
an elevator, then swiftly down three floors to a reception room wit h rows of
chairs. At the front were a number of private offices with frosted g lass doors 
and walls.
"Sit down there," they said. "The director will see you shortly. " 
I sat, seeing them disappear inside one of the offices for a se cond 
and emerge, passing me without a word. I trembled like a leaf. Were they 
really freeing me? My head spun. I looked at my white overalls. Th e nurse 
said that this was the factory hospital . . . Why couldn't I reme mber what 
kind of factory it was? And why a factory hospital? Yes . . . I di d remember 
some vague factory; perhaps I was being sent back there. Yes, an d he'd 
spoken of the director instead of the head doctor; could they be one and the 
same? Perhaps I was in the factory already. I listened but could hear no 
machinery.
ACROSS the room a newspaper lay on a chair, but I was too 
concerned to get it. Somewhere a fan droned. Then one of the doors w ith 
frosted glass was opened and I saw a tall austere-looking man in a white 
coat, beckoning to me with a chart.
"Come," he said.
I got up and went past him into a large simply furnished office,
thinking, Now, I'll know. Now.
"Sit down," he said.
I eased myself into the chair beside his desk. He watched me wi th a 
calm, scientific gaze.
"What is your name? Oh here, I have it," he said, studying the ch art.
And it was as though someone inside of me tried to tell him to be s ilent, but 
already he had called my name and I heard myself say, "Oh!" as a pa in 
stabbed through my head and I shot to my feet and looked wildly a round me 
and sat down and got up and down again very fast, remembering. I d on't 
know why I did it, but suddenly I saw him looking at me intently , and I 
stayed down this time.
He began asking questions and I could hear myself replying flu ently,
though inside I was reeling with swiftly changing emotional i mages that 
shrilled and chattered, like a sound-track reversed at high speed .
"Well, my boy," he said, "you're cured. We are going to release you .
How does that strike you?" 
Suddenly I didn't know. I noticed a company calendar beside a
stethoscope and a miniature silver paint brush. Did he mean from the 
hospital or from the job? . . .
"Sir?" I said.
"I said, how does that strike you?" 
"All right, sir," I said in an unreal voice. "I'll be glad to get ba ck to 
work." 
He looked at the chart, frowning. "You'll be released, but I'm af raid 
that you'll be disappointed about the work," he said.
"What do you mean, sir?" 
"You've been through a severe experience," he said. "You aren't re ady 
for the rigors of industry. Now I want you to rest, undertake a perio d of
convalescence. You need to become readjusted and get your stre ngth back." 
"But, sir --" 
"You mustn't try to go too fast. You're glad to be released, are yo u 
not?" 
"Oh, yes. But how shall I live?" 
"Live?" his eyebrows raised and lowered. "Take another job," he said.
"Something easier, quieter. Something for which you're better prepared." 
"Prepared?" I looked at him, thinking, Is he in on it too? "I'll t ake 
anything, sir," I said.
"That isn't the problem, my boy. You just aren't prepared for work 
under our industrial conditions. Later, perhaps, but not now. A nd remember,
you'll be adequately compensated for your experience." 
"Compensated, sir?" 
"Oh, yes," he said. "We follow a policy of enlightened 
humanitarianism; all our employees are automatically insured . You have only 
to sign a few papers." 
"What kind of papers, sir?" 
"We require an affidavit releasing the company of responsibilit y," he 
said. "Yours was a difficult case, and a number of specialists had to be called 
in. But, after all, any new occupation has its hazards. They are part of
growing up, of becoming adjusted, as it were. One takes a chance and while 
some are prepared, others are not." 
I looked at his lined face. Was he doctor, factory official, or both? I 
couldn't get it; and now he seemed to move back and forth across m y field 
of vision, although he sat perfectly calm in his chair.
It came out of itself: "Do you know Mr. Norton, sir?" I said.
"Norton?" His brows knitted. "What Norton is this?" 
Then it was as though I hadn't asked him; the name sounded 
strange. I ran my hand over my eyes.
"I'm sorry," I said. "It occurred to me that you might. He was just a 
man I used to know." 
"I see. Well" -- he picked up some papers -- "so that's the way it is,
my boy. A little later perhaps we'll be able to do something. Yo u may take 
the papers along if you wish. Just mail them to us. Your check wi ll be sent 
upon their return. Meanwhile, take as much time as you like. You 'll find that 
we are perfectly fair." 
I took the folded papers and looked at him for what seemed to be 
too long a time. He seemed to waver. Then I heard myself say, "Do y ou 
know him?" my voice rising.
"Who?" 
"Mr. Norton," I said. "Mr. Norton!" 
"Oh, why, no." 
"No," I said, "no one knows anybody and it was too long a time 
ago." 
He frowned and I laughed. "They picked poor Robin clean," I sai d.
"Do you happen to know Bled?" 
He looked at me, his head to one side. "Are these people friends o f
yours?" 
"Friends? Oh, yes," I said, "we're all good friends. Buddies from way 
back. But I don't suppose we get around in the same circles." 
His eyes widened. "No," he said, "I don't suppose we do. Howev er,
good friends are valuable to have." 
I felt light-headed and started to laugh and he seemed to waver
again and I thought of asking him about Emerson, but now he was c learing 
his throat and indicating that he was finished.
I put the folded papers in my overalls and started out. The door 
beyond the rows of chairs seemed far away.
"Take care of yourself," he said.
"And you," I said, thinking, it's time, it's past time.
Turning abruptly, I went weakly back to the desk, seeing him loo king 
up at me with his steady scientific gaze. I was overcome with ce remonial
feelings but unable to remember the proper formula. So as I delib erately 
extended my hand I fought down laughter with a cough.
"It's been quite pleasant, our little palaver, sir," I said. I l istened to 
myself and to his answer.
"Yes, indeed," he said.
He shook my hand gravely, without surprise or distaste. I looked
down, he was there somewhere behind the lined face and outstretc hed hand.
"And now our palaver is finished," I said. "Good-bye." 
He raised his hand. "Good-bye," he said, his voice noncommitt al.
Leaving him and going out into the paint-fuming air I had the 
feeling that I had been talking beyond myself, had used words a nd expressed 
attitudes not my own, that I was in the grip of some alien persona lity lodged 
deep within me. Like the servant about whom I'd read in psychol ogy class 
who, during a trance, had recited pages of Greek philosophy which she had 
overheard one day while she worked. It was as though I were acting o ut a 
scene from some crazy movie. Or perhaps I was catching up with mys elf and 
had put into words feelings which I had hitherto suppressed. Or w as it, I 
thought, starting up the walk, that I was no longer afraid? I sto pped, looking 
at the buildings down the bright street slanting with sun and sh ade. I was no 
longer afraid. Not of important men, not of trustees and such; fo r knowing 
now that there was nothing which I could expect from them, there w as no 
reason to be afraid. Was that it? I felt light-headed, my ears were ringing. I 
went on.
Along the walk the buildings rose, uniform and close together. I t was 
day's end now and on top of every building the flags were flutte ring and 
diving down, collapsing. And I felt that I would fall, had fal len, moved now 
as against a current sweeping swiftly against me. Out of the grou nds and up 
the street I found the bridge by which I'd come, but the stairs lea ding back 
to the car that crossed the top were too dizzily steep to climb, s wim or fly,
and I found a subway instead.
Things whirled too fast around me. My mind went alternately brigh t 
and blank in slow rolling waves. We, he, him -- my mind and I -- we re no 
longer getting around in the same circles. Nor my body either. Ac ross the 
aisle a young platinum blonde nibbled at a red Delicious apple as station 
lights rippled past behind her. The train plunged. I dropped throu gh the roar,
giddy and vacuum-minded, sucked under and out into late afte rnoon Harlem.
Chapter 12 
When I came out of the subway, Lenox Avenue seemed to careen 
away from me at a drunken angle, and I focused upon the teetering s cene 
with wild, infant's eyes, my head throbbing. Two huge women wi th 
spoiled-cream complexions seemed to struggle with their mass ive bodies as 
they came past, their flowered hips trembling like threatening flames. Out 
across the walk before me they moved, and a bright orange slant of s un 
seemed to boil up and I saw myself going down, my legs watery be neath me,
but my head clear, too clear, recording the crowd swerving around me : legs,
feet, eyes, hands, bent knees, scuffed shoes, teethy-eyed e xcitement; and some 
moving on unhalting.
And the big dark woman saying, Boy, is you all right, what's wrong ? 
in a husky-voiced contralto. And me saying, I'm all right, just weak, and 
trying to stand, and her saying, Why don't y'all stand back an d let the man 
breathe? Stand back there y'all, and now echoed by an official t one, Keep 
moving, break it up. And she on one side and a man on the other, hel ping 
me to stand and the policeman saying, Are you all right? and me an swering,
Yes, I just felt weak, must have fainted but all right now, and h im ordering 
the crowd to move on and the others moving on except the man and wo man 
and him saying, You sure you okay, daddy, and me nodding yes, an d her 
saying, Where you live son, somewhere around here? And me telling her 
Men's House and her looking at me shaking her head saying, Men 's House,
Men's House, shucks that ain't no place for nobody in your con dition what's 
weak and needs a woman to keep an eye on you awhile. And me sayin g, But 
I'll be all right now, and her, Maybe you will and maybe you won't . I live 
just up the street and round the corner, you better come on round and rest 
till you feel stronger. I'll phone Men's House and tell 'em where you at. And 
me too tired to resist and already she had one arm and was instructin g the 
fellow to take the other and we went, me between them, inwardly rejecting 
and yet accepting her bossing, hearing, You take it easy, I'll take care of you 
like I done a heap of others, my name's Mary Rambo, everybody kn ows me 
round this part of Harlem, you heard of me, ain't you? And the fello w saying,
Sure, I'm Jenny Jackson's boy, you know I know you, Miss Mary. A nd her 
saying, Jenny Jackson, why, I should say you do know me and I kn ow you,
you Ralston, and your mama got two more children, boy named Flin t and gal
named Laurajean, I should say I know you -- me and your mama and y our 
papa useta -- And me saying, I'm all right now, really all right. A nd her 
saying, And looking like that, you must be worse off even than y ou look, and 
pulling me now saying, Here's my house right here, hep me git him u p the 
steps and inside, you needn't worry, son, I ain't never laid ey es on you before 
and it ain't my business and I don't care what you think about me but you 
weak and caint hardly walk and all and you look what's more like y ou 
hungry, so just come on and let me do something for you like I ho pe you'd 
do something for ole Mary in case she needed it, it ain't costi ng you a penny 
and I don't want to git in your business, I just want you to lay d own till you 
rested and then you can go. And the fellow taking it up, saying, You in good 
hands, daddy, Miss Mary always helping somebody and you need some help 
'cause here you black as me and white as a sheet, as the ofays wou ld say -- 
watch these steps. And going up some steps and then some more, g rowing 
weaker, and the two warm around me on each side of me, and then insi de a 
cool dark room, hearing, Here, here's the bed, lie him down there, th ere,
there now, that's it, Ralston, now put his legs up -- never mind the cover -- 
there, that's it, now go out there in the kitchen and pour him a gl ass of
water, you'll find a bottle in the ice-box. And him going and he r placing 
another pillow beneath my head, saying, Now you'll be better and when you 
git all right you'll know how bad a shape you been in, here, now ta ka sip of
this water, and me drinking and seeing her worn brown fingers holdi ng the 
bright glass and a feeling of old, almost forgotten relief comin g over me and 
thinking in echo of her words, If I don't think I'm sinking, loo k what a hole 
I'm in, and then the soft cool splash of sleep.
I SAW her across the room when I awoke, reading a newspaper, her 
glasses low across the bridge of her nose as she stared at the page intently.
Then I realized that though the glasses still slanted down, th e eyes were no 
longer focused on the page, but on my face and lighting with a s low smile.
"How you feel now?" she said.
"Much better." 
"I thought you would be. And you be even better after you have a
cup of soup I got for you in the kitchen. You slept a good long ti me." 
"Did I?" I said. "What time is it?" 
"It's about ten o'clock, and from the way you slept I suspects a ll you 
needed was some rest . . . No, don't git up yet. You got to drink you r soup,
then you can go," she said, leaving.
She returned with a bowl in a plate. "This here'll fix you up," she
said. "You don't get this kind of service up there at Men's Hous e, do you? 
Now, you just sit there and take your time. I ain't got nothing t o do but read 
the paper. And I like company. You have to make time in the mornin g?" 
"No, I've been sick," I said. "But I have to look for a job." 
"I knowed you wasn't well. Why you try to hide it?" 
"I didn't want to be trouble to anyone," I said.
"Everybody has to be trouble to somebody. And you just come from
the hospital too." 
I looked up. She sat in the rocking chair bent forward, her arms 
folded at ease across her aproned lap. Had she searched my pocket s? 
"How did you know that?" I said.
"There you go getting suspicious," she said sternly. "That's w hat's 
wrong with the world today, don't nobody trust nobody. I can smel l that 
hospital smell on you, son. You got enough ether in those clot hes to put to 
sleep a dog!" 
"I couldn't remember telling you that I had been in the hospita l." 
"No, and you didn't have to. I smelled that out. You got people here 
in the city?" 
"No, ma'm," I said. "They're down South. I came up here to work so 
I could go to school, and I got sick." 
"Now ain't that too bad! But you'll make out all right. What you plan 
to make out of yourself?" 
"I don't know now; I came here wanting to be an educator. Now I 
don't know." 
"So what's wrong with being an educator?" 
I thought about it while sipping the good hot soup. "Nothing, I 
suppose, I just think I'd like to do something else." 
"Well, whatever it is, I hope it's something that's a credit to the 
race." 
"I hope so," I said.
"Don't hope, make it that way." 
I looked at her thinking of what I'd tried to do and of where it had
gotten me, seeing her heavy, composed figure before me.
"It's you young folks what's going to make the changes," she s aid.
"Y'all's the ones. You got to lead and you got to fight and move us all on up 
a little higher. And I tell you something else, it's the one's f rom the South 
that's got to do it, them what knows the fire and ain't forgot how it burns.
Up here too many forgits. They finds a place for theyselves and f orgits the 
ones on the bottom. Oh, heap of them talks about doing things, but they 
done really forgot. No, it's you young ones what has to remember a nd take 
the lead." 
"Yes," I said.
"And you have to take care of yourself, son. Don't let this Harlem git 
you. I'm in New York but New York ain't in me, understand what I mea n? 
Don't git corrupted." 
"I won't. I'll be too busy." 
"All right now, you looks to me like you might make something ou t 
of yourself, so you be careful." 
I got up to go, watching her raise herself out of her chair and com e 
with me to the door.
"You ever decide you want a room somewhere beside Men's House,
try me," she said. "The rent's reasonable." 
"I'll remember that," I said.
I WAS to remember sooner than I had thought. The moment I 
entered the bright, buzzing lobby of Men's House I was overcome b y a sense 
of alienation and hostility. My overalls were causing stares an d I knew that I 
could live there no longer, that that phase of my life was past. T he lobby was 
the meeting place for various groups still caught up in the illu sions that had 
just been boomeranged out of my head: college boys working to ret urn to 
school down South; older advocates of racial progress with Utop ian schemes 
for building black business empires; preachers ordained by no au thority except 
their own, without church or congregation, without bread or win e, body or 
blood; the community "leaders" without followers; old men of s ixty or more 
still caught up in post-Civil-War dreams of freedom within seg regation; the 
pathetic ones who possessed nothing beyond their dreams of be ing gentlemen,
who held small jobs or drew small pensions, and all pretending t o be 
engaged in some vast, though obscure, enterprise, who affected the 
pseudo-courtly manners of certain southern congressmen and bowe d and 
nodded as they passed like senile old roosters in a barnyard; the y ounger 
crowd for whom I now felt a contempt such as only a disillusione d dreamer 
feels for those still unaware that they dream -- the business st udents from 
southern colleges, for whom business was a vague, abstract gam e with rules 
as obsolete as Noah's Ark but who yet were drunk on finance. Yes, a nd that 
older group with similar aspirations, the "fundamentalists, " the "actors" who 
sought to achieve the status of brokers through imagination alo ne, a group of
janitors and messengers who spent most of their wages on clothi ng such as 
was fashionable among Wall Street brokers, with their Brooks Brot hers suits 
and bowler hats, English umbrellas, black calfskin shoes and yellow gloves;
with their orthodox and passionate argument as to what was the c orrect tie 
to wear with what shirt, what shade of gray was correct for spats an d what 
would the Prince of Wales wear at a certain seasonal event; shou ld field 
glasses be slung from the right or from the left shoulder; who neve r read the 
financial pages though they purchased the Wall Street Journal re ligiously and 
carried it beneath the left elbow, pressed firm against the body a nd grasped 
in the left hand -- always manicured and gloved, fair weather o r foul -- with 
an easy precision (Oh, they had style) while the other hand whi pped a tightly 
rolled umbrella back and forth at a calculated angle; with their homburgs and 
Chesterfields, their polo coats and Tyrolean hats worn strictly as fashion 
demanded.
I could feel their eyes, saw them all and saw too the time when t hey 
would know that my prospects were ended and saw already the conte mpt 
they'd feel for me, a college man who had lost his prospects and pride. I 
could see it all and I knew that even the officials and the olde r men would 
despise me as though, somehow, in losing my place in Bledsoe' s world I had 
betrayed them . . . I saw it as they looked at my overalls.
I had started toward the elevator when I heard the voice raised in 
laughter and turned to see him holding forth to a group in the lobb y chairs 
and the rolls of fat behind the wrinkled, high-domed, close-cu t head, and I 
was certain that it was he and stooped without thought and lift ed it shining,
full and foul, and moved forward two long steps, dumping its gre at brown,
transparent splash upon the head warned too late by someone acros s the 
room. And too late for me to see that it was not Bledsoe but a preac her, a 
prominent Baptist, who shot up wide-eyed with disbelief and o utrage, and I 
shot around and out of the lobby before anyone could think to sto p me.
No one followed me and I wandered the streets amazed at my own 
action. Later it began to rain and I sneaked back near Men's Hou se and 
persuaded an amused porter to slip my things out to me. I learned t hat I 
had been barred from the building for "ninety-nine years and a day ." 
"You might not can come back, man," the porter said, "but after
what you did, I swear, they never will stop talking about you. Y ou really 
baptized ole Rev!" 
So THAT same night I went back to Mary's, where I lived in a small
but comfortable room until the ice came.
It was a period of quietness. I paid my way with my compensation
money and found living with her pleasant except for her const ant talk about 
leadership and responsibility. And even this was not too bad as long as I 
could pay my way. It was, however, a small compensation, and wh en after 
several months my money ran out and I was looking again for a job, I found 
her exceedingly irritating to listen to. Still, she never dunn ed me and was as 
generous with her servings of food during mealtime as ever. "It' s just hard 
times you going through," she'd say. "Everybody worth his salt has his hard 
times, and when you git to be somebody you'll see these here ver y same hard 
times helped you a heap." 
I didn't see it that way. I had lost my sense of direction. I spen t my 
time, when not looking for work, in my room, where I read countless books 
from the library. Sometimes, when there was still money, or when I had 
earned a few dollars waiting table, I'd eat out and wander the st reets until
late at night. Other than Mary I had no friends and desired none. Nor did I 
think of Mary as a "friend"; she was something more -- a force, a st able,
familiar force like something out of my past which kept me from w hirling off
into some unknown which I dared not face. It was a most painful p osition,
for at the same time, Mary reminded me constantly that somethi ng was 
expected of me, some act of leadership, some newsworthy achiev ement; and I 
was torn between resenting her for it and loving her for the nebu lous hope 
she kept alive.
I had no doubt that I could do something, but what, and how? I ha d 
no contacts and I believed in nothing. And the obsession with my identity 
which I had developed in the factory hospital returned with a ve ngeance.
Who was I, how had I come to be? Certainly I couldn't help being d ifferent 
from when I left the campus; but now a new, painful, contradicto ry voice had 
grown up within me, and between its demands for revengeful acti on and 
Mary's silent pressure I throbbed with guilt and puzzlement. I w anted peace 
and quiet, tranquillity, but was too much aboil inside. Somew here beneath the 
load of the emotion-freezing ice which my life had conditione d my brain to 
produce, a spot of black anger glowed and threw off a hot red light of such 
intensity that had Lord Kelvin known of its existence, he woul d have had to 
revise his measurements. A remote explosion had occurred somewhe re,
perhaps back at Emerson's or that night in Bledsoe's office, an d it had caused 
the ice cap to melt and shift the slightest bit. But that bit, t hat fraction, was 
irrevocable. Coming to New York had perhaps been an unconscious a ttempt to 
keep the old freezing unit going, but it hadn't worked; hot wate r had gotten 
into its coils. Only a drop, perhaps, but that drop was the first wa ve of the 
deluge. One moment I believed, I was dedicated, willing to li e on the blazing 
coals, do anything to attain a position on the campus -- then s nap! It was 
done with, finished, through. Now there was only the problem of f orgetting it.
If only all the contradictory voices shouting inside my head w ould calm down 
and sing a song in unison, whatever it was I wouldn't care as lon g as they 
sang without dissonance; yes, and avoided the uncertain extre mes of the scale.
But there was no relief. I was wild with resentment but too much un der 
"self-control," that frozen virtue, that freezing vice. And the more resentful I 
became, the more my old urge to make speeches returned. While walk ing 
along the streets words would spill from my lips in a mumble over w hich I 
had little control. I became afraid of what I might do. All thing s were indeed 
awash in my mind. I longed for home.
And while the ice was melting to form a flood in which I threatene d 
to drown I awoke one afternoon to find that my first northern winter had 
set.
Chapter 13 
At first I had turned away from the window and tried to read but 
my mind kept wandering back to my old problems and, unable to end ure it 
any longer, I rushed from the house, extremely agitated but determ ined to get 
away from my hot thoughts into the chill air.
At the entrance I bumped against a woman who called me a filthy 
name, only causing me to increase my speed. In a few minutes I wa s several
blocks away, having moved to the next avenue and downtown. Th e streets 
were covered with ice and soot-flecked snow and from above a feeb le sun 
filtered through the haze. I walked with my head down, feeling t he biting air.
And yet I was hot, burning with an inner fever. I barely raised my ey es until
a car, passing with a thudding of skid chains whirled completel y around on 
the ice, then turned cautiously and thudded off again.
I walked slowly on, blinking my eyes in the chill air, my mind a b lur 
with the hot inner argument continuing. The whole of Harlem see med to fall
apart in the swirl of snow. I imagined I was lost and for a moment t here 
was an eerie quiet. I imagined I heard the fall of snow upon snow. What did 
it mean? I walked, my eyes focused into the endless successio n of barber 
shops, beauty parlors, confectioneries, luncheonettes, fish houses, and hog 
maw joints, walking close to the windows, the snowflakes lac ing swift 
between, simultaneously forming a curtain, a veil, and strippi ng it aside. A 
flash of red and gold from a window filled with religious articles caught my 
eye. And behind the film of frost etching the glass I saw two bras hly painted 
plaster images of Mary and Jesus surrounded by dream books, love powders,
God-Is-Love signs, money-drawing oil and plastic dice. A bla ck statue of a 
nude Nubian slave grinned out at me from beneath a turban of gold . I 
passed on to a window decorated with switches of wiry false hai r, ointments 
guaranteed to produce the miracle of whitening black skin. "You too can be 
truly beautiful," a sign proclaimed. "Win greater happiness wi th whiter 
complexion. Be outstanding in your social set." 
I hurried on, suppressing a savage urge to push my fist through the 
pane. A wind was rising, the snow thinning. Where would I go? To a movie? 
Could I sleep there? I ignored the windows now and walked along, becoming 
aware that I was muttering to myself again. Then far down at the c orner I 
saw an old man warming his hands against the sides of an odd-loo king 
wagon, from which a stovepipe reeled off a thin spiral of smoke th at drifted 
the odor of baking yams slowly to me, bringing a stab of swift no stalgia. I 
stopped as though struck by a shot, deeply inhaling, rememberin g, my mind 
surging back, back. At home we'd bake them in the hot coals of th e fireplace,
had carried them cold to school for lunch, munched them secretly , squeezing 
the sweet pulp from the soft peel as we hid from the teacher behin d the 
largest book, the World's Geography. Yes, and we'd loved them ca ndied, or 
baked in a cobbler, deep-fat fried in a pocket of dough, or roaste d with pork 
and glazed with the well-browned fat; had chewed them raw -- yam s and 
years ago. More yams than years ago though the time seemed endles sly 
expanded, stretched thin as the spiraling smoke beyond all reca ll.
I moved again. "Get yo' hot, baked Car'lina yam," he called. At the 
corner the old man, wrapped in an army overcoat, his feet covered wi th 
gunny sacks, his head in a knitted cap, was puttering with a sta ck of paper 
bags. I saw a crude sign on the side of the wagon proclaiming YAMS , as I 
walked flush into the warmth thrown by the coals that glowed in a grate 
underneath.
"How much are your yams?" I said, suddenly hungry.
"They ten cents and they sweet," he said, his voice quavering w ith 
age. "These ain't none of them binding ones neither. These here is real,
sweet, yaller yams. How many?" 
"One," I said. "If they're that good, one should be enough." 
He gave me a searching glance. There was a tear in the corner of his
eye. He chuckled and opened the door of the improvised oven, rea ching 
gingerly with his gloved hand. The yams, some bubbling with sy rup, lay on a 
wire rack above glowing coals that leaped to low blue flame when struck by 
the draft of air. The flash of warmth set my face aglow as he removed one of
the yams and shut the door.
"Here you are, suh," he said, starting to put the yam into a bag.
"Never mind the bag, I'm going to eat it. Here . . ." 
"Thanks." He took the dime. "If that ain't a sweet one, I'll gi ve you 
another one free of charge." 
I knew that it was sweet before I broke it; bubbles of brown syrup 
had burst the skin.
"Go ahead and break it," the old man said. "Break it and I'll give
you some butter since you gon' eat it right here. Lots of folks ta kes 'em 
home. They got their own butter at home." 
I broke it, seeing the sugary pulp steaming in the cold. "Hold i t over 
here," he said. He took a crock from a rack on the side of the wagon. " Right 
here." 
I held it, watching him pour a spoonful of melted butter over t he 
yam and the butter seeping in. "Thanks." 
"You welcome. And I'll tell you something." 
"What's that?" I said.
"If that ain't the best eating you had in a long time, I give you your 
money back." 
"You don't have to convince me," I said. "I can look at it and se e it's 
good." 
"You right, but everything what looks good ain't necessarily g ood," he 
said. "But these is." 
I took a bite, finding it as sweet and hot as any I'd ever had, an d 
was overcome with such a surge of homesickness that I turned away to keep 
my control. I walked along, munching the yam, just as suddenly overcome by 
an intense feeling of freedom -- simply because I was eating wh ile walking 
along the street. It was exhilarating. I no longer had to worry ab out who saw 
me or about what was proper. To hell with all that, and as sweet as the yam 
actually was, it became like nectar with the thought. If only someone who 
had known me at school or at home would come along and see me now .
How shocked they'd be! I'd push them into a side street and smea r their 
faces with the peel. What a group of people we were, I thought. Wh y, you 
could cause us the greatest humiliation simply by confronting us with 
something we liked. Not all of us, but so many. Simply by walki ng up and 
shaking a set of chitterlings or a well-boiled hog maw at them d uring the 
clear light of day! What consternation it would cause! And I sa w myself
advancing upon Bledsoe, standing bare of his false humility i n the crowded 
lobby of Men's House, and seeing him there and him seeing me and ignoring 
me and me enraged and suddenly whipping out a foot or two of chit terlings,
raw, uncleaned and dripping sticky circles on the floor as I shak e them in his 
face, shouting:
"Bledsoe, you're a shameless chitterling eater! I accuse you of
relishing how bowels! Ha! And not only do you eat them, you snea k and eat 
them in private when you think you're unobserved! You're a sneak ing 
chitterling lover! I accuse you of indulging in a filthy habit, Bledsoe! Lug 
them out of there, Bledsoe! Lug them out so we can see! I accuse y ou before 
the eyes of the world!" And he lugs them out, yards of them, with m ustard 
greens, and racks of pigs' ears, and pork chops and black-eyed pea s with dull
accusing eyes.
I let out a wild laugh, almost choking over the yam as the scene
spun before me. Why, with others present, it would be worse than if I had 
accused him of raping an old woman of ninety-nine years, weighi ng ninety 
pounds . . . blind in one eye and lame in the hip! Bledsoe would 
disintegrate, disinflate! With a profound sigh he'd drop his he ad in shame.
He'd lose caste. The weekly newspapers would attack him. The c aptions over 
his picture: Prominent Educator Reverts to Field Niggerism! His rivals would 
denounce him as a bad example for the South. Editorials would d emand that 
he either recant or retire from public life. In the South his white folks would 
desert him; he would be discussed far and wide, and all of the tru stees'
money couldn't prop up his sagging prestige. He'd end up an exil e washing 
dishes at the Automat. For down South he'd be unable to get a jo b on the 
honey wagon.
This is all very wild and childish, I thought, but to hell with being 
ashamed of what you liked. No more of that for me. I am what I am! I
wolfed down the yam and ran back to the old man and handed him twe nty 
cents, "Give me two more," I said.
"Sho, all you want, long as I got 'em. I can see you a serious yam 
eater, young fellow. You eating them right away?" 
"As soon as you give them to me," I said.
"You want 'em buttered?" 
"Please." 
"Sho, that way you can get the most out of 'em. Yessuh," he said ,
handing over the yams, "I can see you one of these old-fashion ed yam 
eaters." 
"They're my birthmark," I said. "I yam what I am!" 
"Then you must be from South Car'lina," he said with a grin.
"South Carolina nothing, where I come from we really go for yams."
"Come back tonight or tomorrow if you can eat some more," he 
called after me. "My old lady'll be out here with some hot sweet potato fried 
pies." 
Hot fried pies, I thought sadly, moving away. I would probably h ave 
indigestion if I ate one -- now that I no longer felt ashamed of the things I 
had always loved, I probably could no longer digest very many o f them. What 
and how much had I lost by trying to do only what was expected of me 
instead of what I myself had wished to do? What a waste, what a s enseless 
waste! But what of those things which you actually didn't lik e, not because 
you were not supposed to like them, not because to dislike them was 
considered a mark of refinement and education -- but because you actually 
found them distasteful? The very idea annoyed me. How could y ou know? It 
involved a problem of choice. I would have to weigh many things carefully 
before deciding and there would be some things that would cause quite a bit 
of trouble, simply because I had never formed a personal attitud e toward so 
much. I had accepted the accepted attitudes and it had made li fe seem simple 
. . .
But not yams, I had no problem concerning them and I would eat 
them whenever and wherever I took the notion. Continue on the y am level
and life would be sweet -- though somewhat yellowish. Yet the freedom to eat 
yams on the street was far less than I had expected upon coming t o the city.
An unpleasant taste bloomed in my mouth now as I bit the end of t he yam 
and threw it into the street; it had been frost-bitten.
The wind drove me into a side street where a group of boys had set 
a packing box afire. The gray smoke hung low and seemed to thicke n as I 
walked with my head down and eyes closed, trying to avoid the f umes. My 
lungs began to pain; then emerging, wiping my eyes and coughin g, I almost 
stumbled over it: It was piled in a jumble along the walk and ov er the curb 
into the street, like a lot of junk waiting to be hauled away. Th en I saw the 
sullen-faced crowd, looking at a building where two white men w ere toting 
out a chair in which an old woman sat; who, as I watched, struck a t them 
feebly with her fists. A motherly-looking old woman with her h ead tied in a 
handkerchief, wearing a man's shoes and a man's heavy blue swea ter. It was 
startling: The crowd watching silently, the two white men lugg ing the chair 
and trying to dodge the blows and the old woman's face streamin g with angry 
tears as she thrashed at them with her fists. I couldn't believe it. Something,
a sense of foreboding, filled me, a quick sense of uncleanline ss.
"Leave us alone," she cried, "leave us alone!" as the men pulle d their 
heads out of range and sat her down abruptly at the curb, hurrying back into 
the building.
What on earth, I thought, looking about me. What on earth? The ol d 
woman sobbed, pointing to the stuff piled along the curb. "Ju st look what 
they doing to us. Just look," looking straight at me. And I reali zed that what 
I'd taken for junk was actually worn household furnishings.
"Just look at what they doing," she said, her teary eyes upon m y 
face.
I looked away embarrassed, staring into the rapidly growing crowd.
Faces were peering sullenly from the windows above. And now as th e two 
men reappeared at the top of the steps carrying a battered chest of drawers,
I saw a third man come out and stand behind them, pulling at his e ar as he 
looked out over the crowd.
"Shake it up, you fellows," he said, "shake it up. We don't hav e all
day." 
Then the men came down with the chest and I saw the crowd give 
way sullenly, the men trudging through, grunting and putting th e chest at the 
curb, then returning into the building without a glance to left or right.
"Look at that," a slender man near me said. "We ought to beat th e 
hell out of those paddies!" 
I looked silently into his face, taut and ashy in the cold, his eyes 
trained upon the men going up the steps.
"Sho, we ought to stop 'em," another man said, "but ain't that much 
nerve in the whole bunch." 
"There's plenty nerve," the slender man said. "All they need i s 
someone to set it off. All they need is a leader. You mean you don 't have the 
nerve." 
"Who me?" the man said. "Who me?" 
"Yes, you." 
"Just look," the old woman said, "just look," her face still t urned 
toward mine. I turned away, edging closer to the two men.
"Who are those men?" I said, edging closer.
"Marshals or something. I don't give a damn who they is." 
"Marshals, hell," another man said. "Those guys doing all the toting 
ain't nothing but trusties. Soon as they get through they'll lo ck 'em up again." 
"I don't care who they are, they got no business putting these ol d 
folks out on the sidewalk." 
"You mean they're putting them out of their apartment?" I said.
"They can do that up here?" 
"Man, where you from?" he said, swinging toward me.
"What does it look like they puttin' them out of, a Pullman car?
They being evicted!" 
I was embarrassed; others were turning to stare. I had never seen an 
eviction. Someone snickered.
"Where did he come from?" 
A flash of heat went over me and J turned. "Look, friends," I said ,
hearing a hot edge coming into my voice. "I asked a civil questi on. If you 
don't care to answer, don't, but don't try to make me look ridicul ous." 
"Ridiculous? Hell, all scobos is ridiculous. Who the hell is y ou?" 
"Never mind, I am who I am. Just don't beat up your gums at me," 
I said, throwing him a newly acquired phrase.
Just then one of the men came down the steps with an armful of
articles, and I saw the old woman reach up, yelling, "Take your h ands off my 
Bible!" And the crowd surged forward.
The white man's hot eyes swept the crowd. "Where, lady?" he said . "I 
don't see any Bible." 
And I saw her snatch the Book from his arms, clutching it fiercely
and sending forth a shriek. "They can come in your home and do wha t they 
want to you," she said. "Just come stomping in and jerk your lif e up by the 
roots! But this here's the last straw. They ain't going to bother with my 
Bible!" 
The white man eyed the crowd. "Look, lady," he said, more to the 
rest of us than to her, "I don't want to do this, I have to do it. The y sent 
me up here to do it. If it was left to me, you could stay here till he ll freezes 
over . . ." 
"These white folks, Lord. These white folks," she moaned, her eyes 
turned toward the sky, as an old man pushed past me and went to her.
"Hon, Hon," he said, placing his hand on her shoulder. "It's th e 
agent, not these gentlemen. He's the one; He says it's the ban k, but you 
know he's the one. We've done business with him for over twent y years." 
"Don't tell me," she said. "It's all the white folks, not just one. They 
all against us. Every stinking low-down one of them." 
"She's right!" a hoarse voice said. "She's right! They all is!" 
Something had been working fiercely inside me, and for a moment I 
had forgotten the rest of the crowd. Now I recognized a selfconsci ousness 
about them, as though they, we, were ashamed to witness the evi ction, as 
though we were all unwilling intruders upon some shameful event ; and thus 
we were careful not to touch or stare too hard at the effects that li ned the 
curb; for we were witnesses of what we did not wish to see, thoug h curious,
fascinated, despite our shame, and through it all the old fema le,
mind-plunging crying.
I looked at the old people, feeling my eyes burn, my throat tight en.
The old woman's sobbing was having a strange effect upon me-as when a 
child, seeing the tears of its parents, is moved by both fear and sympathy to 
cry. I turned away, feeling myself being drawn to the old couple by a warm,
dark, rising whirpool of emotion which I feared. I was wary of what the sight 
of them crying there on the sidewalk was making me begin to feel . I wanted 
to leave, but was too ashamed to leave, was rapidly becoming to o much a 
part of it to leave.
I turned aside and looked at the clutter of household objects w hich 
the two men continued to pile on the walk. And as the crowd pushe d me I 
looked down to see looking out of an oval frame a portrait of the ol d couple 
when young, seeing the sad, stiff dignity of the faces there; f eeling strange 
memories awakening that began an echoing in my head like that o f a 
hysterical voice stuttering in a dark street. Seeing them look ba ck at me as 
though even then in that nineteenth-century day they had exp ected little, and 
this with a grim, unillusioned pride that suddenly seemed to me both a 
reproach and a warning. My eyes fell upon a pair of crudely carved a nd 
polished bones, "knocking bones," used to accompany music a t country 
dances, used in black-face minstrels; the flat ribs of a cow, a s teer or sheep,
flat bones that gave off a sound, when struck, like heavy casta nets (had he 
been a minstrel?) or the wooden block of a set of drums. Pots and p ots of
green plants were lined in the dirty snow, certain to die of the col d; ivy,
canna, a tomato plant. And in a basket I saw a straightening com b, switches 
of false hair, a curling iron, a card with silvery letters against a background 
of dark red velvet, reading "God Bless Our Home"; and scattered ac ross the 
top of a chiffonier were nuggets of High John the Conqueror, the l ucky stone;
and as I watched the white men put down a basket in which I saw a 
whiskey bottle filled with rock candy and camphor, a small Ethi opian flag, a 
faded tintype of Abraham Lincoln, and the smiling image of a Ho llywood star 
torn from a magazine. And on a pillow several badly cracked pieces of
delicate china, a commemorative plate celebrating the St. Lou is World Fair . .
. I stood in a kind of daze, looking at an old folded lace fan stu dded with jet 
and mother-of-pearl.
The crowd surged as the white men came back, knocking over a 
drawer that spilled its contents in the snow at my feet. I stoop ed and starting 
replacing the articles: a bent Masonic emblem, a set of tarnishe d cuff links,
three brass rings, a dime pierced with a nail hole so as to be worn abo ut the 
ankle on a string for luck, an ornate greeting card with the messag e 
"Grandma, I love you" in childish scrawl; another card with a pic ture of what 
looked like a white man in black-face seated in the door of a ca bin 
strumming a banjo beneath a bar of music and the lyric "Going bac k to my 
old cabin home"; a useless inhalant, a string of bright glass be ads with a 
tarnished clasp, a rabbit foot, a celluloid baseball scoring ca rd shaped like a 
catcher's mitt, registering a game won or lost years ago; an old bre ast pump 
with rubber bulb yellowed with age, a worn baby shoe and a dusty l ock of
infant hair tied with a faded and crumpled blue ribbon. I felt na useated. In 
my hand I held three lapsed life insurance policies with perforat ed seals 
stamped "Void"; a yellowing newspaper portrait of a huge black man with the 
caption: MARCUS GARVEY DEPORTED.
I turned away, bending and searching the dirty snow for anything
missed by my eyes, and my fingers closed upon something resting in a frozen 
footstep: a fragile paper, coming apart with age, written in blac k ink grown 
yellow. I read: FREE PAPERS. Be it known to all men that my negro, Primus 
Provo, has been freed by me this sixth day of August, 1859. Signe d: John 
Samuels Macon . . . I folded it quickly, blotting out the singl e drop of melted 
snow which glistened on the yellowed page, and dropped it back into the 
drawer. My hands were trembling, my breath rasping as if I had run a lon g 
distance or come upon a coiled snake in a busy street. It has bee n longer 
than that, further removed in time, I told myself, and yet I knew that it 
hadn't been. I replaced the drawer in the chest and pushed drunke nly to the 
curb.
But it wouldn't come up, only a bitter spurt of gall filled my mo uth 
and splattered the old folk's possessions. I turned and stared a gain at the 
jumble, no longer looking at what was before my eyes, but 
inwardly-outwardly, around a corner into the dark, far-away-and- long-ago, not 
so much of my own memory as of remembered words, of linked verbal
echoes, images, heard even when not listening at home. And it w as as though 
I myself was being dispossessed of some painful yet precious t hing which I 
could not bear to lose; something confounding, like a rotted t ooth that one 
would rather suffer indefinitely than endure the short, violen t eruption of pain 
that would mark its removal. And with this sense of dispossessi on came a 
pang of vague recognition: this junk, these shabby chairs, the se heavy,
old-fashioned pressing irons, zinc wash tubs with dented bott oms -- all
throbbed within me with more meaning than there should have been : And 
why did I, standing in the crowd, see like a vision my mother han ging wash 
on a cold windy day, so cold that the warm clothes froze even befo re the 
vapor thinned and hung stiff on the line, and her hands white a nd raw in 
the skirt-swirling wind and her gray head bare to the darkened sky - - why 
were they causing me discomfort so far beyond their intrinsic me aning as 
objects? And why did I see them now as behind a veil that threate ned to lift,
stirred by the cold wind in the narrow street? 
A scream, "I'm going in!" spun me around. The old couple were on 
the steps now, the old man holding her arm, the white men leanin g forward 
above, and the crowd pressing me closer to the steps.
"You can't go in, lady," the man said.
"I want to pray!" she said.
"I can't help it, lady. You'll have to do your praying out here."
"I'm go'n in!" 
"Not in here!" 
"All we want to do is go in and pray," she said, clutching her Bib le.
"It ain't right to pray in the street like this." 
"I'm sorry," he said.
"Aw, let the woman go in to pray," a voice called from the crowd.
"You got all their stuff out here on the walk -- what more do you wa nt,
blood?" 
"Sure, let them old folks pray." 
"That's what's wrong with us now, all this damn praying," anoth er 
voice called.
"You don't go back, see," the white man said. "You were legally
evicted." 
"But all we want to do is go in an' kneel on the floor," the old man
said. "We been living right here for over twenty years. I don't se e why you 
can't let us go just for a few minutes . . ." 
"Look, I've told you," the man said. "I've got my orders. You're 
wasting my time." 
"We're go'n in!" the woman said.
It happened so suddenly that I could barely keep up with it: I sa w 
the old woman clutching her Bible and rushing up the steps, her husband 
behind her and the white man stepping in front of them and stretc hing out 
his arm. "I'll jug you," he yelled, "by God, I'll jug you!" 
"Take your hands off that woman!" someone called from the crowd .
Then at the top of the stairs they were pushing against the man an d 
I saw the old woman fall backwards, and the crowd exploded.
"Get that paddie sonofabitch!" 
"He struck her!" a West Indian woman screamed into my ear. "The 
filthy brute, he struck her!" 
"Stand back or I'll shoot," the man called, his eyes wild as he drew a 
gun and backed into the doorway where the two trusties stood bew ildered,
their arms full of articles. "I swear I'll shoot! You don't know what you're 
doing, but I'll shoot!" 
They hesitated. "Ain't but six bullets in that thing," a litt le fellow 
called. "Then what you going to do?" 
"Yeah, you damn sho caint hide." 
"I advise you to stay out of this," the marshal called.
"Think you can come up here and hit one of our women, you a 
fool." 
"To hell with all this talk, let's rush that bastard!" 
"You better think twice," the white man called.
I saw them start up the steps and felt suddenly as though my head
would split. I knew that they were about to attack the man and I w as both 
afraid and angry, repelled and fascinated. I both wanted it and feared the 
consequences, was outraged and angered at what I saw and yet surg ed with 
fear; not for the man or of the consequences of an attack, but of what the 
sight of violence might release in me. And beneath it all there b oiled up all
the shock-absorbing phrases that I had learned all my life. I se emed to totter 
on the edge of a great dark hole.
"No, no," I heard myself yelling. "Black men! Brothers! Black 
Brothers! That's not the way. We're law-abiding. We're a law-abi ding people 
and a slow-to-anger people." 
Forcing my way quickly through the crowd, I stood on the steps 
facing those in front, talking rapidly without thought but out of my clashing 
emotions. "We're a law-abiding people and a slow-to-anger pe ople . . ." They 
stopped, listening. Even the white man was startled.
"Yeah, but we mad now," a voice called out.
"Yes, you're right," I called back. "We're angry, but let us be wi se.
Let us, I mean let us not . . . Let us learn from that great leader who se wise 
action was reported in the newspaper the other day . . ." 
"What, mahn? Who?" a West Indian voice shouted.
"Come on! To hell with this guy, let's get that paddie before th ey 
send him some help . . ." 
"No, wait," I yelled. "Let's follow a leader, let's organize. O rganize.
We need someone like that wise leader, you read about him, down i n 
Alabama. He was strong enough to choose to do the wise thing in s pite of
what he felt himself . . ." 
"Who, mahn? Who?" 
This was it, I thought, they're listening, eager to listen.
Nobody laughed. If they laugh, I'll die! I tensed my diaphragm .
"That wise man," I said, "you read about him, who when that fugi tive 
escaped from the mob and ran to his school for protection, that wi se man 
who was strong enough to do the legal thing, the law-abiding th ing, to turn 
him over to the forces of law and order . . ." 
"Yeah," a voice rang out, "yeah, so they could lynch his ass." 
Oh, God, this wasn't it at all. Poor technique and not at all wh at I 
intended.
"He was a wise leader," I yelled. "He was within the law. Now was n't 
that the wise thing to do?" 
"Yeah, he was wise all right," the man laughed angrily. "Now get out 
of the way so we can jump this paddie." 
The crowd yelled and I laughed in response as though hypnotized .
"But wasn't that the human thing to do? After all, he had to prot ect 
himself because --" 
"He was a handkerchief-headed rat!" a woman screamed, her voice
boiling with contempt.
"Yes, you're right. He was wise and cowardly, but what about us? 
What are we to do?" I yelled, suddenly thrilled by the response. " Look at 
him," I cried.
"Yes, just look at him!" an old fellow in a derby called out as t hough 
answering a preacher in church.
"And look at that old couple . . ." 
"Yeah, what about Sister and Brother Provo?" he said. "It's an 
ungodly shame!" 
"And look at their possessions all strewn there on the sidewalk . Just 
look at their possessions in the snow. How old are you, sir?" I ye lled.
"I'm eighty-seven," the old man said, his voice low and bewil dered.
"How's that? Yell so our slow-to-anger brethren can hear you."
"I'm eighty-seven years old!" 
"Did you hear him? He's eighty-seven. Eighty-seven and look at all
he's accumulated in eighty-seven years, strewn in the snow lik e chicken guts,
and we're a law-abiding, slow-to-anger bunch of folks turning the other cheek 
every day in the week. What are we going to do? What would you, wh at 
would I, what would he have done? What is to be done? I propose we do 
the wise thing, the law-abiding thing. Just look at this junk ! Should two old 
folks live in such junk, cooped up in a filthy room? It's a great d anger, a fire 
hazard! Old cracked dishes and broken-down chairs. Yes, yes, yes ! Look at 
that old woman, somebody's mother, somebody's grandmother, ma ybe. We call
them 'Big Mama' and they spoil us and -- you know, you remember . . .
Look at her quilts and broken-down shoes. I know she's somebod y's mother 
because I saw an old breast pump fall into the snow, and she's so mebody's 
grandmother, because I saw a card that read 'Dear Grandma' . . . But w e're 
law-abiding . . . I looked into a basket and I saw some bones, no t neckbones,
but rib bones, knocking bones . . . This old couple used to dance . . . I saw 
-- What kind of work do you do, Father?" I called.
"I'm a day laborer . . ." 
". . . A day laborer, you heard him, but look at his stuff strewn like
chitterlings in the snow . . . Where has all his labor gone? Is he l ying?" 
"Hell, no, he ain't lying." 
"Naw, suh!" 
"Then where did his labor go? Look at his old blues records and her
pots of plants, they're down-home folks, and everything toss ed out like junk 
whirled eighty-seven years in a cyclone. Eighty-seven years, a nd poof! like a 
snort in a windstorm. Look at them, they look like my mama and pap a and 
my grandma and grandpa, and I look like you and you look like me. L ook at 
them but remember that we're a wise, law-abiding group of people . And 
remember it when you look up there in the doorway at that law stan ding 
there with his forty-five. Look at him, standing with his blue s teel pistol and 
his blue serge suit. Look at him! You don't see just one man dress ed in one 
blue serge suit, or one forty-five, you see ten for every one of u s, ten guns 
and ten warm suits and ten fat bellies and ten million laws. Law s, that's what 
we call them down South! Laws! And we're wise, and law-abiding . And look 
at this old woman with her dog-eared Bible. What's she trying t o bring off
here? She's let her religion go to her head, but we all know that re ligion is 
for the heart, not for the head. 'Blessed are the pure in heart,' it says.
Nothing about the poor in head. What's she trying to do? What a bout the 
clear of head? And the clear of eye, the ice-water-visioned wh o see too clear 
to miss a lie? Look out there at her cabinet with its gaping drawe rs.
Eighty-seven years to fill them, and full of brick and brack, a bri c-a-brac, and 
she wants to break the law . . . What's happened to them? They're o ur 
people, your people and mine, your parents and mine. What's ha ppened to 
'em?" 
"I'll tell you!" a heavyweight yelled, pushing out of the crow d, his 
face angry. "Hell, they been dispossessed, you crazy sonofab itch, get out the 
way!" 
"Dispossessed?" I cried, holding up my hand and allowing the w ord 
to whistle from my throat. "That's a good word, 'Dispossessed'! 'Dispossessed,'
eighty-seven years and dispossessed of what? They ain't got n othing, they 
caint get nothing, they never had nothing. So who was disposs essed?" I 
growled. "We're law-abiding. So who's being dispossessed? Ca n it be us? 
These old ones are out in the snow, but we're here with them. Look a t their 
stuff, not a pit to hiss in, nor a window to shout the news and us right with 
them. Look at them, not a shack to pray in or an alley to sing the b lues!
They're facing a gun and we're facing it with them. They don't wa nt the 
world, but only Jesus. They only want Jesus, just fifteen minu tes of Jesus on 
the rug-bare floor . . . How about it, Mr. Law? Do we get our fifteen minutes 
worth of Jesus? You got the world, can we have our Jesus?" 
"I got my orders, Mac," the man called, waving the pistol with a 
sneer. "You're doing all right, tell 'em to keep out of this. This is legal and 
I'll shoot if I have to . . ." 
"But what about the prayer?" 
"They don't go back!" 
"Are you positive?" 
"You could bet your life," he said.
"Look at him," I called to the angry crowd. "With his blue steel
pistol and his blue serge suit. You heard him, he's the law. He sa ys he'll
shoot us down because we're a law-abiding people. So we've bee n 
dispossessed, and what's more, he thinks he's God. Look up the re backed 
against the post with a criminal on either side of him. Can't yo u feel the cold 
wind, can't you hear it asking, 'What did you do with your heav y labor? 
What did you do?' When you look at all you haven't got in eighty -seven years 
you feel ashamed --" 
"Tell 'em about it, brother," an old man interrupted. "It makes yo u 
feel you ain't a man." 
"Yes, these old folks had a dream book, but the pages went blank
and it failed to give them the number. It was called the Seeing E ye, The 
Great Constitutional Dream Book, The Secrets of Africa, The Wisd om of Egypt 
-- but the eye was blind, it lost its luster. It's all cataracted like a cross-eyed 
carpenter and it doesn't saw straight. All we have is the Bible a nd this Law 
here rules that out. So where do we go? Where do we go from here, withou t 
a pot --" 
"We going after that paddie," the heavyweight called, rushin g up the 
steps.
Someone pushed me. "No, wait," I called.
"Get out the way now." 
There was a rush against me and I fell, hearing a single explosion ,
backward into a whirl of milling legs, overshoes, the trampled sn ow cold on 
my hands. Another shot sounded above like a bursting bag. Mana ging to 
stand, I saw atop the steps the fist with the gun being forced in to the air 
above the crowd's bobbing heads and the next instant they were d ragging him 
down into the snow; punching him left and right, uttering a low t ense 
swelling sound of desperate effort; a grunt that exploded into a thousand 
softly spat, hate-sizzling curses. I saw a woman striking with the pointed heel
of her shoe, her face a blank mask with hollow black eyes as she aimed and 
struck, aimed and struck, bringing spurts of blood, running along beside the 
man who was dragged to his feet now as they punched him gauntlet -wise 
between them. Suddenly I saw a pair of handcuffs arc gleaming i nto the air 
and sail across the street. A boy broke out of the crowd, the marshal 's 
snappy hat on his head. The marshal was spun this way and that, t hen a 
swift tattoo of blows started him down the street. I was beside m yself with 
excitement. The crowd surged after him, milling like a huge man trying to 
turn in a cubbyhole -- some of them laughing, some cursing, some intently 
silent.
"The brute struck that gentle woman, poor thing!" the West Indi an 
woman chanted. "Black men, did you ever see such a brute? Is he a
gentleman, I ask you? The brute! Give it back to him, black men. Repay the 
brute a thousandfold! Give it back to him unto the third and fourt h 
generations. Strike him, our fine black men. Protect your black women! Repay 
the arrogant creature to the third and fourth generations!" 
"We're dispossessed," I sang at the top of my voice, "disposse ssed 
and we want to pray. Let's go in and pray. Let's have a big prayer me eting.
But we'll need some chairs to sit in . . . rest upon as we kneel. We' ll need 
some chairs!" 
"Here's some chairs down here," a woman called from the walk.
"How 'bout taking in some chairs?" 
"Sure," I called, "take everything. Take it all, hide that jun k! Put it 
back where it came from. It's blocking the street and the sidewal k, and that's 
against the law. We're law-abiding, so clear the street of the d ebris. Put it out 
of sight! Hide it, hide their shame! Hide our shame!
"Come on, men," I yelled, dashing down the steps and seizing a chair 
and starting back, no longer struggling against or thinking ab out the nature of
my action. The others followed, picking up pieces of furniture a nd lugging 
them back into the building.
"We ought to done this long ago," a man said.
"We damn sho should." 
"I feel so good," a woman said, "I feel so good!" 
"Black men, I'm proud of you," the West Indian woman shrilled.
"Proud!" 
We rushed into the dark little apartment that smelled of stale 
cabbage and put the pieces down and returned for more. Men, women and 
children seized articles and dashed inside shouting, laughin g. I looked for the 
two trusties, but they seemed to have disappeared. Then, comin g down into 
the street, I thought I saw one. He was carrying a chair back insi de.
"So you're law-abiding too," I called only to become aware that it 
was someone else. A white man but someone else altogether.
The man laughed at me and continued inside. And when I reached 
the street there were several of them, men and women, standing abo ut,
cheering whenever another piece of furniture was returned. It was like a 
holiday. I didn't want it to stop.
"Who are those people?" I called from the steps.
"What people?" someone called back.
"Those," I said, pointing.
"You mean those ofays?" 
"Yes, what do they want?" 
"We're friends of the people," one of the white men called.
"Friends of what people?" I called, prepared to jump down upon hi m 
if he answered, "You people." 
"We're friends of all the common people," he shouted. "We came u p 
to help." 
"We believe in brotherhood," another called.
"Well, pick up that sofa and come on," I called. I was uneasy ab out 
their presence and disappointed when they all joined the crowd and started 
lugging the evicted articles back inside. Where had I heard of th em? 
"Why don't we stage a march?" one of the white men called, going
past.
"Why don't we march!" I yelled out to the sidewalk before I had 
time to think.
They took it up immediately.
"Let's march . . ." 
"It's a good idea." 
"Let's have a demonstration . . ." 
"Let's parade!" 
I heard the siren and saw the scout cars swing into the block in the
same instant. It was the police! I looked into the crowd, tryin g to focus upon 
their faces, hearing someone yell, "Here come the cops," and ot hers 
answering, "Let 'em come!" 
Where is all this leading? I thought, seeing a white man run insi de 
the building as the policemen dashed from their cars and came run ning up.
"What's going on here?" a gold-shield officer called up the st eps.
It had become silent. No one answered.
"I said, what's going on here," he repeated. "You," he called, p ointing 
straight at me.
"We've . . . we've been clearing the sidewalk of a lot of junk," I
called, tense inside.
"What's that?" he said.
"It's a clean-up campaign," I called, wanting to laugh. "The se old 
folks had all their stuff cluttering up the sidewalk and we cle ared the street .
. ." 
"You mean you're interfering with an eviction," he called, start ing 
through the crowd.
"He ain't doing nothing," a woman called from behind me.
I looked around, the steps behind were filled with those who had
been inside.
"We're all together," someone called, as the crowd closed in.
"Clear the streets," the officer ordered.
"That's what we were doing," someone called from back in the crow d.
"Mahoney!" he bellowed to another policeman, "send in a riot c all!" 
"What riot?" one of the white men called to him. "There's no riot. " 
"If I say there's a riot, there's a riot," the officer said. "And wh at are 
you white people doing up here in Harlem?" 
"We're citizens. We go anywhere we like." 
"Listen! Here come some more cops!" someone called.
"Let them come!" 
"Let the Commissioner come!" 
It became too much for me. The whole thing had gotten out of han d.
What had I said to bring on all this? I edged to the back of the crow d on 
the steps and backed into the hallway. Where would I go? I hurried up to 
the old couple's apartment. But I can't hide here, I thought, he ading back for 
the stairs.
"No. You can't go that way," a voice said.
I whirled. It was a white girl standing in the door.
"What are you doing in here?" I shouted, my fear turning to feveris h 
anger.
"I didn't mean to startle you," she said. "Brother, that was quit e a 
speech you made. I heard just the end of it, but you certainly mov ed them to 
action . . ." 
"Action," I said, "action --" 
"Don't be modest, brother," she said, "I heard you." 
"Look, Miss, we'd better get out of here," I said, finally cont rolling 
the throbbing in my throat. "There are a lot of policemen downstai rs and 
more coming." 
"Oh, yes. You'd better go over the roof," she said. "Otherwise ,
someone is sure to point you out." 
"Over the roof?" 
"It's easy. Just go up to the roof of the building and keep crossi ng 
until you reach the house at the end of the block. Then open the d oor and 
walk down as though you've been visiting. You'd better hurry. The longer you 
remain unknown to the police, the longer you'll be effective. " 
Effective? I thought. What did she mean? And what was this 
"brother" business? 
"Thanks," I said, and hurried for the stairs.
"Good-bye," her voice rose fluidly behind me. I turned, glimps ing her 
white face in the dim light of the darkened doorway.
I took the flight in a bound and cautiously opened the door, and
suddenly the sun flared on the roof and it was windy cold. Before m e the 
low, snow-caked walls dividing the buildings stretched hurdl e-like the long 
length of the block to the corner, and before me empty clotheslin es trembled 
in the wind. I made my way through the wind-carved snow to the ne xt roof
and then to the next, going with swift caution. Planes were risi ng over an 
airfield far to the southeast, and I was running now and seeing a ll the church 
steeples rising and falling and stacks with smoke leaning sha rp against the 
sky, and below in the street the sound of sirens and shouting. I h urried.
Then, climbing over a wall I looked back, seeing a man hurrying after me,
slipping, sliding, going over the low dividing walls of the ro ofs with puffing,
bustling effort. I turned and ran, trying to put the rows of chimne ys between 
us, wondering why he didn't yell "Halt!" or shout, or shoot. I ra n, dodging 
behind an elevator housing, then dashing to the next roof, goi ng down, the 
snow cold to my hands, knees striking, toes gripping, and up and running 
and looking back, seeing the short figure in black still running after. The 
corner seemed a mile away. I tried to count the number of roofs tha t 
bounced before me yet to be crossed. Getting to seven, I ran, heari ng shouts,
more sirens, and looking back and him still behind me, running in a 
short-legged scramble, still behind me as I tried to open the doo r of a 
building to go down and finding it stuck and running once more, t rying to 
zig-zag in the snow and feeling the crunch of gravel underneath, and behind 
me still, as I swung over a partition and went brushing past a hug e cote and 
arousing a flight of frantic white birds, suddenly as large as buz zards as they 
beat furiously against my eyes, dazzling the sun as they flutt ered up and away 
and around in a furious glide and me running again and looking bac k and 
for a split second thinking him gone and once more seeing him bo bbing 
after. Why doesn't he shoot? Why? If only it were like at home whe re I knew 
someone in all the houses, knew them by sight and by name, by bl ood and 
by background, by shame and pride, and by religion.
It was a carpeted hall and I moved down with pounding heart as a 
dog set up a terrific din within the top apartment. Then I moved qu ickly, my 
body like glass inside as I skipped downward off the edges of th e stairs.
Looking down the stairwell I saw pale light filtering through t he door glass,
far below. But what had happened to the girl, had she put the man on my 
trail? What was she doing there? I bounded down, no one challeng ing me,
and I stopped in the vestibule, breathing deeply and listenin g for his hand 
upon the door above and brushing my clothing into order. Then I st epped 
into the street with a nonchalance copied from characters I had se en in the 
movies. No sound from above, not even the malicious note of the barking 
dog.
It was a long block and I had come down into a building that face d 
not the street but the avenue. A squad of mounted policemen las hed 
themselves around the corner and galloped past, the horseshoes thudding 
dully through the snow, the men rising high in their saddles, sh outing. I 
picked up speed, careful not to run, heading away. This was awfu l. What on 
earth had I said to have brought on all this? How would it end? Som eone 
might be killed. Heads would be pistol-whipped. I stopped at the corner,
looking for the pursuing man, the detective, and for a bus. The long white 
stretch of street was empty, the aroused pigeons still circling o verhead. I 
scanned the roofs, expecting to see him peering down. The sound of shouting 
continued to rise, then another green and white patrol car was wh ining 
around the corner and speeding past me, heading for the block. I cut through 
a block in which there were close to a dozen funeral parlors, each de cked out 
with neon signs, all set up in old brownstone buildings. Elabo rate funeral cars 
stood along the curb, one a dull black with windows shaped lik e Gothic 
arches, through which I saw funeral flowers piled upon a casket. I hurried on.
I could see the girl's face still, below the short flight of stai rs. But 
who was the figure that had crossed the roof behind me? Chased me? Why 
had he been so silent, and why was there only one? Yes, and why ha dn't 
they sent a patrol car to pick me up? I hurried out of the block of fu neral
parlors into the bright sun that swept the snow of the avenue, slo wing to a 
leisurely walk now, trying to give the impression of a complete lack of haste.
I longed to look stupid, utterly incapable of thought or speec h, and tried to 
shuffle my feet over the walk, but quit with distaste after st ealing a glance 
behind me. Just ahead I saw a car pull up and a man leap out with a
physician's bag.
"Hurry, Doctor," a man called from the stoop, "she's already in 
labor!" 
"Good," the doctor called. "That's what we've been waiting f or, isn't 
it?" 
"Yeah, but it didn't start when we expected it." 
I watched them disappear inside the hall. What a hell of a time to 
be born, I thought. At the corner I joined several people waiting for the 
lights to change. I had just about convinced myself that I had escaped 
successfully when a quiet, penetrating voice beside me said, "That was a 
masterful bit of persuasion, brother." 
Suddenly wound tight as a tensioned spring I turned almost 
lethargically. A short insignificant-looking bushy-eyebrow ed man, with a quiet 
smile on his face stood beside me, looking not at all like a pol iceman.
"What do you mean?" I asked, my voice lazy, distant.
"Don't be alarmed," he said, "I'm a friend." 
"I've got nothing to be alarmed about, and you're no friend of min e." 
"Then say that I'm an admirer," he said pleasantly.
"Admirer of what?" 
"Of your speech," he said. "I was listening." 
"What speech? I made no speech," I said.
He smiled knowingly. "I can see that you have been well trained .
Come, it isn't good for you to be seen with me in the street. Let' s go 
somewhere for a cup of coffee." 
Something told me to refuse, but I was intrigued and, underneath it 
all, was probably flattered. Besides, if I refused to go, it woul d be taken as 
an admission of guilt. And he didn't look like a policeman or a detective. I 
went silently beside him to a cafeteria down near the end of the block, seeing 
him peer inside through the window before we entered.
"You get the table, brother. Over there near the wall where we can 
talk in peace. I'll get the coffee." 
I watched him going across the floor with a bouncy, rolling step ,
then found a table and sat watching him. It was warm in the cafet eria. It 
was late afternoon now only a few customers were scattered at the t ables. I 
watched the man going familiarly to the food counter and orderin g. His 
movements, as he peered through the brightly lighted shelves of pastry, were 
those of a lively small animal, a fyce, interested in detectin g only the target 
cut of cake. So he's heard my speech; well, I'll hear what he has to say, I 
thought, seeing him start toward me with his rapid, rolling, boun cy,
heel-and-toey step. It was as though he had taught himself to walk that way 
and I had a feeling that somehow he was acting a part; that somet hing about 
him wasn't exactly real -- an idea which I dismissed immediate ly, since there 
was a quality of unreality over the whole afternoon. He came stra ight to the 
table without having to look about for me, as though he had exp ected me to 
take that particular table and no other -- although many table s were vacant.
He was balancing a plate of cake on top of each cup, setting the m down 
deftly and shoving one toward me as he took his chair.
"I thought you might like a piece of cheese cake," he said.
"Cheese cake?" I said. "I've never heard of it." 
"It's nice. Sugar?" 
"Go ahead," I said.
"No, after you, brother." 
I looked at him, then poured three spoonfuls and shoved the shak er 
toward him. I was tense again.
"Thanks," I said, repressing an impulse to call him down about t he 
"brother" business.
He smiled, cutting into his cheese cake with a fork and shoving far 
too large a piece into his mouth. His manners are extremely crude, I thought,
trying to put him at a disadvantage in my own mind by pointedly taking a 
small piece of the cheesy stuff and placing it neatly into my m outh.
"You know," he said, taking a gulp of coffee, "I haven't heard s uch 
an effective piece of eloquence since the days when I was in -- well, in a 
long time. You aroused them so quickly to action. I don't unders tand how 
you managed it. If only some of our speakers could have listene d! With a few 
words you had them involved in action! Others would have still b een wasting 
time with empty verbiage. I want to thank you for a most instruc tive 
experience!" 
I drank my coffee silently. Not only did I distrust him, I didn't know 
how much I could safely say.
"The cheese cake here is good," he said before I could answer. "It 's 
really very good. By the way, where did you learn to speak?" 
"Nowhere," I said, much too quickly.
"Then you're very talented. You are a natural. It's hard to believ e." 
"I was simply angry," I said, deciding to admit this much in ord er to 
see what he would reveal.
"Then your anger was skillfully controlled. It had eloquence . Why was 
that?" 
"Why? I suppose I felt sorry -- I don't know. Maybe I just felt li ke 
making a speech. There was the crowd waiting, so I said a few words . You 
might not believe it, but I didn't know what I was going to say . . ." 
"Please," he said, with a knowing smile.
"What do you mean?" I said.
"You try to sound cynical, but I see through you. I know, I liste ned 
very carefully to what you had to say. You were enormously moved. Your 
emotions were touched." 
"I guess so," I said. "Maybe seeing them reminded me of somethi ng." 
He leaned forward, watching me intensely now, the smile still on his 
lips.
"Did it remind you of people you know?" 
"I guess it did," I said.
"I think I understand. You were watching a death --" 
I dropped my fork. "No one was killed," I said tensely. "What are 
you trying to do?" 
"A Death on the City Pavements -- that's the title of a detecti ve story 
or something I read somewhere . . ." He laughed. "I only mean 
meta-phor-ically speaking. They're living, but dead. Dead-i n-living . . . a unity 
of opposites." 
"Oh," I said. What kind of double talk was this? 
"The old ones, they're agrarian types, you know. Being ground up b y 
industrial conditions. Thrown on the dump heaps and cast aside . You pointed 
it out very well. 'Eighty-seven years and nothing to show for i t,' you said. You 
were absolutely correct." 
"I suppose that seeing them like that made me feel pretty bad," I 
said.
"Yes, of course. And you made an effective speech. But you musn 't 
waste your emotions on individuals, they don't count." 
"Who doesn't count?" I said.
"Those old ones," he said grimly. "It's sad, yes. But they're al ready 
dead, defunct. History has passed them by. Unfortunate, but t here's nothing 
to do about them. They're like dead limbs that must be pruned awa y so that 
the tree may bear young fruit or the storms of history will blow th em down 
anyway. Better the storm should hit them --" 
"But look --" 
"No, let me continue. These people are old. Men grow old and type s 
of men grow old. And these are very old. All they have left is thei r religion.
That's all they can think about. So they'll be cast aside. The y're dead, you 
see, because they're incapable of rising to the necessity of th e historical
situation." 
"But I like them," I said. "I like them, they reminded me of folk s I 
know down South. It's taken me a long time to feel it, but they' re folks just 
like me, except that I've been to school a few years." 
He wagged his round red head. "Oh, no, brother; you're mistaken 
and you're sentimental. You're not like them. Perhaps you were, b ut you're 
not any longer. Otherwise you'd never have made that speech. P erhaps you 
were, but that's all past, dead. You might not recognize it just now, but that 
part of you is dead! You have not completely shed that self, tha t old agrarian 
self, but it's dead and you will throw it off completely and eme rge something 
new. History has been born in your brain." 
"Look," I said, "I don't know what you're talking about. I've n ever 
lived on a farm and I didn't study agriculture, but I do know why I m ade 
that speech." 
"Then why?" 
"Because I was upset over seeing those old folks put out in the
street, that's why. I don't care what you call it, I was angry." 
He shrugged. "Let's not argue about it," he said. "I've a notion you 
could do it again. Perhaps you would be interested in working for us." 
"For whom?" I asked, suddenly excited. What was he trying to d o? 
"With our organization. We need a good speaker for this distric t.
Someone who can articulate the grievances of the people," he sa id.
"But nobody cares about their grievances," I said. "Suppose th ey were 
articulated, who would listen or care?" 
"They exist," he said with his knowing smile. "They exist, an d when 
the cry of protest is sounded, there are those who will hear it and act." 
There was something mysterious and smug in the way he spoke, as 
though he had everything figured out -- whatever he was talkin g about. Look 
at this very most certain white man, I thought. He didn't even re alize that I 
was afraid and yet he speaks so confidently. I got to my feet, "I 'm sorry," I 
said, "I have a job and I'm not interested in anyone's grievance s but my own 
. . ." 
"But you were concerned with that old couple," he said with 
narrowed eyes. "Are they relatives of yours?" 
"Sure, we're all black," I said, beginning to laugh.
He smiled, his eyes intense upon my face.
"Seriously, are they your relatives?" 
"Sure, we were burned in the same oven," I said.
The effect was electric. "Why do you fellows always talk in term s of
race!" he snapped, his eyes blazing.
"What other terms do you know?" I said, puzzled. "You think I 
would have been around there if they had been white?" 
He threw up his hands and laughed. "Let's not argue that now," he
said. "You were very effective in helping them. I can't believ e that you're such 
an individualist as you pretend. You appeared to be a man who kne w his 
duty toward the people and performed it well. Whatever you think about it 
personally, you were a spokesman for your people and you have a d uty to 
work in their interest." 
He was too complicated for me. "Look, my friend, thanks for the
coffee and cake. I have no more interest in those old folks than i n your job.
I wanted to make a speech. I like to make speeches. What happen ed 
afterwards is a mystery to me. You picked the wrong man. You shou ld have 
stopped one of those fellows who started yelling at the police men . . ." I 
stood up.
"Wait a second," he said, producing a piece of envelope and 
scribbling something. "You might change your mind. As for tho se others, I 
know them already." 
I looked at the white paper in his extended hand.
"You are wise to distrust me," he said. "You don't know who I am 
and you don't trust me. That's as it should be. But I don't give u p hope,
because some day you will look me up on your own accord and it wil l be 
different, for then you'll be ready. Just call this number and a sk for Brother 
Jack. You needn't give me your name, just mention our conversa tion. Should 
you decide tonight, give me a ring about eight." 
"Okay," I said, taking the paper. "I doubt if I'll ever need it, but who 
knows?" 
"Well, you think about it, brother. Times are grave and you seem 
very indignant." 
"I only wanted to make a speech," I said again.
"But you were indignant. And sometimes the difference between
individual and organized indignation is the difference betwe en criminal and 
political action," he said.
I laughed, "So what? I'm neither a criminal nor a politician, b rother.
So you picked the wrong man. But thanks again for the coffee and cheese 
cake -- brother." 
I left him sitting with a quiet smile on his face. When I had cros sed 
the avenue I looked through the glass, seeing him still there, a nd it occurred 
to me that he was the same man who had followed me over the roof. H e 
hadn't been chasing me at all but only going in the same directi on. I hadn't 
understood much of what he had said, only that he had spoken wit h great 
confidence. Anyway, I had been the better runner. Perhaps it was a trick of
some kind. He gave the impression that he understood much and sp oke out 
of a knowledge far deeper than appeared on the surface of his word s.
Perhaps it was only the knowledge that he had escaped by the sam e route as 
I. But what had he to fear? I had made the speech, not he. That girl in the 
apartment had said that the longer I remained unseen the longer I'd be 
effective, which didn't make much sense either. But perhaps th at was why he 
had run. He wanted to remain unseen and effective. Effective at what? No 
doubt he was laughing at me. I must have looked silly hurtling a cross the 
roofs, and like a black-face comedian shrinking from a ghost whe n the white 
pigeons shot up around me. To hell with him. He needn't be so smu g, I 
knew of some things he didn't know. Let him find someone else. He only 
wanted to use me for something. Everybody wanted to use you fo r some 
purpose. Why should he want me as a speaker? Let him make his own 
speeches. I headed for home, feeling a growing satisfaction t hat I had 
dismissed him so completely.
It was turning dark now, and much colder. Colder than I had ever 
known. What on earth was it, I mused, bending my head to the wind , that 
made us leave the warm, mild weather of home for all this cold, a nd never 
to return, if not something worth hoping for, freezing for, even bei ng evicted 
for? I felt sad. An old woman passed, bent down with two shoppin g bags, her 
eyes upon the slushy walk, and I thought of the old couple at th e eviction.
How had it ended and where were they now? What an awful emotion. W hat 
had he called it -- a death on the city pavements? How often did such things 
occur? And what would he say of Mary? She was far from dead, or of b eing 
ground to bits by New York. Hell, she knew very well how to live he re, much 
better than I with my college training -- training! Bledsoing, that was the 
term. And I was the one being ground up, not Mary. Thinking of her made 
me feel better. I couldn't imagine Mary being as helpless as th e old woman 
at the eviction, and by the time I reached the apartment I had beg un to lose 
my depression.
Chapter 14 
The odor of Mary's cabbage changed my mind. Standing engulfe d in 
the fumes filling the hall, it struck me that I couldn't realist ically reject the 
job. Cabbage was always a depressing reminder of the leaner yea rs of my 
childhood and I suffered silently whenever she served it, but this was the 
third time within the week and it dawned on me that Mary must be s hort of
money.
And here I've been congratulating myself for refusing a job, I 
thought, when I don't even know how much money I owe her. I felt a quick 
sickness grow within me. How could I face her? I went quietly to m y room 
and lay upon the bed, brooding. There were other roomers, who had jo bs,
and I knew she received help from relatives; still there was no mis take, Mary 
loved a variety of food and this concentration upon cabbage was no accident.
Why hadn't I noticed? She'd been too kind, never dunning me, a nd I lay 
there hearing her, "Don't come bothering me with your little troub les, boy.
You'll git something bye and bye" -- when I would try to apolog ize for not 
paying my rent and board. Perhaps another roomer had moved, or los t his 
job. What were Mary's problems anyway; who "articulated her grie vances," as 
the redheaded man had put it? She had kept me going for months, y et I had 
no idea. What kind of man was I becoming? I had taken her so much for 
granted that I hadn't even thought of my debt when I refused the j ob. Nor 
had I considered the embarrassment I might have caused her shoul d the 
police come to her home to arrest me for making that wild speech. Suddenly 
I felt an urge to go look at her, perhaps I had really never seen her. I had 
been acting like a child, not a man.
Taking out the crumpled paper, I looked at the telephone number.
He had mentioned an organization. What was it called? I hadn't inquired.
What a fool! At least I should have learned what I was turning dow n,
although I distrusted the red-headed man. Had I refused out of fe ar as well
as from resentment? Why didn't he just tell me what it was all abo ut instead 
of trying to impress me with his knowledge? 
Then from down the hall I could hear Mary singing, her voice cle ar 
and untroubled, though she sang a troubled song. It was the "Bac k Water 
Blues." I lay listening as the sound flowed to and around me, bri nging me a 
calm sense of my indebtedness. When it faded I got up and put on my coat.
Perhaps it was not too late. I would find a telephone and call hi m; then he 
could tell me exactly what he wanted and I could make a sensibl e decision.
Mary heard me this time. "Boy, when you come home?" she said,
sticking her head out of the kitchen. "I didn't even hear you. " 
"I came in a short while ago," I said. "You were busy so I didn't 
bother you." 
"Then where you going so soon, ain't you going to eat supper?" 
"Yes, Mary," I said, "but I've got to go out now. I forgot to take care 
of some business." 
"Shucks! What kind of business you got on a cold night like thi s?" 
she said.
"Oh, I don't know, I might have a surprise for you." 
"Won't nothing surprise me," she said. "And you hurry on back here
and git something hot in your stomach." 
Going through the cold seeking a telephone booth I realized tha t I 
had committed myself to bring her some kind of surprise, and as I w alked I 
became mildly enthusiastic. It was, after all, a job that prom ised to exercise 
my talent for public speaking, and if the pay was anything at a ll it would be 
more than I had now. At least I could pay Mary something of what I owed 
her. And she might receive some satisfaction that her predictio n had proved 
correct.
I seemed to be haunted by cabbage fumes; the little luncheone tte in 
which I found the telephone was reeking.
Brother Jack didn't sound at all surprised upon receiving my call .
"I'd like some information about --" 
"Get here as quickly as you can, we're leaving shortly," he said,
giving me a Lenox Avenue address and hanging up before I could fi nish my 
request.
I went out into the cold, annoyed both by his lack of surprise and
by the short, clipped manner in which he'd spoken, but I started out, taking 
my own time. It wasn't far, and just as I reached the corner of Leno x a car 
pulled up and I saw several men inside, Jack among them, smilin g.
"Get in," he said. "We can talk where we're going. It's a party; yo u 
might like it." 
"But I'm not dressed," I said. "I'll call you tomorrow --" 
"Dressed?" he chuckled. "You're all right, get in." 
I got in beside him and the driver, noticing that there were three 
men in the back. Then the car moved off.
No one spoke. Brother Jack seemed to sink immediately into dee p 
thought. The others looked out into the night. It was as though we were 
mere chance passengers in a subway car. I felt uneasy, wondering w here we 
were going, but decided to say nothing. The car shot swiftly ov er the slush.
Looking out at the passing night I wondered what kind of men the y 
were. Certainly they didn't act as though they were heading for a very 
sociable evening. I was hungry and I wouldn't get back in time for supper.
Well, maybe it would be worth it, both to Mary and to me. At least I 
wouldn't have to eat that cabbage!
For a moment the car paused for the traffic light, then we were 
circling swiftly through long stretches of snow-covered landsc ape lighted here 
and there by street lamps and the nervously stabbing beams of pa ssing cars:
We were flashing through Central Park, now completely transformed by the 
snow. It was as though we had plunged suddenly into mid-count ry peace, yet 
I knew that here, somewhere close by in the night, there was a zoo w ith its 
dangerous animals. The lions and tigers in heated cages, the be ars asleep, the 
snakes coiled tightly underground. And there was also the reserv oir of dark 
water, all covered by snow and by night, by snow-fall and by nigh t-fall,
buried beneath black and white, gray mist and gray silence. Then past the 
driver's head I could see a wall of buildings looming beyond the windshield.
The car nosed slowly into traffic, dropped swiftly down a hill.
We stopped before an expensive-looking building in a strange p art of
the city. I could see the word Chthonian on the storm awning stret ched above 
the walk as I got out with the others and went swiftly toward a lob by lighted 
by dim bulbs set behind frosted glass, going past the uniformed doorman 
with an uncanny sense of familiarity; feeling now, as we entere d a soundproof
elevator and shot away at a mile a minute, that I had been throug h it all
before. Then we were stopping with a gentle bounce and I was unce rtain 
whether we had gone up or down. Brother Jack guided me down the h all to 
a door on which I saw a bronze door-knocker in the shape of a large- eyed 
owl. Now he hesitated a moment, his head thrust forward as thoug h listening,
then his hand covered the owl from view, producing instead of the knock 
which I expected, an icy peal of clear chimes. Shortly the door swung partly 
open, revealing a smartly dressed woman, whose hard, handsome fa ce broke 
into smiles.
"Come in, Brothers," she said, her exotic perfume filling the fo yer.
I noticed a clip of blazing diamonds on her dress as I tried to sta nd 
aside for the others, but Brother Jack pushed me ahead.
"Excuse me," I said, but she held her ground, and I was pressing 
tensely against her perfumed softness, seeing her smile as th ough there were 
only she and I. Then I was past, disturbed not so much by the clo se contact,
as by the sense that I had somehow been through it all before. I co uldn't 
decide if it were from watching some similar scene in the movies , from books 
I'd read, or from some recurrent but deeply buried dream. Whatsoever, it was 
like entering a scene which, because of some devious circumsta nce, I had 
hitherto watched only from a distance. How could they have such an 
expensive place, I wondered.
"Put your things in the study," the woman said. "I'll go see ab out 
drinks." 
We entered a room lined with books and decorated with old musical
instruments: An Irish harp, a hunter's horn, a clarinet and a wooden flute 
were suspended by the neck from the wall on pink and blue ribbons. There 
were a leather divan and a number of easy chairs.
"Throw your coat on the divan," Brother Jack said.
I slid out of my overcoat and looked around. The dial of the radio 
built into a section of the natural mahogany bookshelf was lig hted, but I 
couldn't hear any sound; and there was an ample desk on which res ted silver 
and crystal writing things, and, as one of the men came to stand gazing at 
the bookcase, I was struck by the contrast between the richness o f the room 
and their rather poor clothing.
"Now we'll go into the other room," Brother Jack said, taking me by 
the arm.
We entered a large room in which one entire wall was hung with 
Italian-red draperies that fell in rich folds from the ceiling. A n umber of
well-dressed men and women were gathered in groups, some beside a grand 
piano, the others lounging in the pale beige upholstery of the blond wood 
chairs. Here and there I saw several attractive young women but care fully 
avoided giving them more than a glance. I felt extremely uncomf ortable,
although after brief glances no one paid me any special attent ion. It was as 
though they hadn't seen me, as though I were here, and yet not here . The 
others were moving away to join the various groups now, and Brother Jack 
took my arm.
"Come, let's get a drink," he said, guiding me toward the end of t he 
room.
The woman who'd let us in was mixing drinks behind a handsome 
free-form bar which was large enough to have graced a night club.
"How about a drink for us, Emma?" Brother Jack said.
"Well, now, I'll have to think about it," she said, tilting he r severely 
drawn head and smiling.
"Don't think, act," he said. "We're very thirsty men. This youn g man 
pushed history ahead twenty years today." 
"Oh," she said, her eyes becoming intent. "You must tell me ab out 
him." 
"Just read the morning papers, Emma. Things have begun to move.
Yes, leap ahead." He laughed deeply.
"What would you like, Brother?" she said, her eyes brushing slow ly 
over my face.
"Bourbon," I said, a little too loudly, as I remembered the best the 
South had to offer. My face was warm, but I returned her glance as st eadily 
as I dared. It was not the harsh uninterested-in-you-as-a-huma n-being stare 
that I'd known in the South, the kind that swept over a black ma n as though 
he were a horse or an insect; it was something more, a direct,
what-type-of-mere-man-have-we-here kind of look that seeme d to go beneath 
my skin . . . Somewhere in my leg a muscle twitched violently.
"Emma, the bourbon! Two bourbons," Brother Jack said.
"You know," she said, picking up a decanter, "I'm intrigued." 
"Naturally. Always," he said. "Intrigued and intriguing. But w e're 
dying of thirst." 
"Only of impatience," she said, pouring the drinks. "I mean you are.
Tell me, where did you find this young hero of the people?" 
"I didn't," Brother Jack said. "He simply arose out of a crowd. Th e 
people always throw up their leaders, you know . . ." 
"Throw them up," she said. "Nonsense, they chew them up and spi t 
them out. Their leaders are made, not born. Then they're destroyed . You've 
always said that. Here you are, Brother." 
He looked at her steadily. I took the heavy crystal glass and ra ised it 
to my lips, glad for an excuse to turn from her eyes. A haze of ciga rette 
smoke drifted through the room. I heard a series of rich arpeggios sou nd on 
the piano behind me and turned to look, hearing the woman Emma sa y not 
quite softly enough, "But don't you think he should be a littl e blacker?" 
"Shhh, don't be a damn fool," Brother Jack said sharply. "We're n ot 
interested in his looks but in his voice. And I suggest, Emma, t hat you make 
it your interest too . . ." 
Suddenly hot and breathless, I saw a window across the room and 
went over and stood looking out. We were up very high; street lam ps and 
traffic cut patterns in the night below. So she doesn't think I' m black enough.
What does she want, a black-face comedian? Who is she, anyway , Brother 
Jack's wife, his girl friend? Maybe she wants to see me sweat coa l tar, ink,
shoe polish, graphite. What was I, a man or a natural resource? 
The window was so high that I could barely hear the sound of traff ic 
below . . . This was a bad beginning, but hell, I was being hired b y Brother 
Jack, if he still wanted me, not this Emma woman. I'd like to sh ow her how 
really black I am, I thought, taking a big drink of the bourbon. I t was 
smooth, cold. I'd have to be careful with the stuff. Anything m ight happen if
I had too much. With these people I'll have to be careful. Alway s careful.
With all people I'll have to be careful . . .
"It's a pleasant view, isn't it?" a voice said, and I whirled to see a 
tall dark man. "But now would you mind joining us in the library? " he said.
Brother Jack, the men who had come along in the car, and two 
others whom I hadn't seen before were waiting.
"Come in, Brother," Jack said. "Business before pleasure is alwa ys a 
good rule, whoever you are. Some day the rule shall be business wi th 
pleasure, for the joy of labor shall have been restored. Sit down ." 
I took the chair directly before him, wondering what this speech was 
all about.
"You know, Brother," he said, "we don't ordinarily interrupt our so cial
gatherings with business, but with you it's necessary." 
"I'm very sorry," I said. "I should have called you earlier." 
"Sorry? Why, we're only too glad to do so. We've been waiting for
you for months. Or for someone who could do what you've done."
"But what . . . ?" I said.
"What are we doing? What is our mission? It's simple; we are 
working for a better world for all people. It's that simple. Too many have 
been dispossessed of their heritage, and we have banded toget her in 
brotherhood so as to do something about it. What do you think of t hat?" 
"Why, I think it's fine," I said, trying to take in the full mea ning of
his words. "I think it's excellent. But how?" 
"By moving them to action just as you did this morning. . . Brothe rs,
I was there," he said to the others, "and he was magnificent. Wit h a few 
words he set off an effective demonstration against evictions !" 
"I was present too," another said. "It was amazing." 
"Tell us something of your background," Brother Jack said, his voice 
and manner demanding truthful answers. And I explained briefly that I had 
come up looking for work to pay my way through college and had fai led.
"Do you still plan to return?" 
"Not now," I said. "I'm all done with that." 
"It's just as well," Brother Jack said. "You have little to lea rn down 
there. However, college training is not a bad thing -- although y ou'll have to 
forget most of it. Did you study economics?" 
"Some." 
"Sociology?" 
"Yes." 
"Well, let me advise you to forget it. You'll be given books to re ad 
along with some material that explains our program in detail. Bu t we're 
moving too fast. Perhaps you aren't interested in working for the
Brotherhood." 
"But you haven't told me what I'm supposed to do," I said.
He looked at me fixedly, picking up his glass slowly and takin g a 
long swallow.
"Let's put it this way," he said. "How would you like to be the n ew 
Booker T. Washington?" 
"What!" I looked into his bland eyes for laughter, seeing his re d head 
turned slightly to the side. "Please, now," I said.
"Oh, yes, I'm serious." 
"Then I don't understand you." Was I drunk? I looked at him; he 
seemed sober.
"What do you think of the idea? Or better still, what do you thi nk of
Booker T. Washington?" 
"Why, naturally, I think he was an important figure. At least mos t 
people say so." 
"But?" 
"Well," I was at a loss for words. He was going too fast again. Th e 
whole idea was insane and yet the others were looking at me calml y; one of
them was lighting up an underslung pipe. The match sputtered, c aught fire.
"What is it?" Brother Jack insisted.
"Well, I guess I don't think he was as great as the Founder." 
"Oh? And why not?" 
"Well, in the first place, the Founder came before him and did 
practically everything Booker T. Washington did and a lot more . And more 
people believed in him. You hear a lot of arguments about Booke r T.
Washington, but few would argue about the Founder . . ." 
"No, but perhaps that is because the Founder lies outside hist ory,
while Washington is still a living force. However, the new Wash ington shall
work for the poor . . ." 
I looked into my crystal glass of bourbon. It was unbelievabl e, yet 
strangely exciting and I had the sense of being present at the cre ation of
important events, as though a curtain had been parted and I was be ing 
allowed to glimpse how the country operated. And yet none of th ese men was 
well known, or at least I'd never seen their faces in the newsp apers.
"During these times of indecision when all the old answers are 
proven false, the people look back to the dead to give them a clu e," he went 
on. "They call first upon one and then upon another of those who have acted 
in the past." 
"If you please, Brother," the man with the pipe interrupted, "I th ink 
you should speak more concretely." 
"Please don't interrupt," Brother Jack said icily.
"I wish only to point out that a scientific terminology exists ," the 
man said, emphasizing his words with his pipe. "After all, we c all ourselves 
scientists here. Let us speak as scientists." 
"In due time," Brother Jack said. "In due time . . . You see,
Brother," he said, turning to me, "the trouble is that there is litt le the dead 
can do; otherwise they wouldn't be the dead. No! But on the oth er hand, it 
would be a great mistake to assume that the dead are absolutely p owerless.
They are powerless only to give the full answer to the new questi ons posed 
for the living by history. But they try! Whenever they hear th e imperious 
cries of the people in a crisis, the dead respond. Right now in thi s country,
with its many national groups, all the old heroes are being calle d back to life 
-- Jefferson, Jackson, Pulaski, Garibaldi, Booker T. Washing ton, Sun Yat-sen,
Danny O'Connell, Abraham Lincoln and countless others are bein g asked to 
step once again upon the stage of history. I can't say too emph atically that 
we stand at a terminal point in history, at a moment of supreme wo rld crisis.
Destruction lies ahead unless things are changed. And things m ust be 
changed. And changed by the people. Because, Brother, the enem ies of man 
are dispossessing the world! Do you understand?" 
"I'm beginning to," I said, greatly impressed.
"There are other terms, other more accurate ways of saying all this ,
but we haven't time for that right now. We speak now in terms that are easy 
to understand. As you spoke to the crowd this morning." 
"I see," I said, feeling uncomfortable under his stare.
"So it isn't a matter of whether you wish to be the new Booker T.
Washington, my friend. Booker Washington was resurrected today at a certain 
eviction in Harlem. He came out from the anonymity of the crowd an d spoke 
to the people. So you see, I don't joke with you. Or play with wo rds either.
There is a scientific explanation for this phenomenon -- as ou r learned 
brother has graciously reminded me -- you'll learn it in time, but whatever 
you call it the reality of the world crisis is a fact. We are all reali sts here,
and materialists. It is a question of who shall determine the di rection of
events. That is why we've brought you into this room. This mornin g you 
answered the people's appeal and we want you to be the true interp reter of
the people. You shall be the new Booker T. Washington, but eve n greater 
than he." 
There was silence. I could hear the wet cracking of the pipe.
"Perhaps we should allow the Brother to express himself as to how
he feels about all this," the man with the pipe said.
"Well, Brother?" Brother Jack said.
I looked into their waiting faces.
"It's all so new to me that I don't know exactly what I do think, " I 
said. "Do you really think you have the right man?" 
"You mustn't let that worry you," Brother Jack said. "You will ri se to 
the task; it is only necessary that you work hard and follow inst ructions." 
They stood up now. I looked at them, fighting a sense of unreali ty.
They stared at me as the fellows had done when I was being initia ted into 
my college fraternity. Only this was real and now was the time for me to 
decide or to say I thought they were crazy and go back to Mary's. B ut what 
is there to lose? I thought. At least they've invited me, one of us, in at the 
beginning of something big; and besides, if I refused to join t hem, where 
would I goto a job as porter at the railroad station? At least here w as a 
chance to speak.
"When shall I start?" I said.
"Tomorrow, we must waste no time. By the way, where are you 
living?" 
"I rent a room from a woman in Harlem," I said.
"A housewife?" 
"She's a widow," I said. "She rents rooms." 
"What is her educational background?" 
"She's had very little." 
"More or less like the old couple that was evicted?" 
"Somewhat, but better able to take care of herself. She's tough ," I 
said with a laugh.
"Does she ask a lot of questions? Are you friendly with her?" 
"She's been very nice to me," I said. "She allowed me to stay on
after I was unable to pay my rent." 
He shook his head. "No." 
"What is it?" I said.
"It is best that you move," he said. "We'll find you a place furt her 
downtown so that you'll be within easy call . . ." 
"But I have no money, and she's entirely trustworthy." 
"That will be taken care of," he said, waving his hand. "You mus t 
realize immediately that much of our work is opposed. Our disci pline 
demands therefore that we talk to no one and that we avoid situat ions in 
which information might be given away unwittingly. So you mus t put aside 
your past. Do you have a family?" 
"Yes." 
"Are you in touch with them?" 
"Of course. I write home now and then," I said, beginning to resen t 
his method of questioning. His voice had become cold, searchi ng.
"Then it's best that you cease for a while," he said. "Anyway, you'll
be too busy. Here." He fished into his vest pocket for somethin g and got 
suddenly to his feet.
"What is it?" someone asked.
"Nothing, excuse me," he said, rolling to the door and beckoni ng. In 
a moment I saw the woman appear.
"Emma, the slip of paper I gave you. Give it to the new Brother," h e 
said as she stepped inside and closed the door.
"Oh, so it's you," she said with a meaningful smile.
I watched her reach into the bosom of her taffeta hostess gown a nd 
remove a white envelope.
"This is your new identity," Brother Jack said. "Open it." 
Inside I found a name written on a slip of paper.
"That is your new name," Brother Jack said. "Start thinking of
yourself by that name from this moment. Get it down so that even i f you are 
called in the middle of the night you will respond. Very soon yo u shall be 
known by it all over the country. You are to answer to no other,
understand?" 
"I'll try," I said.
"Don't forget his living quarters," the tall man said.
"No," Brother Jack said with a frown. "Emma, please, some funds ." 
"How much, Jack?" she said.
He turned to me. "Do you owe much rent?" 
"Too much," I said.
"Make it three hundred, Emma," he said.
"Never mind," he said as I showed my surprise at the sum. "This 
will pay your debts and buy you clothing. Call me in the morning and I'll
have selected your living quarters. For a start your salary will be sixty dollars 
a week." 
Sixty a week! There was nothing I could say. The woman had 
crossed the room to the desk and returned with the money, placing i t in my 
hand.
"You'd better put it away," she said expansively.
"Well, Brothers, I believe that's all," he said. "Emma, how abo ut a 
drink?" 
"Of course, of course," she said, going to a cabinet and removing a 
decanter and a set of glasses in which she poured about an inch o f clear 
liquid.
"Here you are, Brothers," she said.
Taking his, Brother Jack raised it to his nose, inhaling deeply . "To 
the Brotherhood of Man . . . to History and to Change," he said, to uching 
my glass.
"To History," we all said.
The stuff burned, causing me to lower my head to hide the tears th at 
popped from my eyes.
"Aaaah!" someone said with deep satisfaction.
"Come along," Emma said. "Let's join the others." 
"Now for some pleasure," Brother Jack said. "And remember your 
new identity." 
I wanted to think but they gave me no time. I was swept into the 
large room and introduced by my new name. Everyone smiled and see med 
eager to meet me, as though they all knew the role I was to play. A ll
grasped me warmly by the hand.
"What is your opinion of the state of women's rights, Brother?" I was 
asked by a plain woman in a large black velvet tarn. But before I co uld open 
my mouth, Brother Jack had pushed me along to a group of men, one o f
whom seemed to know all about the eviction. Nearby, a group arou nd the 
piano were singing folk songs with more volume than melody. We m oved 
from group to group, Brother Jack very authoritative, the others al ways 
respectful. He must be a powerful man, I thought, not a clown at a ll. But to 
hell with this Booker T. Washington business. I would do the w ork but I 
would be no one except myself -- whoever I was, I would pattern m y life on 
that of the Founder. They might think I was acting like Booker T .
Washington; let them. But what I thought of myself I would kee p to myself.
Yes, and I'd have to hide the fact that I had actually been afrai d when I 
made my speech. Suddenly I felt laughter bubbling inside me. I'd have to 
catch up with this science of history business.
We had come to stand near the piano now, where an intense young 
man questioned me about various leaders of the Harlem community . I knew 
them only by name, but pretended that I knew them all.
"Good," he said, "good, we have to work with all these forces duri ng 
the coming period." 
"Yes, you're quite right," I said, giving my glass a tinkling tw irl. A 
short broad man saw me and waved the others to a halt. "Say, Brother, " he 
called. "Hold the music, boys, hold it!" 
"Yes, uh . . . Brother," I said.
"You're just who we need. We been looking for you." 
"Oh," I said.
"How about a spiritual, Brother? Or one of those real good ole Negro
work songs? Like this: Ah went to Atlanta -- nevah been there bef o'," he 
sang, his arms held out from his body like a penguin's wings, gla ss in one 
hand, cigar in the other. "White man sleep in a feather bed, Nig guh sleep on 
the flo' . . . Ha! Ha! How about it, Brother?" 
"The Brother does not sing!" Brother Jack roared staccato.
"Nonsense, all colored people sing." 
"This is an outrageous example of unconscious racial chauvini sm!" 
Jack said.
"Nonsense, I like their singing," the broad man said doggedly .
"The Brother does not sing!" Brother Jack cried, his face turning a 
deep purple.
The broad man regarded him stubbornly. "Why don't you let him say 
whether he can sing or not . . . ? Come on, Brother, git hot! Go Down ,
Moses," he bellowed in a ragged baritone, putting down his ciga r and 
snapping his fingers. "Way down in Egypt's land. Tell dat ole P haraoh to let 
ma colored folks sing! I'm for the rights of the colored brother to sing!" he 
shouted belligerently.
Brother Jack looked as if he would choke; he raised his hand,
signaling. I saw two men shoot from across the room and lead the sh ort man 
roughly away. Brother Jack followed them as they disappeared be yond the 
door, leaving an enormous silence.
For a moment I stood there, my eyes riveted upon the door, then I 
turned, the glass hot in my hand, my face feeling as though it wo uld explode.
Why was everyone staring at me as though I were responsible? Why t he hell
were they staring at me? Suddenly I yelled, "What's the matter w ith you? 
Haven't you ever seen a drunk --" when somewhere off the foyer th e broad 
man's voice staggered drunkenly to us, "St. Louis mammieeeee - - with her 
diamond riiiings . . ." and was clipped off by a slamming door, le aving a 
roomful of bewildered faces. And suddenly I was laughing hyste rically.
"He hit me in the face," I wheezed. "He hit me in the face with a 
yard of chitterlings!" -- bending double, roaring, the whole room seeming to 
dance up and down with each rapid eruption of laughter.
"He threw a hog maw," I cried, but no one seemed to understand.
My eyes filled, I could barely see. "He's high as a Georgia pine, " I laughed,
turning to the group nearest me. "He's abso-lutely drunk . . . off m usic!" 
"Yes. Sure," a man said nervously. "Ha, ha . . ." 
"Three sheets in the wind," I laughed, getting my breath now, an d 
discovering that the silent tension of the others was ebbing in to a ripple of
laughter that sounded throughout the room, growing swiftly to a roar, a laugh 
of all dimensions, intensities and intonations. Everyone w as joining in. The 
room fairly bounced.
"And did you see Brother Jack's face," a man shouted, shaking h is 
head.
"It was murder!" 
"Go down Moses!" 
"I tell you it was murder!" 
Across the room they were pounding someone on the back to keep 
him from choking. Handkerchiefs appeared, there was much honkin g of noses,
wiping of eyes. A glass crashed to the floor, a chair was overturne d. I fought 
against the painful laughter, and as I calmed I saw them lookin g at me with 
a sort of embarrassed gratitude. It was sobering and yet they seeme d bent 
upon pretending that nothing unusual had happened. They smil ed. Several
seemed about to come over and pound my back, shake my hand. It w as as 
though I had told them something which they'd wished very muc h to hear,
had rendered them an important service which I couldn't understa nd. But 
there it was, working in their faces. My stomach ached. I wanted to leave, to 
get their eyes off me. Then a thin little woman came over and gra sped my 
hand.
"I'm so sorry that this had to happen," she said in a slow Yankee
voice, "really and truly sorry. Some of our Brothers aren't so highl y 
developed, you know. Although they mean very well. You must a llow me to 
apologize for him . . ." 
"Oh, he was only tipsy," I said, looking into her thin, New Eng land 
face.
"Yes, I know, and revealingly so. I would never ask our colored 
brothers to sing, even though I love to hear them. Because I know that it 
would be a very backward thing. You are here to fight along with us , not to 
entertain. I think you understand me, don't you, Brother?" 
I gave her a silent smile.
"Of course you do. I must go now, good-bye," she said, extendin g her 
little white-gloved hand and leaving.
I was puzzled. Just what did she mean? Was it that she understoo d 
that we resented having others think that we were all entertainers and natural
singers? But now after the mutual laughter something disturb ed me: Shouldn't 
there be some way for us to be asked to sing? Shouldn't the short m an have 
the right to make a mistake without his motives being considere d consciously 
or unconsciously malicious? After all, he was singing, or tr ying to. What if I 
asked him to sing? I watched the little woman, dressed in black like a 
missionary, winding her way through the crowd. What on earth was she doing 
here? What part did she play? Well, whatever she meant, she's ni ce and I 
like her.
Just then Emma came up and challenged me to dance and I led her 
toward the floor as the piano played, thinking of the vet's pred iction and 
drawing her to me as though I danced with such as her every eveni ng. For 
having committed myself, I felt that I could never allow myse lf to show 
surprise or upset -- even when confronted with situations furthe st from my 
experience. Otherwise I might be considered undependable, or unworthy. I felt 
that somehow they expected me to perform even those tasks for wh ich 
nothing in my experience -- except perhaps my imagination -- ha d prepared 
me. Still it was nothing new, white folks seemed always to exp ect you to 
know those things which they'd done everything they could th ink of to 
prevent you from knowing. The thing to do was to be prepared -- as my
grandfather had been when it was demanded that he quote the ent ire United 
States Constitution as a test of his fitness to vote. He had co nfounded them 
all by passing the test, although they still refused him the ba llot . . . Anyway,
these were different.
It was close to five A.M., many dances and many bourbons later,
when I reached Mary's. Somehow, I felt surprised that the room was still the 
same -- except that Mary had changed the bed linen. Good old Ma ry. I felt 
sadly sobered. And as I undressed I saw my outworn clothes and real ized 
that I'd have to shed them. Certainly it was time. Even my hat wo uld go; its 
green was sun-faded and brown, like a leaf struck by the winter's s nows. I 
would require a new one for my new name. A black broad-brimmed one;
perhaps a homburg . . . humbug? I laughed. Well, I could leave pac king for 
tomorrow -- I had very little, which was perhaps all to the good. I would 
travel light, far and fast. They were fast people, all right. Wha t a vast 
difference between Mary and those for whom I was leaving her. An d why 
should it be this way, that the very job which might make it pos sible for me 
to do some of the things which she expected of me required that I l eave her? 
What kind of room would Brother Jack select for me and why wasn't I left 
to select my own? It didn't seem right that in order to become a Ha rlem 
Leader I should live elsewhere. Yet nothing seemed right and I w ould have to 
rely upon their judgment. They seemed expert in such matters.
But how far could I trust them, and in what way were they different
from the trustees? Whatever, I was committed; I'd learn in the proc ess of
working with them, I thought, remembering the money. The bills w ere crisp 
and fresh and I tried to imagine Mary's surprise when I paid her all my back 
rent and board. She'd think that I was kidding. But money could n ever repay 
her generosity. She would never understand my wanting to move s o quickly 
after getting a job. And if I had any kind of success at all, it w ould seem the 
height of ingratitude. How would I face her? She had asked for no thing in 
return. Or hardly anything, except that I make something of myse lf that she 
called a "race leader." I shivered in the cold. Telling her that I was moving 
would be a hard proposition. I didn't like to think of it, but one couldn't be 
sentimental. As Brother Jack had said, History makes harsh dem ands of us 
all. But they were demands that had to be met if men were to be the 
masters and not the victims of their times. Did I believe that? Perhaps I had 
already begun to pay. Besides, I might as well admit right now, I thought,
that there are many things about people like Mary that I dislike . For one 
thing, they seldom know where their personalities end and yours begins; they 
usually think in terms of "we" while I have always tended to thi nk in terms 
of "me" -- and that has caused some friction, even with my own fa mily.
Brother Jack and the others talked in terms of "we," but it was a di fferent,
bigger "we." 
Well, I had a new name and new problems. I had best leave the old 
behind. Perhaps it would be best not to see Mary at all, just pla ce the money 
in an envelope and leave it on the kitchen table where she'd be s ure to find 
it. It would be better that way, I thought drowsily; then there' d be no need 
to stand before her and stumble over emotions and words that were at best 
all snarled up and undifferentiated . . . One thing about the peo ple at the 
Chthonian, they all seemed able to say just what they felt and meant in hard,
clear terms. That too, I'd have to learn . . . I stretched out benea th the 
covers, hearing the springs groan beneath me. The room was cold. I l istened 
to the night sounds of the house. The clock ticked with empty u rgency, as 
though trying to catch up with the time. In the street a siren how led.
Chapter 15 
Then I was awake and not awake, sitting bolt upright in bed and 
trying to peer through the sick gray light as I sought the meanin g of the 
brash, nerve-jangling sound. Pushing the blanket aside I cla sped my hands to 
my ears. Someone was pounding the steam line, and I stared helpl essly for 
what seemed minutes. My ears throbbed. My side began itching vi olently and 
I tore open my pajamas to scratch, and suddenly the pain seemed t o leap 
from my ears to my side and I saw gray marks appearing where the old ski n 
was flaking away beneath my digging nails. And as I watched I s aw thin lines 
of blood well up in the scratches, bringing pain and joining tim e and place 
again, and I thought, The room has lost its heat on my last day at Mary's,
and suddenly I was sick at heart.
The clock, its alarm lost in the larger sound, said seven-thirty , and I 
got out of bed. I'd have to hurry. There was shopping to do before I called 
Brother Jack for my instructions and I had to get the money to Mar y -- Why 
didn't they stop that noise? I reached for my shoes, flinching as the knocking 
seemed to sound an inch above my head. Why don't they stop, I th ought.
And why do I feel so let down? The bourbon? My nerves going bad?
Suddenly I was across the room in a bound, pounding the pipe 
furiously with my shoe heel.
"Stop it, you ignorant fool!" 
My head was splitting. Beside myself, I struck pieces of silve r from 
the pipe, exposing the black and rusted iron. He was using a piec e of metal
now, his blows ringing with a ragged edge.
If only I knew who it was, I thought, looking for something hea vy 
with which to strike back. If only I knew!
Then near the door I saw something which I'd never noticed the re 
before: the cast-iron figure of a very black, red-lipped and wide -mouthed 
Negro, whose white eyes stared up at me from the floor, his face an 
enormous grin, his single large black hand held palm up before his chest. It 
was a bank, a piece of early Americana, the kind of bank which, if a coin is 
placed in the hand and a lever pressed upon the back, will raise i ts arm and 
flip the coin into the grinning mouth. For a second I stopped, f eeling hate 
charging within me, then dashed over and grabbed it, suddenly a s enraged by 
the tolerance or lack of discrimination, or whatever, that allo wed Mary to 
keep such a self-mocking image around, as by the knocking.
In my hand its expression seemed more of a strangulation than a 
grin. It was choking, filled to the throat with coins.
How the hell did it get here, I wondered, dashing over and strikin g 
the pipe a blow with the kinky iron head. "Shut up!" I screamed, w hich 
seemed only to enrage the hidden knocker. The din was deafening . Tenants 
up and down the entire line of apartments joined in. I hammered ba ck with 
the iron naps, seeing the silver fly, striking like driven sand a gainst my face.
The pipe fairly hummed with the blows. Windows were going up. Vo ices 
yelled obscenities down the airshaft.
Who started all this, I wondered, who's responsible? 
"Why don't you act like responsible people living in the twent ieth 
century?" I yelled, aiming a blow at the pipe. "Get rid of your c ottonpatch 
ways! Act civilized!" 
Then came a crash of sound and I felt the iron head crumble and fly 
apart in my hand. Coins flew over the room like crickets, ringing, rattling 
against the floor, rolling. I stopped dead.
"Just listen to 'em! Just listen to 'em!" Mary called from the h all.
"Enough noise to wake the dead! They know when the heat don't c ome up 
that the super's drunk or done walked off the job looking for his woman, or 
something. Why don't folks act according to what they know?" 
She was at my door now, knocking stroke for stroke with the blows
landing on the pipe, calling, "Son! Ain't some of that knocki ng coming from 
in there?" 
I turned from side to side in indecision, looking at the pieces o f
broken head, the small coins of all denominations that were sca ttered about.
"You hear me, boy?" she called.
"What is it?" I called, dropping to the floor and reaching franti cally 
for the broken pieces, thinking, If she opens the door, I'm lost . . .
"I said is any of that racket coming from in there?" 
"Yes, it is, Mary," I called, "but I'm all right . . . I'm already a wake." 
I saw the knob move and froze, hearing, "Sounded to me like a heap
of it was coming from in there. You got your clothes on?" 
"No," I cried. "I'm just dressing. I'll have them on in a minute. " 
"Come on out to the kitchen," she said. "It's warm out there. And
there's some hot water on the stove to wash your face in . . . and s ome 
coffee. Lawd, just listen at the racket!" 
I stood as though frozen, until she moved away from the door. I'd 
have to hurry. I kneeled, picking up a piece of the bank, a part of the 
red-shirted chest, reading the legend, FEED ME in a curve of whit e iron 
letters, like the team name on an athlete's shirt. The figure had gone to 
pieces like a grenade, scattering jagged fragments of painted i ron among the 
coins. I looked at my hand; a small trickle of blood showed. I wi ped it away,
thinking, I'll have to hide this mess! I can't take her this an d the news that 
I'm moving at the same time. Taking a newspaper from the chair I folded it 
stiffly and swept the coins and broken metal into a pile. Where w ould I hide 
it, I wondered, looking with profound distaste at the iron kinks , the dull red 
of a piece of grinning lip. Why, I thought with anguish, would M ary have 
something like this around anyway? Just why? I looked under th e bed. It was 
dustless there, no place to hide anything. She was too good a ho usekeeper.
Besides, what of the coins? Hell! Maybe the thing was left by t he former 
roomer. Anyway, whose ever it was, it had to be hidden. There was t he 
closet, but she'd find it there too. After I was gone a few days s he'd clean 
out my things and there it'd be. The knocking had gone beyond me re protest 
over heatlessness now, they had fallen into a ragged rumba rhyth m:
Knock!
Knock-knock 
Knock-knock!
Knock!
Knock-knock!
Knock-knock!
vibrating the very floor.
"Just a few minutes more, you bastards," I said aloud, "and I'll be 
gone! No respect for the individual. Why don't you think about those who 
might wish to sleep? What if someone is near a nervous breakdow n . . . ?" 
But there was still the package. There was nothing to do but get ri d 
of it along the way downtown. Making a tight bundle, I placed i t in my 
overcoat pocket. I'd simply have to give Mary enough money to c over the 
coins. I'd give her as much as I could spare, half of what I had, i f necessary.
That should make up for some of it. She should appreciate that. And now I 
realized with a feeling of dread that I had to meet her face to fac e. There 
was no way out. Why can't I just tell her that I'm leaving and pa y her and 
go on off? She was a landlady, I was a tenant -- No, there was more t o it 
and I wasn't hard enough, scientific enough, even to tell her t hat I was 
leaving. I'll tell her I have a job, anything, but it has to be n ow.
She was sitting at the table drinking coffee when I went in, the
kettle hissing away on the stove, sending up jets of steam.
"Gee, but you slow this morning," she said. "Take some of that w ater 
in the kettle and go wash your face. Though sleepy as you look, maybe you 
ought to just use cold water." 
"This'll do," I said flatly, feeling the steam drifting upon m y face,
growing swiftly damp and cold. The clock above the stove was sl ower than 
mine.
In the bathroom I put in the plug and poured some of the hot water 
and cooled it from the spigot. I kept the tear-warm water upon my f ace a 
long time, then dried and returned to the kitchen.
"Run it full again," she said when I returned. "How you feel?" 
"So-so," I said.
She sat with her elbows upon the enameled table top, her cup he ld 
in both hands, one work-worn little finger delicately curved. I went to the 
sink and turned the spigot, feeling the cold rush of water upon m y hand,
thinking of what I had to do . . .
"That's enough there, boy," Mary said, startling me. "Wake up! " 
"I guess I'm not all here," I said. "My mind was wandering." 
"Well, call it back and come get you some coffee. Soon's I've h ad 
mine, I'll see what kind of breakfast I can whip together. I gues s after last 
night you can eat this morning. You didn't come back for supper. " 
"I'm sorry," I said. "Coffee will be enough for me." 
"Boy, you better start eating again," she warned, pouring me a fu ll
cup of coffee.
I took the cup and sipped it, black. It was bitter. She glanced f rom 
me to the sugar bowl and back again but remained silent, then sw irled her 
cup, looking into it.
"Guess I'll have to get some better filters," she mused. "Thes e I got 
lets through the grounds along with the coffee, the good with th e bad. I don't 
know though, even with the best of filters you apt to find a groun d or two at 
the bottom of your cup." 
I blew upon the steaming liquid, avoiding Mary's eyes. The kn ocking 
was becoming unbearable again. I'd have to get away. I looked a t the hot 
metallic surface of the coffee, noticing on oily, opalescent swirl.
"Look, Mary," I said, plunging in, "I want to talk to you about
something." 
"Now see here, boy," she said gruffly, "I don't want you worrying me 
about your rent this morning. I'm not worried 'cause when you get i t I know 
you'll pay me. Meanwhile you forget it. Nobody in this house is going to 
starve. You having any luck lining up a job?" 
"No -- I mean not exactly," I stammered, seizing the opportunit y.
"But I've got an appointment to see about one this morning . . ."
Her face brightened. "Oh, that's fine. You'll get something y et. I know 
it." 
"But about my debt," I began again.
"Don't worry about it. How about some hotcakes?" she asked, ris ing 
and going to look into the cabinet. "They'll stick with you in this cold 
weather." 
"I won't have time," I said. "But I've got something for you . . ." 
"What's that?" she said, her voice coming muffled as she peere d 
inside the cabinet.
"Here," I said hurriedly reaching into my pocket for the money.
"What? -- Let's see if I got some syrup . . ." 
"But look," I said eagerly, removing a hundred-dollar bill.
"Must be on a higher shelf," she said, her back still turned.
I sighed as she dragged a step ladder from beside the cabinet and
mounted it, holding onto the doors and peering upon an upper she lf. I'd 
never get it said. . .
"But I'm trying to give you something," I said.
"Why don't you quit bothering me, boy? You trying to give me 
what?" she said looking over her shoulder.
I held up the bill. "This," I said.
She craned her head around. "Boy, what you got there?" 
"It's money." 
"Money? Good God, boy!" she said, almost losing her balance a s she 
turned completely around. "Where'd you get all that much money? You been 
playing the numbers?" 
"That's it. My number came up," I said thankfully -- thinking , What'll
I say if she asks what the number was? I didn't know. I had never played.
"But how come you didn't tell me? I'd have at least put a nickel on 
it." 
"I didn't think it would do anything," I said.
"Well, I declare. And I bet it was your first time too." 
"It was." 
"See there, I knowed you was a lucky one. Here I been playing for 
years and the first drop of the bucket you hits for that kinda mone y. I'm sho 
glad for you, son. I really am. But I don't want your money. You w ait 'til you 
get a job." 
"But I'm not giving you all of it," I said hastily. "This is jus t on 
account." 
"But that's a hundred-dollar bill. I take that an' try to chang e it and 
the white folks'll want to know my whole life's history." She snorted. "They 
want to know where I was born, where I work, and where I been for the la st 
six months, and when I tell 'em they still gonna think I stole i t. Ain't you 
got nothing smaller?" 
"That's the smallest. Take it," I pleaded. "I'll have enough left." 
She looked at me shrewdly. "You sho?" 
"It's the truth," I said.
"Well, I de-clare -- Let me get down from up here before I fall and 
break my neck! Son," she said, coming down off the ladder, "I sho do 
appreciate it. But I tell you, I'm just going to keep part of it fo r myself and 
the rest I'm going to save for you. You get hard up just come to Mar y." 
"I think I'll be all right now," I said, watching her fold the mo ney 
carefully, placing it in the leather bag that always hung on th e back of her 
chair.
"I'm really glad, 'cause now I can take care of that bill they bee n 
bothering me about. It'll do me so much good to go in there and plo p down 
some money and tell them folks to quit bothering me. Son, I beli eve your 
luck done changed. You dream that number?" 
I glanced at her eager face. "Yes," I said, "but it was a mixed- up 
dream." 
"What was the figger -- Jesus! What's this!" she cried, gettin g up and 
pointing at the linoleum near the steam line.
I saw a small drove of roaches trooping frantically down the steam
line from the floor above, plummeting to the floor as the vibrat ion of the 
pipe shook them off.
"Get the broom!" Mary yelled. "Out of the closet there!" 
Stepping around the chair I snatched the broom and joined her,
splattering the scattering roaches with both broom and feet, hea ring the pop 
and snap as I brought the pressure down upon them vehemently.
"The filthy, stinking things," Mary cried. "Git that one unde r the 
table! Yon' he goes, don't let him git away! The nasty rascal!"
I swung the broom, battering and sweeping the squashed insects into 
piles. Breathing excitedly Mary got the dust pan and handed it to me.
"Some folks just live in filth," she said disgustedly. "Just let a little 
knocking start and here it comes crawling out. All you have to do i s shake 
things up a bit." 
I looked at the damp spots on the linoleum, then shakily replac ed 
the pan and broom and started out of the room.
"Aren't you going to eat no breakfast?" she said. "Soon's I wipe up 
this mess I'm going to start." 
"I don't have time," I said, my hand on the knob. "My appointme nt 
is early and I have a few things to do beforehand." 
"Then you better stop and have you something hot soon as you ca n.
Don't do to go around in this cold weather without something in your belly.
And don't think you goin' start eating out just 'cause you got s ome money!" 
"I don't. I'll take care of it," I said to her back as she washed h er 
hands.
"Well, good luck, son," she called. "You really give me a pleas ant 
surprise this morning -- and if that's a lie, I hope something big 'll bite me!" 
She laughed gaily and I went down the hall to my room and closed 
the door. Pulling on my overcoat I got down my prized brief case from the 
closet. It was still as new as the night of the battle royal, and sagged now as 
I placed the smashed bank and coins inside and locked the flap . Then I 
closed the closet door and left.
The knocking didn't bother me so much now. Mary was singing 
something sad and serene as I went down the hall, and still sing ing as I 
opened the door and stepped into the outside hall. Then I remem bered, and 
there beneath the dim hall light I took the faintly perfumed pap er from my 
wallet and carefully unfolded it. A tremor passed over me; the h all was cold.
Then it was gone and I squinted and took a long, hard look at my ne w 
Brotherhood name.
The night's snowfall was already being churned to muck by the 
passing cars, and it was warmer. Joining the pedestrians along th e walk, I 
could feel the brief case swinging against my leg from the weigh t of the 
package, and I determined to get rid of the coins and broken iron at the first 
ash can. I needed nothing like this to remind me of my last mornin g at 
Mary's.
I made for a row of crushed garbage cans lined before a row of old 
private houses, coming alongside and tossing the package cas ually into one of
them and moving on -- only to hear a door open behind me and a voi ce ring 
out,
"Oh, no you don't, oh, no you don't! Just come right back here and
get it!" 
Turning, I saw a little woman standing on the stoop with a green 
coat covering her head and shoulders, its sleeves hanging limp like extra 
atrophied arms.
"I mean you," she called. "Come on back an' get your trash. An'
don't ever put your trash in my can again!" 
She was a short yellow woman with a pince-nez on a chain, her hai r 
pinned up in knots.
"We keep our place clean and respectable and we don't want you 
field niggers coming up here from the South and ruining things," s he shouted 
with blazing hate.
People were stopping to look. A super from a building down the 
block came out and stood in the middle of the walk, pounding hi s fist against 
his palm with a dry, smacking sound. I hesitated, embarrassed a nd annoyed.
Was this woman crazy? 
"I mean it! Yes, you! I'm talking to you! Just take it right out!
Rosalie," she called to someone inside the house, "call the p olice, Rosalie!" 
I can't afford that, I thought, and walked back to the can. "Wha t 
does it matter, Miss?" I called up to her. "When the collectors co me, garbage 
is garbage. I just didn't want to throw it into the street. I didn 't know that 
some kinds of garbage were better than others." 
"Never mind your impertinence," she said. "I'm sick and tired o f
having you southern Negroes mess up things for the rest of us!" 
"All right," I said, "I'll get it out." 
I reached into the half-filled can, feeling for the package, a s the 
fumes of rotting swill entered my nostrils. It felt unhealthy to my hand, and 
the heavy package had sunk far down. Cursing, I pushed back my s leeve with 
my clean hand and probed until I found it. Then I wiped off my arm w ith a 
handkerchief and started away, aware of the people who paused to grin at 
me.
"It serves you right," the little woman called from the stoop.
And I turned and started upward. "That's enough out of you, you 
piece of yellow gone-to-waste. Unless you still want to call the police." My 
voice had taken on a new shrill pitch. "I've done what you wante d me to do;
another word and I'll do what I want to do --" 
She looked at me with widening eyes. "I believe you would," sh e 
said, opening the door. "I believe you would." 
"I not only would, I'd love it," I said.
"I can see that you're no gentleman," she called, slamming the door,
At the next row of cans I wiped off my wrist and hands with a piece 
of newspaper, then wrapped the rest around the package. Next time I'd throw 
it into the street.
Two blocks further along my anger had ebbed, but I felt strangel y 
lonely. Even the people who stood around me at the intersection seemed 
isolated, each lost in his own thoughts. And now just as the li ghts changed I 
let the package fall into the trampled snow and hurried across, th inking,
There, it's done.
I had covered two blocks when someone called behind me, "Say,
buddy! Hey, there! You, Mister . . . Wait a second!" and I could h ear the 
hurried crunching of footsteps upon the snow. Then he was beside me, a 
squat man in worn clothes, the strands of his breath showing whit e in the 
cold as he smiled at me, panting.
"You was moving so fast I thought I wasn't going to be able to st op 
you," he said. "Didn't you lose something back there a piece?"
Oh, hell, a friend in need, I thought, deciding to deny it. "Los e 
something?" I said. "Why, no." 
"You sure?" he said, frowning.
"Yes," I said, seeing his forehead wrinkle with uncertainty, a h ot 
charge of fear leaping to his eyes as he searched my face.
"But I seen you -- Say, buddy," he said, looking swiftly back u p the 
street, "what you trying to do?" 
"Do? What do you mean?" 
"I mean talking 'bout you didn't lose nothing. You working a co n 
game or something?" He backed away, looking hurriedly at the pe destrians 
back up the street from where he'd come.
"What on earth are you talking about now?" I said. "I tell you I 
didn't lose anything." 
"Man, don't tell me! I seen you. What the hell you mean?" he sai d,
furtively removing the package from his pocket. "This here feels like money or 
a gun or something and I know damn well I seen you drop it." 
"Oh, that," I said. "That isn't anything -- I thought you --" 
"That's right, 'Oh.' So you remember now, don't you? I think I'm
doing you a favor and you play me for a fool. You some kind of con fidence 
man or dope peddler or something? You trying to work one of thos e pigeon 
drops on me?" 
"Pigeon drop?" I said. "You're making a mistake --" 
"Mistake, hell! Take this damn stuff," he said, thrusting the package 
in my hands as though it were a bomb with a lighted fuse. "I got a f amily,
man. I try to do you a favor and here you trying to get me into troub le -- 
You running from a detective or somebody?" 
"Wait a minute," I said. "You're letting your imagination run a way;
this is nothing but garbage --" 
"Don't try to hand me that simple-minded crap," he wheezed. "I
know what kind of garbage it is. You young New York Negroes is a bl ip! I 
swear you is! I hope they catch you and put your ass under the ja il!" 
He shot away as though I had smallpox. I looked at the package. He 
thinks it's a gun or stolen goods, I thought, watching him go. A few steps 
farther along I was about to toss it boldly into the street when u pon looking 
back I saw him, joined by another man now, gesturing toward me 
indignantly. I hurried away. Give him time and the fool'll call a policeman. I 
dropped the package back into the brief case. I'd wait until I go t downtown.
On the subway people around me were reading their morning papers,
pressing forward their unpleasant faces. I rode with my eyes shu t, trying to 
make my mind blank to thoughts of Mary. Then turning, I saw the i tem 
Violent Protest Over Harlem Eviction, just as the man lowered hi s paper and 
moved out of the breaking doors. I could hardly wait until I reache d 42nd 
Street, where I found the story carried on the front page of a tabloi d, and I 
read it eagerly. I was referred to only as an unknown "rabble rouser" wh o 
had disappeared in the excitement, but that it referred to me was 
unmistakable. It had lasted for two hours, the crowd refusing to vacate the 
premises. I entered the clothing store with a new sense of self-i mportance.
I selected a more expensive suit than I'd intended, and while i t was 
being altered I picked up a hat, shorts, shoes, underwear and so cks, then 
hurried to call Brother Jack, who snapped his orders like a general. I was to 
go to a number on the upper East Side where I'd find a room, and I wa s to 
read over some of the Brotherhood's literature which had been left there for 
me, with the idea of my making a speech at a Harlem rally to be held that 
evening.
The address was that of an undistinguished building in a mixed
Spanish-Irish neighborhood, and there were boys throwing snowba lls across 
the street when I rang the super's bell. The door was opened by a sm all
pleasant-faced woman who smiled.
"Good morning, Brother," she said. "The apartment is all ready for
you. He said you'd come about this time and I've just this minu te come 
down. My, just look at that snow." 
I followed her up the three flights of stairs, wondering what on e arth 
I'd do with a whole apartment.
"This is it," she said, removing a chain of keys from her pocket a nd 
opening a door at the front of the hall. I went into a small comfo rtably 
furnished room that was bright with the winter sun. "This is the l iving room," 
she said proudly, "and over here is your bedroom." 
It was much larger than I needed, with a chest of drawers, two 
upholstered chairs, two closets, a bookshelf and a desk on whic h was stacked 
the literature to which he'd referred. A bathroom lay off the bedroom , and 
there was a small kitchen.
"I hope you like it, Brother," she said, as she left. "If there's a nything 
you need, please ring my bell." 
The apartment was clean and neat and I liked it -- especially th e 
bathroom with its tub and shower. And as quickly as I could I drew a bath 
and soaked myself. Then feeling clean and exhilarated I went o ut to puzzle 
over the Brotherhood books and pamphlets. My brief case with the broken 
image lay on the table. I would get rid of the package later; right now I had 
to think about tonight's rally.
Chapter 16 
At seven-thirty Brother Jack and some of the others picked me up 
and we shot up to Harlem in a taxi. As before, no one spoke a word. Th ere 
was only the sound made by a man in the corner who drew noisily on a
pipeful of rum-flavored tobacco, causing it to glow on and off, a red disk in 
the dark. I rode with mounting nervousness; the taxi seemed unn aturally 
warm. We got out in a side street and went down a narrow alley in the d ark 
to the rear of the huge, barn-like building. Other members had al ready 
arrived.
"Ah, here we are," Brother Jack said, leading the way through a dark
rear door to a dressing room lighted by naked, low-hanging bulbs -- a small
room with wooden benches and a row of steel lockers with a network o f
names scratched on the doors. It had a football-locker smell of ancient sweat,
iodine, blood and rubbing alcohol, and I felt a welling up of me mories.
"We remain here until the building fills," Brother Jack said. "T hen we 
make our appearance -- just at the height of their impatience. " He gave me a 
grin. "Meanwhile, you think about what you'll say. Did you loo k over the 
material?" 
"All day," I said.
"Good. I suggest, however, that you listen carefully to the rest of us.
We'll all precede you so that you can get pointers for your remarks . You'll be 
last." 
I nodded, seeing him take two of the other men by the arm and 
retreat to a corner. I was alone, the others were studying their note s, talking.
I went across the room to a torn photograph tacked to the faded wall . It was 
a shot, in fighting stance, of a former prizefight champion, a p opular fighter 
who had lost his sight in the ring. It must have been right here in t his 
arena, I thought. That had been years ago. The photograph was tha t of a 
man so dark and battered that he might have been of any nationali ty. Big 
and loose-muscled, he looked like a good man. I remembered my fa ther's 
story of how he had been beaten blind in a crooked fight, of the s candal that 
had been suppressed, and how the fighter had died in a home for t he blind.
Who would have thought I'd ever come here? How things were twist ed 
around! I felt strangely sad and went and slouched on a bench. Th e others 
talked on, their voices low. I watched them with a sudden resen tment. Why 
did I have to come last? What if they bored the audience to death before I 
came on! I'd probably be shouted down before I could get started . . . But 
perhaps not, I thought, jabbing my suspicions away. Perhaps I c ould make an 
effect through the sheer contrast between my approach and theirs . Maybe that 
was the strategy . . . Anyway, I had to trust them. I had to.
Still a nervousness clung to me. I felt out of place. From beyon d the 
door I could hear a distant scrape of chairs, a murmur of voices. L ittle 
worries whirled up within me: That I might forget my new name; that I 
might be recoginzed from the audience. I bent forward, suddenly conscious of
my legs in new blue trousers. But how do you know they're your legs ? What's 
your name? I thought, making a sad joke with myself. It was abs urd, but it 
relieved my nervousness. For it was as though I were looking at m y own legs 
for the first time -- independent objects that could of their o wn volition lead 
me to safety or danger. I stared at the dusty floor. Then it was as t hough I 
were returning after a long suspension of consciousness, as tho ugh I stood 
simultaneously at opposite ends of a tunnel. I seemed to view myself from 
the distance of the campus while yet sitting there on a bench in the old 
arena; dressed in a new blue suit; sitting across the room from a grou p of
intense men who talked among themselves in hushed, edgy voic es; while yet 
in the distance I could hear the clatter of chairs, more voices, a cough. I 
seemed aware of it all from a point deep within me, yet there was a 
disturbing vagueness about what I saw, a disturbing unformed quality, as 
when you see yourself in a photo exposed during adolescence: th e expression 
empty, the grin without character, the ears too large, the pimples , "courage 
bumps," too many and too well-defined. This was a new phase, I realized, a 
new beginning, and I would have to take that part of myself that looked on 
with remote eyes and keep it always at the distance of the campu s, the 
hospital machine, the battle royal -- all now far behind. Perha ps the part of
me that observed listlessly but saw all, missing nothing, wa s still the 
malicious, arguing part; the dissenting voice, my grandfather part; the cynical,
disbelieving part -- the traitor self that always threatened in ternal discord.
Whatever it was, I knew that I'd have to keep it pressed down. I h ad to. For 
if I were successful tonight, I'd be on the road to something big . No more 
flying apart at the seams, no more remembering forgotten pains . . . No, I 
thought, shifting my body, they're the same legs on which I've come so far 
from home. And yet they were somehow new. The new suit imparted a 
newness to me. It was the clothes and the new name and the circum stances.
It was a newness too subtle to put into thought, but there it was . I was 
becoming someone else.
I sensed vaguely and with a flash of panic that the moment I wal ked 
out upon the platform and opened my mouth I'd be someone else. N ot just a 
nobody with a manufactured name which might have belonged to a nyone, or 
to no one. But another personality. Few people knew me now, but after 
tonight . . . How was it? Perhaps simply to be known, to be looked upon by 
so many people, to be the focal point of so many concentrating e yes, perhaps 
this was enough to make one different; enough to transform one in to 
something else, someone else; just as by becoming an increasi ngly larger boy 
one became one day a man; a man with a deep voice -- although my v oice 
had been deep since I was twelve. But what if someone from the ca mpus 
wandered into the audience? Or someone from Mary's -- even Mary herself? 
"No, it wouldn't change it," I heard myself say softly, "that' s all past." My 
name was different; I was under orders. Even if I met Mary on the st reet, I'd 
have to pass her by unrecognized. A depressing thought -- and I g ot up 
abruptly and went out of the dressing room and into the alley.
Without my overcoat it was cold. A feeble light burned above the
entrance, sparkling the snow. I crossed the alley to the dark side , stopping 
near a fence that smelled of carbolic acid, which, as I looked back across the 
alley, caused me to remember a great abandoned hole that had bee n the site 
of a sports arena that had burned before my birth. All that was left, a cliff
drop of some forty feet below the heat-buckled walk, was the she ll of
concrete with weirdly bent and rusted rods that had been its basem ent. The 
hole was used for dumping, and after a rain it stank with stagna nt water.
And now in my mind I stood upon the walk looking out across the ho le past 
a Hooverville shanty of packing cases and bent tin signs, to a railroad yard 
that lay beyond. Dark depthless water lay without motion in th e hole, and 
past the Hooverville a switch engine idled upon the shining ra ils, and as a 
plume of white steam curled slowly from its funnel I saw a man com e out of
the shanty and start up the path which led to the walk above. Sto oped and 
dark and sprouting rags from his shoes, hat and sleeves, he shuffl ed slowly 
toward me, bringing a threatening cloud of carbolic acid. It was a syphilitic 
who lived alone in the shanty between the hole and the railroad y ard, coming 
up to the street only to beg money for food and disinfectant wit h which to 
soak his rags. Then in my mind I saw him stretching out a hand from w hich 
the fingers had been eaten away and I ran -- back to the dark, and th e cold 
and the present.
I shivered, looking toward the street, where up the alley through t he 
tunneling dark, three mounted policemen loomed beneath the ci rcular,
snow-sparkling beam of the street lamp, grasping their horses by their bridles,
the heads of both men and animals bent close, as though plotti ng; the leather 
of saddles and leggings shining. Three white men and three blac k horses.
Then a car passed and they showed in full relief, their shadows flying like 
dreams across the sparkle of snow and darkness. And, as I turned to l eave,
one of the horses violently tossed its head and I saw the gauntl eted fist 
yanked down. Then there was a wild neigh and the horse plunged of f in the 
dark, the crisp, frantic clanking of metal and the stomping of ho oves followed 
me to the door. Perhaps this was something for Brother Jack to kno w.
But inside they were still in a huddle, and I went back and sat on
the bench.
I watched them, feeling very young and inexperienced and yet 
strangely old, with an oldness that watched and waited quietl y within me.
Outside, the audience had begun to drone; a distant, churning s ound that 
brought back some of the terror of the eviction. My mind flowed. T here was 
a child standing in rompers outside a chicken-wire fence, looki ng in upon a 
huge black-and-white dog, log-chained to an apple tree. It wa s Master, the 
bulldog; and I was the child who was afraid to touch him, althou gh, panting 
with heat, he seemed to grin back at me like a fat good-natured ma n, the 
saliva roping silvery from his jowls. And as the voices of the cro wd churned 
and mounted and became an impatient splatter of hand claps, I thought of
Master's low hoarse growl. He had barked the same note when angry o r 
when being brought his dinner, when lazily snapping flies, or w hen tearing an 
intruder to shreds. I liked, but didn't trust old Master; I wanted to please,
but did not trust the crowd. Then I looked at Brother Jack and grinn ed: That 
was it; in some ways, he was like a toy bull terrier.
But now the roar and clapping of hands became a song and I saw 
Brother Jack break off and bounce to the door. "Okay, Brothers," he said,
"that's our signal." 
We went in a bunch, out of the dressing room and down a dim 
passage aroar with the distant sound. Then it was brighter and I could see a 
spotlight blazing the smoky haze. We moved silently, Brother Jack following 
two very black Negroes and two white men who led the procession, and now 
the roar of the crowd seemed to rise above us, flaring louder. I noti ced the 
others falling into columns of four, and I was alone in the rear, li ke the pivot 
of a drill team. Ahead, a slanting shaft of brightness marked the entrance to 
one of the levels of the arena, and now as we passed it the crowd le t out a 
roar. Then swiftly we were in the dark again, and climbing, the roar seeming 
to sink below us and we were moved into a bright blue light and dow n a 
ramp; to each side of which, stretching away in a curve, I could s ee rows of
blurred faces -- then suddenly I was blinded and felt myself cras h into the 
man ahead of me. "It always happens the first time," he shouted , stopping to 
let me get my balance, his voice small in the roar. "It's the spot light!" 
It had picked us up now, and, beaming just ahead, led us into th e 
arena and encircled us full in its beam, the crowd thundering. The song burst 
forth like a rocket to the marching tempo of clapping hands:
John Brown's body lies a-mold'ring in the grave 
John Brown's body lies a-mold'ring in the grave 
John Brown's body lies a-mold'ring in the grave 
-- His soul is marching on!
Imagine that, I thought, they make the old song sound new. At f irst 
I was as remote as though I stood in the highest balcony looking on. Then I 
walked flush into the vibrations of the voices and felt an elec tric tingling 
along my spine. We marched toward a flag-draped platform set near the front 
of the arena, moving through an aisle left between rows of people in folding 
chairs, then onto the platform past a number of women who stood w hen we 
came on. With a nod Brother Jack indicated our chairs and we face d the 
applause standing.
Below and above us was the audience, row after row of faces, the 
arena a bowl-shaped aggregation of humanity. Then I saw the pol icemen and 
was disturbed. What if they recognized me? They were all along t he wall. I 
touched the arm of the man ahead, seeing him turn, his mouth halt ing in a 
verse of the song.
"Why all the police?" I said, leaning forward on the back of his
chair.
"Cops? Don't worry. Tonight they're ordered to protect us. This 
meeting is of great political consequence!" he said, turning a way.
Who ordered them to protect us? I thought -- But now the song was 
ending and the building rang with applause, yells, until the c hant burst from 
the rear and spread:
No more dispossessing of the dispossessed!
No more dispossessing of the dispossessed!
The audience seemed to have become one, its breathing and 
articulation synchronized. I looked at Brother Jack. He stood u p front beside 
a microphone, his feet planted solidly on the dirty canvas-cov ered platform,
looking from side to side; his posture dignified and benign, li ke a bemused 
father listening to the performance of his adoring children. I sa w his hand go 
up in a salute, and the audience thundered. And I seemed to move in close,
like the lens of a camera, focusing into the scene and feeling t he heat and 
excitement and the pounding of voice and applause against my diaphragm,
my eyes flying from face to face, swiftly, fleetingly, searchi ng for someone I 
could recognize, for someone from the old life, and seeing the f aces become 
vaguer and vaguer the farther they receded from the platform.
The speeches began. First an invocation by a Negro preacher; then a 
woman spoke of what was happening to the children. Then came sp eeches on 
various aspects of the economic and political situation. I li stened carefully,
trying to snatch a phrase here, a word there, from the arsenal of hard,
precise terms. It was becoming a high-keyed evening. Songs fla red between 
speeches, chants exploded as spontaneously as shouts at a so uthern revival.
And I was somehow attuned to it all, could feel it physically. Sitting with my 
feet on the soiled canvas I felt as though I had wandered into th e percussion 
section of a symphony orchestra. It worked on me so thoroughly tha t I soon 
gave up trying to memorize phrases and simply allowed the excit ement to 
carry me along.
Someone pulled on my coat sleeve -- my turn had come. I went 
toward the microphone where Brother Jack himself waited, enterin g the spot 
of light that surrounded me like a seamless cage of stainless st eel. I halted.
The light was so strong that I could no longer see the audience, the bowl of
human faces. It was as though a semi-transparent curtain had drop ped 
between us, but through which they could see me -- for they were a pplauding 
-- without themselves being seen. I felt the hard, mechanical isolation of the 
hospital machine and I didn't like it. I stood, barely hearing B rother Jack's 
introduction. Then he was through and there was an encouraging bu rst of
applause. And I thought, They remember, some of them were there.
The microphone was strange and unnerving. I approached it 
incorrectly, my voice sounding raspy and full of air, and after a f ew words I 
halted, embarrassed. I was getting off to a bad start, something had to be 
done. I leaned toward the vague audience closest to the platfo rm and said,
"Sorry, folks. Up to now they've kept me so far away from these sh iny 
electric gadgets I haven't learned the technique . . . And to tel l you the truth,
it looks to me like it might bite! Just look at it, it looks like the steel skull
of a man! Do you think he died of dispossession?" 
It worked and while they laughed someone came and made an 
adjustment. "Don't stand too close," he advised.
"How's that?" I said, hearing my voice boom deep and vibrant ove r 
the arena. "Is that better?" 
There was a ripple of applause.
"You see, all I needed was a chance. You've granted it, now it's up 
to me!" 
The applause grew stronger and from down front a man's far-carrying
voice called out, "We with you, Brother. You pitch 'em we catch ' em!" 
That was all I needed, I'd made a contact, and it was as though h is 
voice was that of them all. I was wound up, nervous. I might hav e been 
anyone, might have been trying to speak in a foreign language. For I couldn't 
remember the correct words and phrases from the pamphlets. I had to f all
back upon tradition and since it was a political meeting, I sel ected one of the 
political techniques that I'd heard so often at home: The old d own-to-earth,
I'm-sick-and-tired-of-the-way-they've-been-treating-u s approach. I couldn't see 
them so I addressed the microphone and the co-operative voice be fore me.
"You know, there are those who think we who are gathered here are 
dumb," I shouted. "Tell me if I'm right." 
"That's a strike, Brother," the voice called. "You pitched a stri ke." 
"Yes, they think we're dumb. They call us the 'common people.' But 
I've been sitting here listening and looking and trying to und erstand what's so 
common about us. I think they're guilty of a gross mis-statemen t of fact -- 
we are the uncommon people --" 
"Another strike," the voice called in the thunder, and I paused
holding up my hand to halt the noise.
"Yes, we're the uncommon people -- and I'll tell you why. They c all
us dumb and they treat us dumb. And what do they do with dumb ones ? 
Think about it, look around! They've got a slogan and a policy. They've got 
what Brother Jack would call a 'theory and a practice.' It's 'Ne ver give a 
sucker an even break!' It's dispossess him! Evict him! Use his empty head for 
a spittoon and his back for a door mat! It's break him! Deprive hi m of his 
wages! It's use his protest as a sounding brass to frighten him in to silence,
it's beat his ideas and his hopes and homely aspirations, into a tinkling 
cymbal! A small, cracked cymbal to tinkle on the Fourth of July! Only muffle 
it! Don't let it sound too loud! Beat it in stoptime, give the d umb bunnies 
the soft-shoe dance! The Big Wormy Apple, The Chicago Get Away , the Shoo 
Fly Don't Bother Me!
"And do you know what makes us so uncommon?" I whispered 
hoarsely. "We let them do it." 
The silence was profound. The smoke boiled in the spotlight.
"Another strike," I heard the voice call sadly. "Ain't no use to protest 
the decision!" And I thought, Is he with me or against me? 
"Dispossession! Dis-possession is the word!" I went on. "The y've tried 
to dispossess us of our manhood and womanhood! Of our childho od and 
adolescence -- You heard the sister's statistics on our infant mortality rate.
Don't you know you're lucky to be uncommonly born? Why, they eve n tried 
to dispossess us of our dislike of being dispossessed! And I' ll tell you 
something else -- if we don't resist, pretty soon they'll succe ed! These are the 
days of dispossession, the season of homelessness, the time of evictions. We'll
be dispossessed of the very brains in our heads! And we're so unc ommon 
that we can't even see it! Perhaps we're too polite. Perhaps we do n't care to 
look at unpleasantness. They think we're blind -- uncommonly blind. And I 
don't wonder. Think about it, they've dispossessed us each of one eye from 
the day we're born. So now we can only see in straight white lines. We're a 
nation of one-eyed mice -- Did you ever see such a sight in your life? Such 
an uncommon sight!" 
"An' ain't a farmer's wife in the house," the voice called throug h the 
titters of bitter laughter. "It's another strike!" 
I leaned forward. "You know, if we aren't careful, they'll slip u p on 
our blind sides and -- plop! out goes our last good eye and we're blind as 
bats! Someone's afraid we'll see something. Maybe that's why so many of our 
fine friends are present tonight -- blue steel pistols and blue s erge suits and 
all! -- but I believe one eye is enough to lose without resistan ce and I think 
that's your belief. So let's get together. Did you ever notice , my dumb 
one-eyed brothers, how two totally blind men can get together a nd help one 
another along? They stumble, they bump into things, but they avoid dangers 
too; they get along. Let's get together, uncommon people. Wit h both our eyes 
we may see what makes us so uncommon, we'll see who makes us so 
uncommon! Up to now we've been like a couple of one-eyed men wa lking 
down opposite sides of the street. Someone starts throwing brick s and we 
start blaming each other and fighting among ourselves. But we' re mistaken!
Because there's a third party present. There's a smooth, oily scou ndrel
running down the middle of the wide gray street throwing stones -- He's the 
one! He's doing the damage! He claims he needs the space -- he c alls it his 
freedom. And he knows he's got us on our blind side and he's been popping 
away till he's got us silly -- uncommonly silly! In fact, In fa ct, his freedom 
has got us damn-nigh blind! Hush now, don't call no names!" I c alled,
holding up my palm. "I say to hell with this guy! I say come on, c ross over!
Let's make an alliance! I'll look out for you, and you look out for me! I'm 
good at catching and I've got a damn good pitching arm!" 
"You don't pitch no balls, Brother! Not a single one!" 
"Let's make a miracle," I shouted. "Let's take back our pillag ed eyes!
Let's reclaim our sight; let's combine and spread our vision. P eep around the 
corner, there's a storm coming. Look down the avenue, there's only one 
enemy. Can't you see his face?" 
It was a natural pause and there was applause, but as it burst I 
realized that the flow of words had stopped. What would I do when they 
started to listen again? I leaned forward, straining to see throu gh the barrier 
of light. They were mine, out there, and I couldn't afford to lose them. Yet I 
suddenly felt naked, sensing that the words were returning and th at 
something was about to be said that I shouldn't reveal.
"Look at me!" The words ripped from my solar plexus. "I haven't 
lived here long. Times are hard, I've known despair. I'm from the So uth, and 
since coming here I've known eviction. I'd come to distrust the world . . .
But look at me now, something strange is happening. I'm here bef ore you. I 
must confess . . ." 
And suddenly Brother Jack was beside me, pretending to adjust t he 
microphone. "Careful now," he whispered. "Don't end your usefu lness before 
you've begun." 
"I'm all right," I said, leaning toward the mike.
"May I confess?" I shouted. "You are my friends. We share a 
common disinheritance, and it's said that confession is good for the soul.
Have I your permission?" 
"Your batting .500, Brother," the voice called.
There was a stir behind me. I waited until it was quiet and hurried
on.
"Silence is consent," I said, "so I'll have it out, I'll confe ss it!" My 
shoulders were squared, my chin thrust forward and my eyes focused straight 
into the light. "Something strange and miraculous and transform ing is taking 
place in me right now . . . as I stand here before you!" 
I could feel the words forming themselves, slowly falling into place.
The light seemed to boil opalescently, like liquid soap shak en gently in a 
bottle.
"Let me describe it. It is something odd. It's something that I 'm sure 
I'd never experience anywhere else in the world. I feel your eyes upon me. I 
hear the pulse of your breathing. And now, at this moment, with your black 
and white eyes upon me, I feel . . . I feel . . ." 
I stumbled in a stillness so complete that I could hear the gea rs of
the huge clock mounted somewhere on the balcony gnawing upon t ime.
"What is it, son, what do you feel?" a shrill voice cried.
My voice fell to a husky whisper, "I feel, I feel suddenly that I have 
become more human. Do you understand? More human. Not that I have
become a man, for I was born a man. But that I am more human. I feel
strong, I feel able to get things done! I feel that I can see sharp and clear 
and far down the dim corridor of history and in it I can hear the fo otsteps 
of militant fraternity! No, wait, let me confess . . . I feel the u rge to affirm 
my feelings . . . I feel that here, after a long and desperate and u ncommonly 
blind journey, I have come home . . . Home! With your eyes upon me I feel
that I've found my true family! My true people! My true country! I am a new 
citizen of the country of your vision, a native of your fraterna l land. I feel
that here tonight, in this old arena, the new is being born and the vital old 
revived. In each of you, in me, in us all.
"SISTERS! BROTHERS!
"WE ARE THE TRUE PATRIOTS! THE CITIZENS OF TOMORROW'S 
WORLD!
"WE'LL BE DISPOSSESSED NO MORE!" 
The applause struck like a clap of thunder. I stood, transfixed, unable 
to see, my body quivering with the roar. I made an indefinite move ment.
What should I do -- wave to them? I faced the shouts, cheers, shri ll
whistling, my eyes burning from the light. I felt a large tear roll down my 
face and I wiped it away with embarrassment. Others were starting d own.
Why didn't someone help me get out of the spot before I spoiled e verything? 
But with the tears came an increase of applause and I lifted my he ad,
surprised, my eyes streaming. The sound seemed to roar up in waves . They 
had begun to stomp the floor and I was laughing and bowing my he ad now 
unashamed. It grew in volume, the sound of splitting wood came from the 
rear. I grew tired, but still they cheered until, finally, I gave up and started 
back toward the chairs. Red spots danced before my eyes. Someone took my 
hand, and leaned toward my ear.
"You did it, goddamnit! You did it!" And I was puzzled by the ho t 
mixture of hate and admiration bursting through his words as I than ked him 
and removed my hand from his crushing grasp.
"Thanks," I said, "but the others had raised them to the right pit ch." 
I shuddered; he sounded as though he would like to throttle me. I
couldn't see and there was much confusion and suddenly someon e spun me 
around, pulling me off balance, and I felt myself pressed again st warm 
feminine softness, holding on.
"Oh, Brother, Brother!" a woman's voice cried into my ear, "Little 
Brother!" and I felt the hot moist pressure of her lips upon my chee k.
Blurred figures bumped about me. I stumbled as in a game of
blindman's buff. My hands were shaken, my back pounded. My fac e was 
sprayed with the saliva of enthusiasm, and I decided that the n ext time I 
stood in the spotlight it would be wise to wear dark glasses.
It was a deafening demonstration. We left them cheering, knock ing 
over chairs, stomping the floor. Brother Jack guided me off the p latform. "It's 
time we left," he shouted. "Things have truly begun to move. Al l that energy 
must be organized!" 
He guided me through the shouting crowd, hands continuing to to uch 
me as I stumbled along. Then we entered the dark passage and when we 
reached the end the spots faded from my eyes and I began to see aga in.
Brother Jack paused at the door.
"Listen to them," he said. "Just waiting to be told what to do! " And 
I could still hear the applause booming behind us. Then severa l of the others 
broke off their conversation and faced us, as the applause muff led down 
behind the closing door.
"Well, what do you think?" Brother Jack said enthusiasticall y. "How's 
that for a starter?" 
There was a tense silence. I looked from face to face, black and 
white, feeling swift panic. They were grim.
"Well?" Brother Jack said, his voice suddenly hard.
I could hear the creaking of someone's shoes.
"Well?" he repeated.
Then the man with the pipe spoke up, a swift charge of tension 
building with his words.
"It was a most unsatisfactory beginning," he said quietly, p unctuating 
the "unsatisfactory" with a stab of his pipe. He was looking s traight at me 
and I was puzzled. I looked at the others. Their faces were nonco mmittal,
stolid.
"Unsatisfactory!" Brother Jack exploded. "And what alleged process of
thought led to that brilliant pronouncement?" 
"This is no time for cheap sarcasm, Brother," the brother with the
pipe said.
"Sarcasm? You made the sarcasm. No, it isn't a time for sarcasms 
nor for imbecilities. Nor for plain damn-fooleries! This is a key moment in 
the struggle, things have just begun to move -- and suddenly yo u are 
unhappy. You are afraid of success? What's wrong? Isn't this jus t what we've 
been working for?" 
"Again, ask yourself. You are the great leader. Look into your cry stal
ball." 
Brother Jack swore.
"Brothers!" someone said.
Brother Jack swore and swung to another brother. "You," he said to
the husky man. "Have you the courage to tell me what's going on h ere? Have 
we become a street-corner gang?" 
Silence. Someone shuffled his feet. The man with the pipe was
looking now at me.
"Did I do something wrong?" I said.
"The worst you could have done," he said coldly.
Stunned, I looked at him wordlessly.
"Never mind," Brother Jack said, suddenly calm. "Just what is the 
problem, Brother? Let's have it out right here. Just what is your co mplaint?" 
"Not a complaint, an opinion. If we are still allowed to express our 
opinions," the brother with the pipe said.
"Your opinion, then," Brother Jack said.
"In my opinion the speech was wild, hysterical, politically 
irresponsible and dangerous," he snapped. "And worse than that, it was 
incorrect!" He pronounced "incorrect" as though the term described the most 
heinous crime imaginable, and I stared at him open-mouthed, fe eling a vague 
guilt.
"Soooo," Brother Jack said, looking from face to face, "there's been a 
caucus and decisions have been made. Did you take minutes, Bro ther 
Chairman? Have you recorded your wise disputations?" 
"There was no caucus and the opinion still holds," the brother w ith 
the pipe said.
"No meeting, but just the same there has been a caucus and 
decisions have been reached even before the event is finished. " 
"But, Brother," someone tried to intervene.
"A most brilliant, operation," Brother Jack went on, smiling no w. "A 
consummate example of skilled theoretical Nijinskys leapin g ahead of history.
But come down. Brothers, come down or you'll land on your dialec tics; the 
stage of history hasn't built that far. The month after next, p erhaps, but not 
yet. And what do you think, Brother Wrestrum?" he asked, pointin g to a big 
fellow of the shape and size of Supercargo.
"I think the brother's speech was backward and reactionary!" he s aid.
I wanted to answer but could not. No wonder his voice had sound ed 
so mixed when he congratulated me. I could only stare into the bro ad face 
with its hate-burning eyes.
"And you," Brother Jack said.
"I liked the speech," the man said, "I thought it was quite eff ective." 
"And you?" Brother Jack said to the next man.
"I am of the opinion that it was a mistake." 
"And just why?" 
"Because we must strive to reach the people through their intell igence 
. . ." 
"Exactly," the brother with the pipe said. "It was the antithe sis of the 
scientific approach. Ours is a reasonable point of view. We are ch ampions of
a scientific approach to society, and such a speech as we've id entified 
ourselves with tonight destroys everything that has been said before. The 
audience isn't thinking, it's yelling its head off." 
"Sure, it's acting like a mob," the big black brother said.
Brother Jack laughed. "And this mob," he said, "Is it a mob agai nst 
us, or is it a mob for us -- how do our muscle-bound scientists a nswer that?" 
But before they could answer he continued, "Perhaps you're right ,
perhaps it is a mob; but if it is, then it seems to be a mob that's s imply 
boiling over to come along with us. And I shouldn't have to tel l you 
theoreticians that science bases its judgments upon experime nt! You're 
jumping to conclusions before the experiment has run its course. In fact,
what's happening here tonight represents only one step in the ex periment.
The initial step, the release of energy. I can understand that it should make 
you timid -- you're afraid of carrying through to the next step -- b ecause it's 
up to you to organize that energy. Well, it's going to be organize d and not by 
a bunch of timid sideline theoreticians arguing in a vacuum, bu t by getting 
out and leading the people!" 
He was fighting mad, looking from face to face, his red head 
bristling, but no one answered his challenge.
"It's disgusting," he said, pointing to me. "Our new brother h as 
succeeded by instinct where for two years your 'science' has fa iled, and now 
all you can offer is destructive criticism." 
"I beg to differ," the brother with the pipe said. "To point out t he 
dangerous nature of his speech isn't destructive criticism. Far from it. Like 
the rest of us, the new brother must learn to speak scientificall y. He must be 
trained!" 
"So at last it occurs to you," Brother Jack said, pulling down th e 
corners of his mouth. "Training. All is not lost. There's hope tha t our wild 
but effective speaker may be tamed. The scientists perceive a possibility! Very 
well, it has been arranged; perhaps not scientifically but arrang ed 
nevertheless. For the next few months our new brother is to unde rgo a period 
of intense study and indoctrination under the guidance of Brot her Hambro.
That's right," he said, as I started to speak. "I meant to tell yo u later." 
"But that's a long time," I said. "How am I going to live?" 
"Your salary will continue," he said. "Meanwhile, you'll be guilty of
no further unscientific speeches to upset our brothers' scient ific tranquillity. In 
fact, you are to stay completely out of Harlem. Perhaps then we'l l see if you 
brothers are as swift at organizing as you are at criticizing. It's y our move,
Brothers." 
"I think Brother Jack is correct," a short, bald man said. "And I 
don't think that we, of all people, should be afraid of the peop le's 
enthusiasm. What we've got to do is to guide it into channels w here it will
do the most good." 
The rest were silent, the brother with the pipe looking at me 
unbendingly.
"Come," Brother Jack said. "Let's get out of here. If we keep our
eyes on the real goal our chances are better than ever before. And let's 
remember that science isn't a game of chess, although chess ma y be played 
scientifically. The other thing to remember is that if we are to organize the 
masses we must first organize ourselves. Thanks to our new brothe r, things 
have changed; we mustn't fail to make use of our opportunity. F rom now on 
it's up to you." 
"We shall see," the brother with the pipe said. "And as for the n ew 
brother, a few talks with Brother Hambro wouldn't harm anyone." 
Hambro, I thought, going out, who the hell is he? I suppose I'm 
lucky they didn't fire me. So now I've got to go to school again.
Out in the night the group was breaking up and Brother Jack drew 
me aside. "Don't worry," he said. "You'll find Brother Hambro in teresting, and 
a period of training was inevitable. Your speech tonight was a t est which you 
passed with flying colors, so now you'll be prepared for some real work.
Here's the address; see Brother Hambro the first thing in the mornin g. He's 
already been notified." 
When I reached home, tiredness seemed to explode within me. My 
nerves remained tense even after I had had a hot shower and crawl ed into 
bed. In my disappointment, I wanted only to sleep, but my mind kept 
wandering back to the rally. It had actually happened. I had bee n lucky and 
had said the right things at the right time and they had liked me. Or perhaps 
I had said the wrong things in the right places -- whatever, they h ad liked it 
regardless of the brothers, and from now on my life would be differen t. It 
was different already. For now I realized that I meant everythin g that I had 
said to the audience, even though I hadn't known that I was goi ng to say 
those things. I had intended only to make a good appearance, to say enough 
to keep the Brotherhood interested in me. What had come out was co mpletely 
uncalculated, as though another self within me had taken ove r and held forth.
And lucky that it had, or I might have been fired.
Even my technique had been different; no one who had known me at
college would have recognized the speech. But that was as it sh ould have 
been, for I was someone new -- even though I had spoken in a very
old-fashioned way. I had been transformed, and now, lying restl essly in bed 
in the dark, I felt a kind of affection for the blurred audience wh ose faces I 
had never clearly seen. They had been with me from the first word. T hey had 
wanted me to succeed, and fortunately I had spoken for them and they had 
recognized my words. I belonged to them. I sat up, grasping my kne es in the 
dark as the thought struck home. Perhaps this was what was meant b y being 
"dedicated and set aside." Very well, if so, I accepted it. My possibilities were 
suddenly broadened. As a Brotherhood spokesman I would represent not only 
my own group but one that was much larger. The audience was mixed, their 
claims broader than race. I would do whatever was necessary to s erve them 
well. If they could take a chance with me, then I'd do the very b est that I 
could. How else could I save myself from disintegration? 
I sat there in the dark trying to recall the sequence of the speech .
Already it seemed the expression of someone else. Yet I knew tha t it was 
mine and mine alone, and if it was recorded by a stenographer, I wou ld have 
a look at it tomorrow.
Words, phrases skipped through my mind; I saw the blue haze again .
What had I meant by saying that I had become "more human"? Was it a 
phrase that I had picked up from some preceding speaker, or a slip o f the 
tongue? For a moment I thought of my grandfather and quickly di smissed 
him. What had an old slave to do with humanity? Perhaps it was so mething 
that Woodridge had said in the literature class back at college. I could see 
him vividly, half-drunk on words and full of contempt and exalt ation, pacing 
before the blackboard chalked with quotations from Joyce and Ye ats and Sean 
O'Casey; thin, nervous, neat, pacing as though he walked a hi gh wire of
meaning upon which no one of us would ever dare venture. I could h ear 
him: "Stephen's problem, like ours, was not actually one of crea ting the 
uncreated conscience of his race, but of creating the uncreated f eatures of his 
face. Our task is that of making ourselves individuals. The co nscience of a 
race is the gift of its individuals who see, evaluate, record . . . We create the 
race by creating ourselves and then to our great astonishment we w ill have 
created something far more important: We will have created a cult ure. Why 
waste time creating a conscience for something that doesn't e xist? For, you 
see, blood and skin do not think!" 
But no, it wasn't Woodridge. "More human" . . . Did I mean that I 
had become less of what I was, less a Negro, or that I was less a be ing 
apart; less an exile from down home, the South? . . . But all this i s negative.
To become less -- in order to become more? Perhaps that was it, but in what 
way more human? Even Woodridge hadn't spoken of such things. It was a 
mystery once more, as at the eviction I had uttered words that had possessed 
me.
I thought of Bledsoe and Norton and what they had done. By kicki ng 
me into the dark they'd made me see the possibility of achievin g something 
greater and more important than I'd ever dreamed. Here was a way tha t 
didn't lead through the back door, a way not limited by black and white, but 
a way which, if one lived long enough and worked hard enough, cou ld lead 
to the highest possible rewards. Here was a way to have a part in mak ing 
the big decisions, of seeing through the mystery of how the cou ntry, the 
world, really operated. For the first time, lying there in the dark, I could 
glimpse the possibility of being more than a member of a race. It was no 
dream, the possibility existed. I had only to work and learn and s urvive in 
order to go to the top. Sure I'd study with Hambro, I'd learn what he had to 
teach and a lot more. Let tomorrow come. The sooner I was through wi th 
this Hambro, the sooner I could get started with my work.
Chapter 17 
Four months later when Brother Jack called the apartment at 
midnight to tell me to be prepared to take a ride I became quite exc ited.
Fortunately, I was awake and dressed, and when he drove up a few mi nutes 
later I was waiting expectantly at the curb. Maybe, I thought , as I saw him 
hunched behind the wheel in his topcoat, this is what I've bee n waiting for.
"How have you been, Brother?" I said, getting in.
"A little tired," he said. "Not enough sleep, too many problems ." 
Then, as he got the car under way, he became silent, and I decid ed 
not to ask any questions. That was one thing I had learned thorou ghly. There 
must be something doing at the Chthonian, I thought, watchin g him staring 
at the road as though lost in thought. Maybe the brothers are waiti ng to put 
me through my paces. If so, fine; I've been waiting for an exami nation . . .
But instead of going to the Chthonian I looked out to discover that 
he had brought me to Harlem and was parking the car.
"We'll have a drink," he said, getting out and heading for where the 
neon-lighted sign of a bull's head announced the El Toro Bar.
I was disappointed. I wanted no drink; I wanted to take the next
step that lay between me and an assignment. I followed him ins ide with a 
surge of irritation.
The barroom was warm and quiet. The usual rows of bottles with 
exotic names were lined on the shelves, and in the rear, where four men 
argued in Spanish over glasses of beer, a juke box, lit up green an d red,
played "Media Luz." And as we waited for the bartender, I tried to figure the 
purpose of the trip.
I had seen very little of Brother Jack after beginning my studi es with 
Brother Hambro. My life had been too tightly organized. But I sho uld have 
known that if anything was going to happen, Brother Hambro woul d have let 
me know. Instead, I was to meet him in the morning as usual. That Hambro,
I thought, is he a fanatic teacher! A tall, friendly man, a lawye r and the 
Brotherhood's chief theoretician, he had proved to be a hard taskm aster.
Between daily discussions with him and a rigid schedule of read ing, I had 
been working harder than I'd ever found necessary at college. E ven my nights 
were organized; every evening found me at some rally or meeting i n one of
the many districts (though this was my first trip to Harlem since m y speech) 
where I'd sit on the platform with the speakers, making notes to b e discussed 
with him the next day. Every occasion became a study situatio n, even the 
parties that sometimes followed the meetings. During these I h ad to make 
mental notes on the ideological attitudes revealed in the gue sts' conversations.
But I had soon learned the method in it: Not only had I been learni ng the 
many aspects of the Brotherhood's policy and its approach to vari ous social
groupings, but the city-wide membership had grown familiar wit h me. My 
part in the eviction was kept very much alive, and although I wa s under 
orders to make no speeches, I had grown accustomed to being introd uced as 
a kind of hero.
Yet it had been mainly a time for listening and, being a talker, I had 
grown impatient. Now I knew most of the Brotherhood arguments so w ell -- 
those I doubted as well as those I believed -- that I could repea t them in my 
sleep, but nothing had been said about my assignment. Thus I h ad hoped the 
midnight call meant some kind of action was to begin . . .
Beside me, Brother Jack was still lost in thought. He seemed in no 
hurry to go elsewhere or to talk, and as the slow-motion bartende r mixed our 
drinks I puzzled vainly as to why he had brought me here. Before me, in the 
panel where a mirror is usually placed, I could see a scene from a bu llfight,
the bull charging close to the man and the man swinging the red ca pe in 
sculptured folds so close to his body that man and bull seemed t o blend in 
one swirl of calm, pure motion. Pure grace, I thought, looking abo ve the bar 
to where, larger than life, the pink and white image of a girl smil ed down 
from a summery beer ad on which a calendar said April One. Then, a s our 
drinks were placed before us, Brother Jack came alive, his mood ch anging as 
though in the instant he had settled whatever had been botheri ng him and 
felt suddenly free.
"Here, come back," he said, nudging me playfully. "She's only a 
cardboard image of a cold steel civilization." 
I laughed, glad to hear him joking. "And that?" I said, pointi ng to 
the bullfight scene.
"Sheer barbarism," he said, watching the bartender and lowerin g his 
voice to a whisper. "But tell me, how have you found your work wit h Brother 
Hambro?" 
"Oh, fine," I said. "He's strict, but if I'd had teachers like hi m in 
college, I'd know a few things. He's taught me a lot, but wheth er enough to 
satisfy the brothers who disliked my arena speech, I don't know. Shall we 
converse scientifically?" 
He laughed, one of his eyes glowing brighter than the other. "Do n't 
worry about the brothers," he said. "You'll do very well. Brother Hambro's 
reports on you have been excellent." 
"Now, that's nice to hear," I.said, aware now of another bullfi ght 
scene further down the bar in which the matador was being swept skyward 
on the black bull's horns. "I've worked pretty hard trying to mast er the 
ideology." 
"Master it," Brother Jack said, "but don't overdo it. Don't let it 
master you. There is nothing to put the people to sleep like dry ideology. The 
ideal is to strike a medium between ideology and inspiration. S ay what the 
people want to hear, but say it in such a way that they'll do what we wish." 
He laughed. "Remember too, that theory always comes after pra ctice. Act first,
theorize later; that's also a formula, a devastatingly effecti ve one!" 
He looked at me as though he did not see me and I could not tell
whether he was laughing at me or with me. I was sure only that he w as 
laughing.
"Yes," I said, "I'll try to master all that is required." 
"You can," he said. "And now you don't have to worry about the 
brothers' criticism. Just throw some ideology back at them and th ey'll leave 
you alone -- provided, of course, that you have the right backing and produce 
the required results. Another drink?" 
"Thanks, I've had enough." 
"Are you sure?" 
"Sure." 
"Good. Now to your assignment: Tomorrow you are to become chief
spokesman of the Harlem District . . ." 
"What!" 
"Yes. The committee decided yesterday." 
"But I had no idea." 
"You'll do all right. Now listen. You are to continue what you st arted 
at the eviction. Keep them stirred up. Get them active. Get as ma ny to join 
as possible. You'll be given guidance by some of the older mem bers, but for 
the time being you are to see what you can do. You will have freedo m of
action -- and you will be under strict discipline to the commit tee." 
"I see," I said.
"No, you don't quite see," he said, "but you will. You must not
underestimate the discipline, Brother. It makes you answerable to the entire 
organization for what you do. Don't underestimate the discipl ine. It is very 
strict, but within its framework you are to have full freedom to do y our work.
And your work is very important. Understand?" His eyes seemed to crowd my 
face as I nodded yes. "We'd better go now so that you can get som e sleep," 
he said, draining his glass. "You're a soldier now, your health belongs to the 
organization." 
"I'll be ready," I said.
"I know you will. Until tomorrow then. You'll meet with the exec utive 
committee of the Harlem section at nine A.M. You know the locat ion of
course?" 
"No, Brother, I don't." 
"Oh? That's right -- then you'd better come up with me for a minu te.
I have to see someone there and you can take a look at where you'll work.
I'll drop you off on the way down," he said.
THE district offices were located in a converted church structure, the 
main floor of which was occupied by a pawn shop, its window cram med with 
loot that gleamed dully in the darkened street. We took a stair t o the third 
floor, entering a large room beneath a high Gothic ceiling.
"It's down here," Brother Jack said, making for the end of the la rge 
room where I saw a row of smaller ones, only one of which was lighte d. And 
now I saw a man appear in the door and limp forward.
"Evening, Brother Jack," he said.
"Why, Brother Tarp, I expected to find Brother Tobitt." 
"I know. He was here but he had to leave," the man said. "He left 
this envelope for you and said he'd call you later on tonight. " 
"Good, good," Brother Jack said. "Here, meet a new brother . . ." 
"Pleased to meet you," the brother said, smiling. "I heard you s peak 
at the arena. You really told 'em." 
"Thanks," I said.
"So you liked it, did you, Brother Tarp?" Brother Jack said.
"The boy's all right with me," the man said.
"Well, you're going to see a lot of him, he's your new spokesman ." 
"That's fine," the man said. "Looks like we're going to get som e 
changes made." 
"Correct," Brother Jack said. "Now let's take a look at his offic e and 
we'll be going." 
"Sure, Brother," Tarp said, limping before me into one of the dark 
rooms and snapping on a light. "This here is the one." 
I looked into a small office, containing a flat-top desk with a 
telephone, a typewriter on its table, a bookcase with shelves of books and 
pamphlets, and a huge map of the world inscribed with ancient na utical signs 
and a heroic figure of Columbus to one side.
"If there's anything you need, just see Brother Tarp," Brother Ja ck 
said. "He's here at all times." 
"Thanks, I shall," I said. "I'll get oriented in the morning." 
"Yes, and we'd better go so you can get some sleep. Good night,
Brother Tarp. See that everything is ready for him in the morning. " 
"He won't have to worry about a thing, Brother. Good night." 
"It's because we attract men like Brother Tarp there that we shall
triumph," he said as we climbed into the car. "He's old physical ly, but 
ideologically he's a vigorous young man. He can be depended up on in the 
most precarious circumstance." 
"He sounds like a good man to have around," I said.
"You'll see," he said and lapsed into a silence that lasted un til we 
reached my door.
THE committee was assembled in the hall with the high Gothic 
ceiling when I arrived, sitting in folding chairs around two smal l tables 
pushed together to form a unit.
"Well," Brother Jack said, "you are on time. Very good, we favor
precision in our leaders." 
"Brother, I shall always try to be on time," I said.
"Here he is, Brothers and Sisters," he said, "your new spokesman.
Now to begin. Are we all present?" 
"All except Brother Tod Clifton," someone said.
His red head jerked with surprise. "So?" 
"He'll be here," a young brother said. "We were working until three
this morning." 
"Still, he should be on time -- Very well," Brother Jack said, t aking 
out a watch, "let us begin. I have only a little time here, but a l ittle time is 
all that is needed. You all know the events of the recent period, and the role 
our new brother has played in them. Briefly, you are here to see tha t it isn't 
wasted. We must achieve two things: We must plan methods of in creasing the 
effectiveness of our agitation, and we must organize the energ y that has 
already been released. This calls for a rapid increase of membersh ip. The 
people are fully aroused; if we fail to lead them into action, th ey will become 
passive, or they will become cynical. Thus it is necessary th at we strike 
immediately and strike hard!
"For this purpose," he said, nodding toward me, "our brother has
been appointed district spokesman. You are to give him your loy al support 
and regard him as the new instrument of the committee's authority . . ." 
I heard the slight applause splatter up -- only to halt with the
opening of the door, and I looked down past the rows of chairs to wh ere a 
hatless young man about my own age was coming into the hall. He wore a 
heavy sweater and slacks, and as the others looked up I heard the quick 
intake of a woman's pleasurable sigh. Then the young man was mo ving with 
an easy Negro stride out of the shadow into the light, and I saw th at he was 
very black and very handsome, and as he advanced mid-distanc e into the 
room, that he possessed the chiseled, black-marble features s ometimes found 
on statues in northern museums and alive in southern towns in whi ch the 
white offspring of house children and the black offspring of yard children 
bear names, features and character traits as identical as the rif ling of bullets 
fired from a common barrel. And now close up, leaning tall and relax ed, his 
arms outstretched stiffly upon the table, I saw the broad, taut s pan of his 
knuckles upon the dark grain of the wood, the muscular, sweatered arms, the 
curving line of the chest rising to the easy pulsing of his throa t, to the 
square, smooth chin, and saw a small X-shaped patch of adhesiv e upon the 
subtly blended, velvet-over-stone, granite-over-bone, Afro- Anglo-Saxon contour 
of his cheek.
He leaned there, looking at us all with a remote aloofness in whi ch I 
sensed an unstated questioning beneath a friendly charm. Sens ing a possible 
rival, I watched him warily, wondering who he was.
"Ah so, Brother Tod Clifton is late," Brother Jack said. "Our le ader of
the youth is late. Why is this?" 
The young man pointed to his cheek and smiled. "I had to see the
doctor," he said.
"What is this?" Brother Jack said, looking at the cross of adhes ive on 
the black skin.
"Just a little encounter with the nationalists. With Ras the Exhorter's 
boys," Brother Clifton said. And I heard a gasp from one of the wom en who 
gazed at him with shining, compassionate eyes.
Brother Jack gave me a quick look. "Brother, you have heard of Ras?
He is the wild man who calls himself a black nationalist." 
"I don't recall so," I said.
"You'll hear of him soon enough. Sit down, Brother Clifton; si t down.
You must be careful. You are valuable to the organization, you mu st not take 
chances." 
"This was unavoidable," the young man said.
"Just the same," Brother Jack said, returning to the discussion with a 
call for ideas.
"Brother, are we still to fight against evictions?" I said.
"It has become a leading issue, thanks to you." 
"Then why not step up the fight?" 
He studied my face. "What do you suggest?" 
"Well, since it has attracted so much attention, why not try to reach 
the whole community with the issue?" 
"And how would you suggest we go about it?" 
"I suggest we get the community leaders on record in support of us. " 
"There are certain difficulties in face of this," Brother Jack sa id.
"Most of the leaders are against us." 
"But I think he's got something there," Brother Clifton said. " What if
we got them to support the issue whether they like us or not? The issue is a 
community issue, it's non-partisan." 
"Sure," I said, "that's how it looks to me. With all the excitem ent 
over evictions they can't afford to come out against us, not wi thout appearing 
to be against the best interests of the community . . ." 
"So we have them across a barrel," Clifton said.
"That is perceptive enough," Brother Jack said.
The others agreed.
"You see," Brother Jack said with a grin, "we've always avoided these 
leaders, but the moment we start to advance on a broad front, secta rianism 
becomes a burden to be cast off. Any other suggestions?" He loo ked around.
"Brother," I said, remembering now, "when I first came to Harlem 
one of the first things that impressed me was a man making a speec h from a 
ladder. He spoke very violently and with an accent, but he had a n 
enthusiastic audience . . . Why can't we carry our program to the s treet in 
the same way?" 
"So you have met him," he said, suddenly grinning. "Well, Ras t he 
Exhorter has had a monopoly in Harlem. But now that we are larger we
might give it a try. What the committee wants is results!" 
So that was Ras the Exhorter, I thought.
"We'll have trouble with the Extortor -- I mean the Exhorter," a bi g 
woman said. "His hoodlums would attack and denounce the whit e meat of a 
roasted chicken." 
We laughed.
"He goes wild when he sees black people and white people toget her," 
she said to me.
"We'll take care of that," Brother Clifton said, touching his c heek.
"Very well, but no violence," Brother Jack said. "The Brotherho od is 
against violence and terror and provocation of any kind -- aggres sive, that is.
Understand, Brother Clifton?" 
"I understand," he said.
"We will not countenance any aggressive violence. Understand ? Nor 
attacks upon officials or others who do not attack us. We are aga inst all
forms of violence, do you understand?" 
"Yes, Brother," I said.
"Very well, having made this clear I leave you now," he said. " See 
what you can accomplish. You'll have plenty support from other districts and 
all the guidance you need. Meanwhile, remember that we are all u nder 
discipline." 
He left and we divided the labor. I suggested that each work in th e 
area he knew best. Since there was no liaison between the Brotherh ood and 
the community leaders I assigned myself the task of creating on e. It was 
decided that our street meetings begin immediately and that B rother Tod 
Clifton was to return and go over the details with me.
While the discussion continued I studied their faces. They s eemed 
absorbed with the cause and in complete agreement, blacks and whites. But 
when I tried to place them as to type I got nowhere. The big woman w ho 
looked like a southern "sudsbuster" was in charge of women's work , and 
spoke in abstract, ideological terms. The shy-looking man wit h the liver 
splotches on his neck spoke with a bold directness and eagernes s for action.
And this Brother Tod Clifton, the youth leader, looked somehow like a 
hipster, a zoot suiter, a sharpie -- except his head of Persian lam b's wool had 
never known a straightener. I could place none of them. They see med familiar 
but were just as different as Brother Jack and the other whites we re from all
the white men I had known. They were all transformed, like famili ar people 
seen in a dream. Well, I thought, I'm different too, and they'll see it when 
the talk is finished and the action begins. I'll just have to b e careful not to 
antagonize anyone. As it is, someone might resent my being pla ced in charge.
But when Brother Tod Clifton came into my office to discuss the
street meeting I saw no signs of resentment, but a complete abso rption in the 
strategy of the meeting. With great care he went about instructin g me how to 
deal with hecklers, on what to do if we were attacked, and upon ho w to 
recognize our own members from the rest of the crowd. For all his see ming 
zoot-suiter characteristics his speech was precise and I had no doubt that he 
knew his business.
"How do you think we'll do?" I said when he had finished.
"It'll go big, man," he said. "It'll be bigger than anything s ince 
Garvey." 
"I wish I could be so sure," I said. "I never saw Garvey." 
"I didn't either," he said, "but I understand that in Harlem he wa s 
very big." 
"Well, we're not Garvey, and he didn't last." 
"No, but he must have had something," he said with sudden pass ion.
"He must have had something to move all those people! Our peop le are hell
to move. He must have had plenty!" 
I looked at him. His eyes were turned inward; then he smiled. "Don 't 
worry," he said. "We have a scientific plan and you set them off . Things are 
so bad they'll listen, and when they listen they'll go along. " 
"I hope so," I said.
"They will. You haven't been around the movement as I have, for
three years now, and I can feel the change. They're ready to move."
"I hope your feelings are right," I said.
"They're right, all right," he said. "All we have to do is gather t hem 
in." 
THE evening was almost of a winter coldness, the corner well li ghted 
and the all-Negro crowd large and tightly packed. Up on the ladde r now I 
was surrounded by a group of Clifton's youth division, and I coul d see,
beyond their backs with upturned collars, the faces of the doub tful, the 
curious and the convinced in the crowd. It was early and I threw my v oice 
hard down against the traffic sounds, feeling the damp coldnes s of the air 
upon my cheeks and hands as my voice warmed with my emotion. I ha d just 
begun to feel the pulsing set up between myself and the people , hearing them 
answering in staccato applause and agreement when Tod Clifton caught my 
eye, pointing. And over the heads of the crowd and down past the dark 
storefronts and blinking neon signs I saw a bristling band of abo ut twenty 
men quick-stepping forward. I looked down.
"It's trouble, keep talking," Clifton said. "Give the boys th e signal." 
"My Brothers, the time has come for action," I shouted. And now I
saw the youth members and some older men move around to the back o f the 
crowd, and up to meet the advancing group. Then something saile d up out of
the dark and landed hard against my forehead, and I felt the crowd s urge in 
close, sending the ladder moving backwards, and I was like a ma n tottering 
above a crowd on stilts, then dropping backwards into the street a nd clear,
hearing the ladder clatter down. They were milling in a panic no w, and I saw 
Clifton beside me. "It's Ras the Exhorter," he yelled. "Can you use your 
hands?" 
"I can use my fists!" I was annoyed.
"Well, all right then. Here's your chance. Come on, let's see yo u 
duke!" 
He moved forward and seemed to dive into the whirling crowd, and 
I beside him, seeing them scatter into doorways and pound off in the dark.
"There's Ras, over there," Clifton cried. And I heard the sound of
breaking glass and the street went dark. Someone had knocked out the light,
and through the dimness I saw Clifton heading to where a red neon s ign 
glowed in a dark window as something went past my head. Then a ma n ran 
up with a length of pipe and I saw Clifton close with him, ducki ng down and 
working in close and grabbing the man's wrist and twisting sudde nly like a 
soldier executing an about-face so that now he faced me, the b ack of the 
man's elbow rigid across his shoulder and the man rising on tipto e and 
screaming as Clifton straightened smoothly and levered down on the arm.
I heard a dry popping sound and saw the man sag, and the pipe 
rang upon the walk; then someone caught me hard in the stomach an d 
suddenly I knew that I was fighting too. I went to my knees and ro lled and 
pulled erect, facing him. "Get up, Uncle Tom," he said, and I cl ipped him. He 
had his hands and I had mine and the match was even but he was not so 
lucky. He wasn't down and he wasn't out, but I caught him two go od ones 
and he decided to fight elsewhere. When he turned I tripped him an d moved 
away.
The fight was moving back into the dark where the street lights ha d 
been knocked out clear to the corner, and it was quiet except for the 
grunting and straining and the sound of footfalls and of blows. It was 
confusing in the dark and I couldn't tell ours from theirs and move d 
cautiously, trying to see. Someone up the street in the dark yel led, "Break it 
up! Break it up!" and I thought, Cops, and looked around for Clif ton. The 
neon sign glowed mysteriously and there was a lot of running and c ursing,
and now I saw him working skillfully in a store lobby before a red CH ECKS 
CASHED HERE sign and I hurried over, hearing objects sailing past my head 
and the crash of glass. Clifton's arms were moving in short, accura te jabs 
against the head and stomach of Ras the Exhorter, punching swif tly and 
scientifically, careful not to knock him into the window or st rike the glass 
with his fists, working Ras between rights and lefts jabbed so f ast that he 
rocked like a drunken bull, from side to side. And as I came up Ras t ried to 
bull his way out and I saw Clifton drive him back and down into a s quat, his 
hands upon the dark floor of the lobby, his heels back against t he door like a 
runner against starting blocks. And now, shooting forward, he c aught Clifton 
coming in, butting him, and I heard the burst of breath and Clifto n was on 
his back and something flashed in Ras's hand and he came forwa rd, a short,
heavy figure as wide as the lobby now with the knife, moving del iberately. I 
spun, looking for the length of pipe, diving for it and crawlin g on hands and 
knees and here, here -- and coming up to see Ras reach down, gettin g one 
hand into Clifton's collar, the knife in the other, looking dow n at Clifton and 
panting, bull-angry. I froze, seeing him draw back the knife an d stop it in 
mid-air; draw back and stop, cursing; then draw back and stop agai n, all very 
quickly, beginning to cry now and talking rapidly at the same t ime; and me 
easing slowly forward.
"Mahn," Ras blurted, "I ought to kill you. Godahm, I ought to ki ll
you and the world be better off. But you black, mahn. Why you be b lack,
mahn? I swear I ought to kill you. No mahn strike the Exhorter, god ahmit,
no mahn!" 
I saw him raise the knife again and now as he lowered it unused he 
pushed Clifton into the street and stood over him, sobbing.
"Why you with these white folks? Why? I been watching you a lon g 
time. I say to myself, 'Soon he get smart and get tired. He get out of that 
t'ing.' Why a good boy like you still with them?" 
Still moving forward, I saw his face gleam with red angry tears as he 
stood above Clifton with the still innocent knife and the tea rs red in the glow 
of the window sign.
"You my brother, mahn. Brothers are the same color; how the hell
you call these white men brother? Shit, mahn. That's shit! Broth ers the same 
color. We sons of Mama Africa, you done forgot? You black, BLACK! You -- 
Godahm, mahn!" he said, swinging the knife for emphasis. "Yo u got bahd 
hair! You got thick lips! They say you stink! They hate you, mah n. You 
Afrian. AFRICAN! Why you with them? Leave that shit, mahn. The y sell you 
out. That shit is old-fashioned. They enslave us -- you forget that? How can 
they mean a black mahn any good? How they going to be your brothe r?" 
I had reached him now and brought the pipe down hard, seeing the 
knife fly off into the' dark as he grabbed his wrist, and I raised th e pipe 
again, suddenly hot with fear and hate, as he looked at me out o f his narrow 
little eyes, standing his ground.
"And you, mahn," the Exhorter said, "a reg'lar little black dev il! A 
godahm sly mongoose! Where you think you from, going with the wh ite folks? 
I know, godahm; don't I know it! You from down South! You from Trin idad!
You from Barbados! Jamaica, South Africa, and the white mahn's foot in your 
ass all the way to the hip. What you trying to deny by betraying t he black 
people? Why you fight against us? You young fellows. You youn g black men 
with plenty education; I been hearing your rabble rousing. Why y ou go over 
to the enslaver? What kind of education is that? What kind of bl ack mahn is 
that who betray his own mama?" 
"Shut up," Clifton said, leaping to his feet. "Shut up!" 
"Hell, no," Ras cried, wiping his eyes with his fists. "I talk! Bust me 
with the pipe but, by God, you listen to the Exhorter! Come in wit h us,
mahn. We build a glorious movement of black people. Black Peop le! What 
they do, give you money? Who wahnt the dahm stuff? Their money bleed 
black blood, mahn. It's unclean! Taking their money is shit, mahn. Money 
without dignity -- That's bahd shit!" 
Clifton lunged toward him. I held him, shaking my head. "Come o n,
the man's crazy," I said, pulling on his arm.
Ras struck his thighs with his fists. "Me crazy, mahn? You call m e 
crazy? Look at you two and look at me -- is this sanity? Standing here in 
three shades of blackness! Three black men fighting in the stree t because of
the white enslaver? Is that sanity? Is that consciousness, sc ientific 
understahnding? Is that the modern black mahn of the twentieth century? 
Hell, mahn! Is it self-respect -- black against black? What th ey give you to 
betray -- their women? You fall for that?" 
"Let's go," I said, listening and remembering and suddenly ali ve in 
the dark with the horror of the battle royal, but Clifton looked at Ras with a 
tight, fascinated expression, pulling away from me.
"Let's go," I repeated. He stood there, looking.
"Sure, you go," Ras said, "but not him. You contahminated but h e 
the real black mahn. In Africa this mahn be a chief, a black king! Here they 
say he rape them godahm women with no blood in their veins. I bet this 
mahn can't beat them off with baseball bat -- shit! What kind o f foolishness 
is it? Kick him ass from cradle to grave then call him brother? Does i t make 
mahthematics? Is it logic? Look at him, mahn; open your eyes, " he said to 
me. "I look like that I rock the blahsted world! They know about m e in 
Japan, India -- all the colored countries. Youth! Intelligenc e! The mahn's a 
natural prince! Where is your eyes? Where your self-respect? Worki ng for 
them dahm people? Their days is numbered, the time is almost he re and you 
fooling 'round like this was the nineteenth century. I don't u nderstahnd you.
Am I ignorant? Answer me, mahn!" 
"Yes," Clifton burst out. "Hell, yes!" 
"You t'ink I'm crazy, is it c'ase I speak bahd English? Hell, it ain't 
my mama tongue, mahn, I'm African! You really t'ink I'm crazy?" 
"Yes, yes!" 
"You believe that?" said Ras. "What they do to you, black mahn ? 
Give you them stinking women?" 
Clifton lunged again, and again I grabbed him; and again Ras he ld 
his ground, his head glowing red.
"Women? Godahm, mahn! Is that equality? Is that the black mah n's 
freedom? A pat on the back and a piece of cunt without no passion ? 
Maggots! They buy you that blahsted cheap, mahn? What they do to my 
people! Where is your brains? These women dregs, mahn! They bilg e water!
You know the high-class white mahn hates the black mahn, that 's simple. So 
now he use the dregs and wahnt you black young men to do his dirty w ork.
They betray you and you betray the black people. They tricking yo u, mahn.
Let them fight among themselves. Let 'em kill off one another. We organize -- 
organization is good -- but we organize black. BLACK! To hell wi th that son 
of a bitch! He take one them strumpets and tell the black mahn hi s freedom 
lie between her skinny legs -- while that son of a gun, he take a ll the power 
and the capital and don't leave the black mahn not'ing. The go od white 
women he tell the black mahn is a rapist and keep them locked up a nd 
ignorant while he makes the black mahn a race of bahstards.
"When the black mahn going to tire of this childish perfidity? H e got 
you so you don't trust your black intelligence? You young, don 't play you'self
cheap, mahn. Don't deny you'self! It took a billion gallons o f black blood to 
make you. Recognize you'self inside and you wan the kings amo ng men! A 
mahn knows he's a mahn when he got not'ing, when he's naked -- n obody 
have to tell him that. You six foot tall, mahn. You young and in telligent. You 
black and beautiful -- don't let 'em tell you different! You wa sn't them t'ings 
you be dead, mahn. Dead! I'd have killed you, mahn. Ras the Exh orter raised 
up his knife and tried to do it, but he could not do it. Why don't y ou do it? 
I ask myself. I will do it now, I say; but somet'ing tell me, 'No , no! You 
might be killing your black king!' And I say, yas, yas! So I acc ept your 
humiliating ahction. Ras recognized your black possibiliti es, mahn. Ras would 
not sahcrifice his black brother to the white enslaver. Instead he cry. Ras is a 
mahn -- no white mahn have to tell him that -- and Ras cry. So why don't 
you recognize your black duty, mahn, and come jine us?" 
His chest was heaving and a note of pleading had come into the 
harsh voice. He was an exhorter, all right, and I was caught in the c rude,
insane eloquence of his plea. He stood there, awaiting an answ er. And 
suddenly a big transport plane came low over the buildings and I looked up 
to see the firing of its engine, and we were all three silent, watc hing.
Suddenly the Exhorter shook his fist toward the plane and yelle d,
"Hell with him, some day we have them too! Hell with him!" 
He stood there, shaking his fist as the plane rattled the buildi ngs in 
its powerful flight. Then it was gone and I looked about the unre al street.
They were fighting far up the block in the dark now and we were alon e. I 
looked at the Exhorter. I didn't know if I was angry or amazed.
"Look," I said, shaking my head, "let's talk sense. From now on we'll
be on the street corners every night and we'll be prepared for troubl e. We 
don't want it, especially with you, but we won't run either . . . " 
"Goddam, mahn," he said, leaping forward, "this is Harlem. Thi s is 
my territory, the black mahn's territory. You think we let white f olks come in 
and spread their poison? Let 'em come in like they come and take over the 
numbers racket? Like they have all the stores? Talk sense, mahn, if you 
talking to Ras, talk sense!" 
"This is sense," I said, "and you listen as we listened to you. We'll
be out here every night, understand. We'll be out here and the nex t time you 
go after one of our brothers with a knife -- and I mean white or bla ck -- 
well, we won't forget it." 
He shook his head, "Nor will I forget you either, mahn." 
"Don't. I don't want you to; because if you forget there'll be tro uble.
You're mistaken, don't you see you're outnumbered? You need all ies to win . .
." 
"That there is sense. Black allies. Yellow and brown allies!" 
"All men who want a brotherly world," I said.
"Don't be stupid, mahn. They white, they don't have to be alli es with 
no black people. They get what they wahnt, they turn against yo u. Where's 
your black intelligence?" 
"Thinking like that will get you lost in the backwash of histo ry," I 
said. "Start thinking with your mind and not your emotions." 
He shook his head vehemently, looking at Clifton.
"This black mahn talking to me about brains and thinking. I ask
both of you, are you awake or sleeping? What is your pahst and wh ere are 
you going? Never mind, take your corrupt ideology and eat out yo ur own guts 
like a laughing hyena. You are nowhere, mahn. Nowhere! Ras is not ignorant,
nor is Ras afraid. No! Ras, he be here black and fighting for the l iberty of
the black people when the white folks have got what they wahnt and done 
gone off laughing in your face and you stinking and choked up w ith white 
maggots." 
He spat angrily into the dark street. It flew pink in the red glow.
"That'll be all right with me," I said. "Only remember what I sai d.
Come on, Brother Clifton. This man's full of pus, black pus." 
We started away, a piece of glass crunching under my foot.
"Maybe so," Ras said, "but I ahm no fool! I ahm no black educate d 
fool who t'inks everything between black mahn and white mahn can be 
settled with some blahsted lies in some bloody books written b y the white 
mahn in the first place. It's three hundred years of black blood to build this 
white mahn's civilization and wahn't be wiped out in a minute . Blood calls 
for blood! You remember that. And remember that I am not like you . Ras 
recognizes the true issues and he is not afraid to be black. Nor is he a 
traitor for white men. Remember that: I am no black traitor to th e black 
people for the white people." 
And before I could answer Clifton spun in the dark and there was a 
crack and I saw Ras go down and Clifton breathing hard and Ras lyin g there 
in the street, a thick, black man with red tears on his face that ca ught the 
reflection of the CHECKS CASHED HERE sign.
And again, as Clifton looked gravely down he seemed to ask a sil ent 
question.
"Let's go," I said. "Let's go!" 
We started away as the screams of sirens sounded, Clifton cursing
quietly to himself.
Then we were out of the dark onto a busy street and he turned to 
me. There were tears in his eyes.
"That poor, misguided son of a bitch," he said.
"He thinks a lot of you, too," I said. I was glad to be out of the 
dark and away from that exhorting voice.
"The man's crazy," Clifton said. "It'll run you crazy if you let i t." 
"Where'd he get that name?" I said.
"He gave it to himself. I guess he did. Ras is a title of respect i n the 
East. It's a wonder he didn't say something about 'Ethiopia s tretching forth 
her wings,' " he said, mimicking Ras. "He makes it sound like t he hood of a 
cobra fluttering . . . I don't know . . . I don't know . . ." 
"We'll have to watch him now," I said.
"Yes, we'd better," he said. "He won't stop fighting . . . And th anks 
for getting rid of his knife." 
"You didn't have to worry," I said. "He wouldn't kill his king. " 
He turned and looked at me as though he thought I might mean it;
then he smiled.
"For a while there I thought I was gone," he said.
As we headed for the district office I wondered what Brother Jack
would say about the fight.
"We'll have to overpower him with organization," I said.
"We'll do that, all right. But it's on the inside that Ras is stro ng," 
Clifton said. "On the inside he's dangerous." 
"He won't get on the inside," I said. "He'd consider himself a traitor." 
"No," Clifton said, "he won't get on the inside. Did you hear h ow he 
was talking? Did you hear what he was saying?" 
"I heard him, sure," I said.
"I don't know," he said. "I suppose sometimes a man has to plun ge 
outside history . . ." 
"What?" 
"Plunge outside, turn his back . . . Otherwise he might kill
somebody, go nuts." 
I didn't answer. Maybe he's right, I thought, and was suddenly v ery 
glad I had found Brotherhood.
THE next morning it rained and I reached the district before the 
others arrived and stood looking through the window of my office, past the 
jutting wall of a building, and on beyond the monotonous patt ern of its 
bricks and mortar I saw a row of trees rising tall and graceful in the ra in.
One tree grew close by and I could see the rain streaking its bark and its 
sticky buds. Trees were rowed the length of the long block beyond me, rising 
tall in dripping wetness above a series of cluttered backyards. A nd it occurred 
to me that cleared of its ramshackle fences and planted with flo wers and 
grass, it might form a pleasant park. And just then a paper bag sai led from a 
window to my left and burst like a silent grenade, scattering gar bage into the 
trees and pancaking to earth with a soggy, exhausted plop! I sta rted with 
disgust, then thought, The sun will shine in those backyards s ome day. A 
community clean-up campaign might be worthwhile for a slack s eason, at 
that. Everything couldn't possibly be as exciting as last ni ght.
Turning back to my desk I sat facing the map now as Brother Tarp 
appeared.
"Morning, son, I see you already on the job," he said.
"Good morning. I have so much to do that I thought I'd better get
started early," I said.
"You'll do all right," he said. "But I didn't come in here to take up 
your time, I want to put something on the wall." 
"Go right ahead. Can I give you a hand?" 
"No, I can make it all right," he said, clambering with his lame l eg 
upon a chair that sat beneath the map and hanging a frame from the ceiling 
molding, straightening it carefully, and getting down to come over beside my 
desk.
"Son, you know who that is?" 
"Why, yes," I said, "it's Frederick Douglass." 
"Yessir, that's just who it is. You know much about him?" 
"Not much. My grandfather used to tell me about him though." 
"That's enough. He was a great man. You just take a look at him 
once in a while. You have everything you need -- paper and stuf f like that?" 
"Yes, I have, Brother Tarp. And thanks for the portrait of Douglas s." 
"Don't thank me, son," he said from the door. "He belongs to all o f
us." 
I sat now facing the portrait of Frederick Douglass, feeling a sud den 
piety, remembering and refusing to hear the echoes of my grandfat her's voice.
Then I picked up the telephone and began calling the communit y leaders.
They fell in line like prisoners: preachers, politicians, variou s 
professionals, proving Clifton correct. The eviction fight was such a dramatic 
issue that most of the leaders feared that their followers would have rallied to 
us without them. I slighted no one, no matter how unimportant; bigshots,
doctors, real-estate men and store-front preachers. And it went so fast and 
smoothly that it seemed not to happen to me but to someone who a ctually 
bore my new name. I almost laughed into the phone when I heard the
director of Men's House address me with profound respect. My new n ame 
was getting around. It's very strange, I thought, but things are so unreal for 
them normally that they believe that to call a thing by name is t o make it 
so. And yet I am what they think I am . . .
OUR work went so well that a few Sundays later we threw a parade 
that clinched our hold on the community. We worked feverishly. And now the 
clashing and conflict of my last days at Mary's seemed to have moved out 
into the struggles of the community, leaving me inwardly calm a nd controlled.
Even the hustle and bustle of picketing and speechmaking see med to 
stimulate me for the better; my wildest ideas paid off.
Upon hearing that one of the unemployed brothers was an ex-drill
master from Wichita, Kansas, I organized a drill team of six-foo ters whose 
duty it was to march through the streets striking up sparks with the ir 
hobnailed shoes. On the day of the parade they drew crowds faster than a 
dogfight on a country road. The People's Hot Foot Squad, we cal led them,
and when they drilled fancy formations down Seventh Avenue in t he 
springtime dusk they set the streets ablaze. The community lau ghed and 
cheered and the police were dumfounded. But the sheer corn of it g ot them 
and the Hot Foot Squad went shuffling along. Then came the fla gs and 
banners and the cards bearing slogans; and the squad of drum majore ttes, the 
best-looking girls we could find, who pranced and twirled and ju st plain 
girled in the enthusiastic interest of Brotherhood. We pulled fi fteen thousand 
Harlemites into the street behind our slogans and marched down B roadway to 
City Hall. Indeed, we were the talk of the town.
With this success I was pushed forward at a dizzy pace. My name 
spread like smoke in an airless room. I was kept moving all over th e place.
Speeches here, there, everywhere, uptown and down. I wrote newsp aper 
articles, led parades and relief delegations, and so on. And the Brotherhood 
was going out of its way to make my name prominent. Articles, tel egrams 
and many mailings went out over my signature -- some of which I' d written,
but most not. I was publicized, identified with the organizat ion both by word 
and image in the press. On the way to work one late spring morning I 
counted fifty greetings from people I didn't know, becoming aw are that there 
were two of me: the old self that slept a few hours a night and dream ed 
sometimes of my grandfather and Bledsoe and Brockway and Mary, the self
that flew without wings and plunged from great heights; and the new public 
self that spoke for the Brotherhood and was becoming so much more
important than the other that I seemed to run a foot race against m yself.
Still, I liked my work during those days of certainty. I kept my ey es 
wide and ears alert. The Brotherhood was a world within a world and I w as 
determined to discover all its secrets and to advance as far as I could. I saw 
no limits, it was the one organization in the whole country in w hich I could 
reach the very top and I meant to get there. Even if it meant climb ing a 
mountain of words. For now I had begun to believe, despite all t he talk of
science around me, that there was a magic in spoken words. Someti mes I sat 
watching the watery play of light upon Douglass' portrait, thi nking how 
magical it was that he had talked his way from slavery to a govern ment 
ministry, and so swiftly. Perhaps, I thought, something of th e kind is 
happening to me. Douglass came north to escape and find work in t he 
shipyards; a big fellow in a sailor's suit who, like me, had take n another 
name. What had his true name been? Whatever it was, it was as Dou glass 
that he became himself, defined himself. And not as a boatwrig ht as he'd 
expected, but as an orator. Perhaps the sense of magic lay in the u nexpected 
transformations. "You start Saul, and end up Paul," my grandfath er had often 
said. "When you're a youngun, you Saul, but let life whup your h ead a bit 
and you starts to trying to be Paul -- though you still Sauls arou nd on the 
side." 
No, you could never tell where you were going, that was a sure 
thing. The only sure thing. Nor could you tell how you'd get the re -- though 
when you arrived it was somehow right. For hadn't I started out wit h a 
speech, and hadn't it been a speech that won my scholarship to c ollege,
where I had expected speechmaking to win me a place with Bledso e and 
launch me finally as a national leader? Well, I had made a speec h, and it 
had made me a leader, only not the kind I had expected. So that wa s the 
way it was. And no complaints, I thought, looking at the map; y ou started 
looking for red men and you found them -- even though of a differe nt tribe 
and in a bright new world. The world was strange if you stopped to th ink 
about it; still it was a world that could be controlled by scienc e, and the 
Brotherhood had both science and history under control.
Thus for one lone stretch of time I lived with the intensity dis played 
by those chronic numbers players who see clues to their fortune in the most 
minute and insignificant phenomena: in clouds, on passing t rucks and subway 
cars, in dreams, comic strips, the shape of dog-luck fouled on th e pavements.
I was dominated by the all-embracing idea of Brotherhood. The org anization 
had given the world a new shape, and me a vital role. We recognized no 
loose ends, everything could be controlled by our science. Li fe was all pattern 
and discipline; and the beauty of discipline is when it works. And it was 
working very well.
Chapter 18 
Only my Bledsoe-trustee inspired compulsion to read all papers t hat 
touched my hands prevented me from throwing the envelope aside. It was 
unstamped and appeared to be the least important item in the morn ing's 
mail:
Brother,
This is advice from a friend who has been watching you closely. D o 
not go too fast. Keep working for the people but remember that yo u are one 
of us and do not forget if you get too big they will cut you down. Y ou are 
from the South and you know that this is a white man's world. So ta ke a 
friendly advice and go easy so that you can keep on helping the c olored 
people. They do not want you to go too fast and will cut you down if you 
do. Be smart . . .
I shot to my feet, the paper rattling poisonously in my hands. W hat 
did it mean? Who'd send such a thing? 
"Brother Tarp!" I called, reading again the wavery lines of a 
handwriting that was somehow familiar. "Brother Tarp!" 
"What is it, son?" 
And looking up, I received another shock. Framed there in the gray ,
early morning light of the door, my grandfather seemed to look from his 
eyes. I gave a quick gasp, then there was a silence in which I cou ld hear his 
wheezing breath as he eyed me unperturbed.
"What's wrong?" he said, limping into the room.
I reached for the envelope. "Where did this come from?" I said.
"What is it?" he said, taking it calmly from my hands.
"It's unstamped." 
"Oh, yes -- I saw it myself," he said. "I reckon somebody put it i n 
the box late last night. I took it out with the regular mail. Is i t something 
that wasn't for you?" 
"No," I said, avoiding his eyes. "But -- it isn't dated. I was w ondering 
when it arrived -- Why are you staring at me?" 
"Because looks to me like you seen a ghost. You feel sick?" 
"It's nothing," I said. "Just a slight upset." 
There was an awkward silence. He stood there and I forced myself to
look at his eyes again, finding my grandfather gone, leaving o nly the 
searching calm. I said, "Sit down a second, Brother Tarp. Since y ou're here 
I'd like to ask you a question." 
"Sure," he said, dropping into a chair. "Go 'head." 
"Brother Tarp, you get around and know the members -- how do 
they really feel about me?" 
He cocked his head. "Why, sure -- they think you're going to make a 
real leader --" 
"But?" 
"Ain't no buts, that's what they think and I don't mind tellin g you." 
"But what about the others?" 
"What others?" 
"The ones who don't think so much of me?" 
"Them's the ones I haven't heard about, son." 
"But I must have some enemies," I said.
"Sure, I guess everybody has 'em, but I never heard of anybody he re 
in the Brotherhood not liking you. As far as folks up here is conce rned they 
think you're it. You heard any different?" 
"No, but I was wondering. I've been going along taking them so 
much for granted that I thought I'd better check so that I can ke ep their 
support." 
"Well, you don't have to worry. So far, nearly everything you had
anything to do with has turned out to be what the folks like, eve n things 
some of 'em resisted. Take that there," he said, pointing to the wall near my 
desk.
It was a symbolic poster of a group of heroic figures: An American 
Indian couple, representing the dispossessed past; a blond bro ther (in 
overalls) and a leading Irish sister, representing the disposses sed present; and 
Brother Tod Clifton and a young white couple (it had been felt u nwise simply 
to show Clifton and the girl) surrounded by a group of children of mi xed 
races, representing the future, a color photograph of bright skin t exture and 
smooth contrast.
"So?" I said, staring at the legend:
"After the Struggle: The Rainbow of America's Future" 
"Well, when you first suggested it, some of the members was agai nst 
you." 
"That's certainly true." 
"Sho, and they raised the devil about the youth members going in to 
the subways and sticking 'em up in place of them constipation ads and things 
-- but do you know what they doing now?" 
"I guess they're holding it against me because some of the kids were 
arrested," I said.
"Holding it against you? Hell, they going around bragging abou t it.
But what I was about to say is they taking them rainbow pictures a nd 
tacking 'em to their walls 'long with 'God Bless Our Home' and the Lord's 
Prayer. They're crazy about it. And same way with the Hot-Footers a nd all
that. You don't have to worry, son. They might resist some of you r ideas, but 
when the deal goes down, they with you right on down to the ground . The 
only enemies you likely to have is somebody on the outside who 's jealous to 
see you spring up all of a sudden and start to doing some of the thi ngs what 
should of been done years ago. And what do you care when some folk s start 
knocking you? It's a sign you getting some place." 
"I'd like to believe so, Brother Tarp," I said. "As long as I have the 
people with me I'll believe in what I'm doing." 
"That's right," he said. "When things get rough it kind of helps to 
know you got support --" His voice broke off and he seemed to stare down 
at me, although he faced me at eye level acrosis the desk.
"What is it, Brother Tarp?" 
"You from down South, ain't you, son?" 
"Yes," I said.
He turned in his chair, sliding one hand into his pocket as he rest ed 
his chin upon the other. "I don't really have the words to say what just come 
into my head, son. You see, I was down there for a long time before I come 
up here, and when I did come up they was after me. What I mean is, I had 
to escape, I had to come a-running." 
"I guess I did too, in a way," I said.
"You mean they were after you too?" 
"Not really, Brother Tarp, I just feel that way." 
"Well this ain't exactly the same thing," he said. "You notic e this 
limp I got?" 
"Yes." 
"Well, I wasn't always lame, and I'm not really now 'cause the 
doctors can't find anything wrong with that leg. They say it's s ound as a 
piece of steel. What I mean is I got this limp from dragging a chai n." 
I couldn't see it in his face or hear it in his speech, yet I knew he 
was neither lying nor trying to shock me. I shook my head.
"Sure," he said. "Nobody knows that about me, they just think I got 
rheumatism. But it was that chain and after nineteen years I hav en't been 
able to stop dragging my leg." 
"Nineteen years!" 
"Nineteen years, six months and two days. And what I did wasn't
much; that is, it wasn't much when I did it. But after all that t ime it 
changed into something else and it seemed to be as bad as they s aid it was.
All that time made it bad. I paid for it with everything I had bu t my life. I 
lost my wife and my boys and my piece of land. So what started out as an 
argument between a couple of men turned out to be a crime worth nine teen 
years of my life." 
"What on earth did you do, Brother Tarp?" 
"I said no to a man who wanted to take something from me; that's 
what it cost me for saying no and even now the debt ain't fully p aid and will
never be paid in their terms." 
A pain throbbed in my throat and I felt a kind of numb despair.
Nineteen years! And here he was talking quietly to me and this no doubt the 
first time he'd tried to tell anyone about it. But why me, I thoug ht, why pick 
me? 
"I said no," he said. "I said hell, no! And I kept saying no unti l I 
broke the chain and left." 
"But how?" 
"They let me get close to the dogs once in a while, that's how. I
made friends with them dogs and I waited. Down there you really le arn how 
to wait. I waited nineteen years and then one morning when the riv er was 
flooding I left. They thought I was one of them who got drowned w hen the 
levee broke, but I done broke the chain and gone. I was standing i n the mud 
holding a long-handled shovel and I asked myself, Tarp, can yo u make it? 
And inside me I said yes; all that water and mud and rain said yes , and I 
took off." 
Suddenly he gave a laugh so gay it startled me.
"I'm tellin' it better'n I ever thought I could," he said, fish ing in his 
pocket and removing something that looked like an oilskin tob acco pouch,
from which he removed an object wrapped in a handkerchief.
"I've been looking for freedom ever since, son. And sometimes I've 
done all right. Up to these here hard times I did very well, consid ering that 
I'm a man whose health is not too good. But even when times were b est for 
me I remembered. Because I didn't want to forget those nineteen y ears I just 
kind of held on to this as a keepsake and a reminder." 
He was unwrapping the object now and I watched his old man's 
hands.
"I'd like to pass it on to you, son. There," he said, handing it t o me.
"Funny thing to give somebody, but I think it's got a heap of si gnifying 
wrapped up in it and it might help you remember what we're really fi ghting 
against. I don't think of it in terms of but two words, yes and no; but it 
signifies a heap more . . ." 
I saw him place his hand on the desk. "Brother," he said, calling me 
"Brother" for the first time, "I want you to take it. I guess it's a kind of luck 
piece. Anyway, it's the one I filed to get away." 
I took it in my hand, a thick, dark, oily piece of filed steel tha t had 
been twisted open and forced partly back into place, on which I s aw marks 
that might have been made by the blade of a hatchet. It was such a link as I 
had seen on Bledsoe's desk, only while that one had been smoot h, Tarp's 
bore the marks of haste and violence, looking as though it had be en attacked 
and conquered before it stubbornly yielded.
I looked at him and shook my head as he watched me inscrutably.
Finding no words to ask him more about it, I slipped the link over my 
knuckles and struck it sharply against the desk.
Brother Tarp chuckled. "Now there's a way I never thought of usin g 
it," he said. "It's pretty good. It's pretty good." 
"But why do you give it to me, Brother Tarp?" 
"Because I have to, I guess. Now don't go trying to get me to say
what I can't. You're the talker, not me," he said, getting up and limping 
toward the door. "It was lucky to me and I think it might be lucky t o you.
You just keep it with you and look at it once in a while. Course, i f you get 
tired of it, why, give it back." 
"Oh, no," I called after him, "I want it and I think I understand .
Thanks for giving it to me." 
I looked at the dark band of metal against my fist and dropped it 
upon the anonymous letter. I neither wanted it nor knew what to do with it;
although there was no question of keeping it if for no other reas on than that 
I felt that Brother Tarp's gesture in offering it was of some deepl y felt 
significance which I was compelled to respect. Something, pe rhaps, like a man 
passing on to his son his own father's watch, which the son acce pted not 
because he wanted the old-fashioned time-piece for itself, but because of the 
overtones of unstated seriousness and solemnity of the paterna l gesture which 
at once joined him with his ancestors, marked a high point of his present,
and promised a concreteness to his nebulous and chaotic future. And now I 
remembered that if I had returned home instead of coming north my fa ther 
would have given me my grandfather's old-fashioned Hamilton, with its long,
burr-headed winding stem. Well, so my brother would get it and I' d never 
wanted it anyway. What were they doing now, I brooded, suddenly sick for 
home.
I could feel the air from the window hot against my neck now as 
through the smell of morning coffee I heard a throaty voice singin g with a 
mixture of laughter and solemnity:
Don't come early in the morning 
Neither in the heat of the day 
But come in the sweet cool of the 
Evening and wash my sins away . . .
A whole series of memories started to well up, but I threw them off. There 
was no time for memory, for all its images were of times passed.
There had been only a few minutes from the time that I'd called in
Brother Tarp about the letter and his leaving, but it seemed as t hough I'd 
plunged down a well of years. I looked calmly now at the writing w hich, for 
a moment, had shaken my total structure of certainty, and was gla d that 
Brother Tarp had been there to be called rather than Clifton or som e of the 
others before whom I would have been ashamed of my panic. Instea d he'd 
left me soberly confident. Perhaps from the shock of seeming to s ee my 
grandfather looking through Tarp's eyes, perhaps through the cal mness of his 
voice alone, or perhaps through his story and his link of chain, he had 
restored my perspective.
He's right, I thought; whoever sent the message is trying to co nfuse 
me; some enemy is trying to halt our progress by destroying my fai th through 
touching upon my old southern distrust, our fear of white betray al. It was as 
though he had learned of my experience with Bledsoe's letters an d was trying 
to use that knowledge to destroy not only me but the whole Brothe rhood. Yet 
that was impossible; no one knew that story who knew me now. It was 
simply an obscene coincidence. If only I could get my hands up on his stupid 
throat. Here in the Brotherhood was the one place in the country wh ere we 
were free and given the greatest encouragement to use our abiliti es, and he 
was trying to destroy it! No, it wasn't me he was worrying about b ecoming 
too big, it was the Brotherhood. And becoming big was exactly wh at the 
Brotherhood wanted. Hadn't I just received orders to submit ideas for 
organizing more people? And "a white man's world" was just what t he 
Brotherhood was against. We were dedicated to building a world of
Brotherhood.
But who had sent it -- Ras the Exhorter? No, it wasn't like him. He
was more direct and absolutely against any collaboration betwe en blacks and 
whites. It was someone else, someone more insidious than Ras. But who, I 
wondered, forcing it below my consciousness as I turned to the ta sks at hand.
The morning began with people asking my advice on how to secure 
relief; members coming in for instructions for small committee meetings being 
held in corners of the large hall; and I had just dismissed a woman seeking 
to free her husband, who had been jailed for beating her, when Bro ther 
Wrestrum entered the room. I returned his greeting and watched him ea se 
into a chair, his eyes sweeping over my desk-with uneasiness. He seemed to 
possess some kind of authority in the Brotherhood, but his exact function was 
unclear. He was, I felt, something of a meddler.
And hardly had he settled himself when he stared at my desk,
saying, "What you got there, Brother?" and pointed toward a pile o f my 
papers.
I leaned slowly back in my chair, looking him in the eye. "That' s my 
work," I said coldly, determined to stop any interference from the start.
"But I mean that," he said, pointing, his eyes beginning to bl aze,
"that there." 
"It's work," I said, "all my work." 
"Is that too?" he said, pointing to Brother Tarp's leg link.
"That's just a personal present, Brother," I said. "What could I d o for 
you?" 
"That ain't what I asked you, Brother. What is it?" 
I picked up the link and held it toward him, the metal oily and 
strangely skinlike now with the slanting sun entering the wind ow. "Would you 
care to examine it, Brother? One of our members wore it nineteen yea rs on 
the chain gang." 
"Hell, no!" He recoiled. "I mean, no, thank you. In fact, Brothe r, I 
don't think we ought to have such things around!" 
"You think so," I said. "And just why?" 
"Because I don't think we ought to dramatize our differences."
"I'm not dramatizing anything, it's my personal property that ha ppens 
to be lying on my desk." 
"But people can see it!" 
"That's true," I said. "But I think it's a good reminder of what o ur 
movement is fighting against." 
"No, suh!" he said, shaking his head, "no, suh! That's the wors e kind 
of thing for Brotherhood -- because we want to make folks think o f the 
things we have in common. That's what makes for Brotherhood. We have to 
change this way we have of always talking about how different w e are. In the 
Brotherhood we are all brothers." 
I was amused. He was obviously disturbed by something deeper than 
a need to forget differences. Fear was in his eyes. "I never thou ght of it in 
just that way, Brother," I said, dangling the iron between my fin ger and 
thumb.
"But you want to think about it," he said. "We have to discipli ne 
ourselves. Things that don't make for Brotherhood have to be root ed out. We 
have enemies, you know. I watch everything I do and say so as to be sure 
that I don't upset the Brotherhood -- 'cause this is a wonderful m ovement,
Brother, and we have to keep it that way. We have to watch ourselve s,
Brother. You know what I mean? Too often we're liable to forget tha t this is 
something that's a privilege to belong to. We're liable to say t hings that don't 
do nothing but make for more misunderstanding." 
What's driving him, I thought, what's all this to do with me? Co uld 
he have sent me the note? Dropping the iron I fished the anonymou s note 
from beneath the pile and held it by a corner, so that the slanting sun shone 
through the page and outlined the scrawling letters. I watched h im intently.
He was leaning upon the desk now, looking at the page but with n o 
recognition in his eyes. I dropped the page upon the chain, more 
disappointed than relieved.
"Between you and me, Brother," he said, "there are those amongst u s 
who don't really believe in Brotherhood." 
"Oh?" 
"You damn right they don't! They're just in it to use it for their own 
ends. Some call you Brother to your face and the minute you turn y our back,
you're a black son of a bitch! You got to watch 'em." 
"I haven't encountered any of that, Brother," I said.
"You will. There's lots of poison around. Some don't want to sha ke 
your hand and some don't like the idea of seeing too much of you ; but 
goddam it, in the Brotherhood they gotta!" 
I looked at him. It had never occurred to me that the Brotherhood 
could force anyone to shake my hand, and that he found satisfac tion that it 
could was both shocking and distasteful.
Suddenly he laughed. "Yes, dammit, they gotta! Me, I don't le t 'em 
get away with nothing. If they going to be brothers let 'em be brot hers! Oh,
but I'm fair," he said, his face suddenly self-righteous. "I'm fair. I ask myself
every day, 'What are you doing against Brotherhood?' and when I f ind it, I 
root it out, I burn it out like a man cauterizing a mad-dog bite. Th is 
business of being a brother is a full-time job. You have to be pu re in heart,
and you have to be disciplined in body and mind. Brother, you und erstand 
what I mean?" 
"Yes, I think I do," I said. "Some folks feel that way about the ir 
religion." 
"Religion?" He blinked his eyes. "Folks like me and you is ful l of
distrust," he said. "We been corrupted 'til it's hard for some of u s to believe 
in Brotherhood. And some even want revenge! That's what I'm talk ing about.
We have to root it out! We have to learn to trust our other brothers. A fter 
all, didn't they start the Brotherhood? Didn't they come and stre tch out their 
hand to us black men and say, 'We want y'all for our brothers?' Di dn't they 
do it? Didn't they, now? Didn't they set out to organize us, and help fight 
our battle and all like that? Sho they did, and we have to rememb er it 
twenty-four hours a day. Brotherhood. That's the word we got to ke ep right 
in front of our eyes every second. Now this brings me to why I come to see 
you, Brother." 
He sat back, his huge hands grasping his knees. "I got a plan I wa nt 
to talk over with you." 
"What is it, Brother?" I said.
"Well, it's like this. I think we ought to have some way of show ing 
what we are. We ought to have some banners and things like that. S pecially 
for us black brothers." 
"I see," I said, becoming interested. "But why do you think thi s is 
important?" 
" 'Cause it helps the Brotherhood, that's why. First, if you remem ber,
when you watch our people when there's a parade or a funeral, or a d ance or 
anything like that, they always have some kind of flags and ba nners even if
they don't mean anything. It kind of makes the occasion seem m ore 
important like. It makes people stop look and listen. 'What's coming off here?'
But you know and I know that they ain't none of 'em got no true fla g -- 
except maybe Ras the Exhorter, and he claims he's Ethiopian or A frican. But 
none of us got no true flag 'cause that flag don't really belong t o us. They 
want a true flag, one that's as much theirs as anybody else's. Yo u know what 
I mean?" 
"Yes, I think I do," I said, remembering that there was always tha t 
sense in me of being apart when the flag went by. It had been a remi nder,
until I'd found the Brotherhood, that my star was not yet there . . .
"Sure, you know," Brother Wrestrum said. "Everybody wants a flag .
We need a flag that stands for Brotherhood, and we need a sign we c an 
wear." 
"A sign?" 
"You know, a pin or a button." 
"You mean an emblem?" 
"That's it! Something we can wear, a pin or something like that . So 
that when a Brother meets a Brother they can know it. That way tha t thing 
what happened to Brother Tod Clifton wouldn't have happened . . ." 
"What wouldn't have happened?" 
He sat back. "Don't you know about it?" 
"I don't know what you mean." 
"It's something that's best forgot about," he said, leaning c lose, his 
big hands gripped and stretched before him. "But you see, there wa s a rally 
and some hoodlums tried to break up the meeting, and in the fight ing 
Brother Tod Clifton got holt to one of the white brothers by mista ke and was 
beating him, thought he was one of the hoodlums, he said. Thin gs like that is 
bad, Brother, very bad. But with some of these emblems, things l ike that 
wouldn't happen." 
"So that actually happened," I said.
"Sure did. That Brother Clifton goes wild when he gits mad . . . Bu t 
what do you think of my idea?" 
"I think it should be brought to the attention of the committee ," I 
said guardedly, as the phone rang. "Excuse me a moment, Brother," I said.
It was the editor of a new picture magazine requesting an interv iew 
of "one of our most successful young men." 
"That's very flattering," I said, "but I'm afraid I'm too busy f or an 
interview. I suggest, however, that you interview our youth l eader, Brother 
Tod Clifton; you'll find him a much more interesting subject."
"No, no!" Wrestrum said, shaking his head violently as the edit or 
said, "But we want you. You've --" 
"And you know," I interrupted, "our work is considered very 
controversial, certainly by some." 
"That's exactly why we want you. You've become identified wi th that 
controversy and it's our job to bring such subjects to the eyes of our 
readers." 
"But so has Brother Clifton," I said.
"No, sir; you're the man and you owe it to our youth to allow us to 
tell them your story," he said, as I watched Brother Wrestrum lea ning 
forward. "We feel that they should be encouraged to keep fighti ng toward 
success. After all, you're one of the latest to fight his way to the top. We 
need all the heroes we can get." 
"But, please," I laughed over the phone, "I'm no hero and I'm fa r 
from the top; I'm a cog in a machine. We here in the Brotherhood work a s a 
unit," I said, seeing Brother Wrestrum nod his head in agreement.
"But you can't get around the fact that you're the first of our peo ple 
to attract attention to it, can you now?" 
"Brother Clifton was active at least three years before me. Besid es, it 
isn't that simple. Individuals don't count for much; it's wh at the group wants,
what the group does. Everyone here submerges his personal ambiti ons for the 
common achievement." 
"Good! That's very good. People want to hear that. Our people need 
to have someone say that to them. Why don't you let me send out a n 
interviewer? I'll have her there in twenty minutes." 
"You're very insistent, but I'm very busy," I said.
And if Brother Wrestrum hadn't been wig-wagging, trying to tell me 
what to say I would have refused. Instead, I consented. Perhaps , I thought, a 
little friendly publicity wouldn't hurt. Such a magazine woul d reach many 
timid souls living far from the sound of our voices. I had only t o remember 
to say little about my past.
"I'm sorry for this interruption, Brother," I said, putting down t he 
phone and looking into his curious eyes. "I'll bring your idea t o the attention 
of the committee as quickly as possible." 
I stood to discourage further talk and he got up, fairly bursting t o 
continue.
"Well, I've got to see some other brothers myself," he said, "I' ll be 
seeing you soon." 
"Anytime," I said, avoiding his hand by picking up some papers .
Going out, he turned with his hand on the door frame, frowning.
"And, Brother, don't forget what I said about that thing you got o n your 
desk. Things like that don't do nothin' but cause confusion. They ought to be 
kept out of sight." 
I was glad to see him go. The idea of his trying to tell me what to
say in a conversation only part of which he could have heard! And i t was 
obvious that he disliked Clifton. Well, I disliked him. And a ll that foolishness 
and fear over the leg chain. Tarp had worn it for nineteen years an d could 
laugh, but this big -- 
Then I forgot Brother Wrestrum until about two weeks later at our 
downtown headquarters, where a meeting had been called to discu ss strategy.
EVERYONE had arrived before me. Long benches were arranged at 
one side of the room, which was hot and filled with smoke. Usual ly such 
meetings sounded like a prizefight or a smoker, but now everyon e was silent.
The white brothers looked uncomfortable and some of the Harlem bro thers 
belligerent. Nor did they leave me time to think about it. No so oner had I 
apologized for my lateness than Brother Jack struck the table w ith his gavel,
addressing his first remarks to me.
"Brother, there seems to be a serious misunderstanding among some
of the brothers concerning your work and recent conduct," he said.
I stared at him blankly, my mind groping for connections. "I'm s orry,
Brother Jack," I said, "but I don't understand. You mean there's something 
wrong with my work?" 
"So it seems," he said, his face completely neutral. "Certain c harges 
have just been made . . ." 
"Charges? Have I failed to carry out some directive?" 
"About that there seems to be some doubt. But we'd better let 
Brother Wrestrum speak of this," he said.
"Brother Wrestrum!" 
I was shocked. He hadn't been around since our talk, and I looke d 
across the table into his evasive face, seeing him stand with a slouch, a rolled 
paper protruding from his pocket.
"Yes, Brothers," he said, "I brought charges, much as I hated to ha ve 
to do it. But I been watching the way things have been going and I've 
decided that if they don't stop soon, this brother is going to m ake a fool out 
of the Brotherhood!" 
There were some sounds of protest.
"Yes, I said it and I mean it! This here brother constitutes one o f
the greatest dangers ever confronted by our movement." 
I looked at Brother Jack; his eyes were sparkling. I seemed to see
traces of a smile as he scribbled something on a pad. I was becomi ng very 
hot.
"Be more specific, Brother," Brother Garnett, a white brother, said .
"These are serious charges and we all know that the brother's work ha s been 
splendid. Be specific." 
"Sho, I'll be specific," Wrestrum boomed, suddenly whipping t he 
paper from his pocket, unrolling it and throwing it on the table. "This here's 
what I mean!" 
I took a step forward; it was a portrait of me looking out from a 
magazine page.
"Where did that come from?" I said.
"That's it," he boomed. "Make out like you never seen it." 
"But I haven't," I said. "I really haven't." 
"Don't lie to these white brothers. Don't lie!" 
"I'm not lying. I never saw it before in my life. But suppose I ha d,
what's wrong with it?" 
"You know what's wrong!" Wrestrum said.
"Look, I don't know anything. What's on your mind? You have us all
here, so if you have anything to say, please get it over with." 
"Brothers, this man is a -- a -- opportunist! All you got to do is rea d 
this article to see. I charge this man with using the Brotherhood m ovement 
to advance his own selfish interests." 
"Article?" Then I remembered the interview which I had forgotten . I 
met the eyes of the others as they looked from me to Wrestrum.
"And what does it say about us?" Brother Jack said, pointing to the 
magazine.
"Say?" Wrestrum said. "It doesn't say anything. It's all about him.
What he thinks, what he does; what he's going to do. Not a word ab out the 
rest of us who's been building the movement before he was ever he ard of.
Look at it, if you think I'm lying. Look at it!" 
Brother Jack turned to me. "Is this true?" 
"I haven't read it," I said. "I had forgotten that I was intervie wed." 
"But you remember it now?" Brother Jack said.
"Yes, I do now. And he happened to be in the office when the 
appointment was made." 
They were silent.
"Hell, Brother Jack," Wrestrum said, "it's right here in black and
white. He's trying to give people the idea that he's the whole Brotherhood 
movement." 
"I'm doing nothing of the sort. I tried to get the editor to inter view 
Brother Tod Clifton, you know that. Since you know so little ab out what I'm 
doing, why not tell the brothers what you're up to." 
"I'm exposing a double-dealer, that's what I'm doing. I'm exp osing 
you. Brothers, this man is a pure dee opportunist!" 
"All right," I said, "expose me if you can, but stop the slander. " 
"I'll expose you, all right," he said, sticking out his chin. " I'm going 
to. He's doing everything I said, Brothers. And I'll tell you so mething else -- 
he's trying to sew things up so that the members won't move unle ss he tells 
them to. Look at a few weeks ago when he was off in Philly. We trie d to get 
a rally going and what happens? Only about two hundred people tu rned out.
He's trying to train them so they won't listen to no one but him. " 
"But, Brother, didn't we decide that the appeal had been imprope rly 
phrased?" a brother interrupted.
"Yeah, I know, but that wasn't it . . ." 
"But the committee analyzed the appeal and --" 
"I know, Brothers, and I don't aim to dispute the committee. But ,
Brothers, it just seems that way 'cause you don't know this man. He works in 
the dark, he's got some kind of plot . . ." 
"What kind of plot?" one of the brothers said, leaning across the
table.
"Just a plot," Wrestrum said. "He aims to control the movement 
uptown. He wants to be a dictator!" 
The room was silent except for the humming of fans. They looked at 
him with a new concern.
"These are very serious charges, Brother," two brothers said in 
unison.
"Serious? I know they're serious. That's how come I brought them.
This opportunist thinks that because he's got a little more edu cation he's 
better than anybody else. He's what Brother Jack calls a petty -- petty 
individualist!" 
He struck the conference table with his fist, his eyes showing s mall
and round in his taut face. I wanted to punch that face. It no lon ger seemed 
real, but a mask behind which the real face was probably laughing , both at 
me and at the others. For he couldn't believe what he had said. I t just wasn't 
possible. He was the plotter and from the serious looks on the co mmittee's 
faces he was getting away with it. Now several brothers started to speak at 
once, and Brother Jack knocked for order.
"Brothers, please!" Brother Jack said. "One at a time. What do yo u 
know about this article?" he said to me.
"Not very much," I said. "The editor of the magazine called to say he 
was sending a reporter up for an interview. The reporter asked a fe w 
questions and took a few pictures with a little camera. That's a ll I know." 
"Did you give the reporter a prepared handout?" 
"I gave her nothing except a few pieces of our official literat ure. I 
told her neither what to ask me nor what to write. I naturally trie d to 
co-operate. If an article about me would help make friends for th e movement 
I felt it was my duty." 
"Brothers, this thing was arranged," Wrestrum said. "I tell you thi s 
opportunist had that reporter sent up there. He had her sent up and he told 
her what to write." 
"That's a contemptible lie," I said. "You were present and you k now I 
tried to get them to interview Brother Clifton!" 
"Who's a lie?" 
"You're a liar and a fat-mouthed scoundrel. You're a liar and no 
brother of mine." 
"Now he's calling me names. Brothers, you heard him." 
"Let's not lose our tempers," Brother Jack said calmly. "Brothe r 
Wrestrum, you've made serious charges. Can you prove them?" 
"I can prove them. All you have to do is read the magazine and 
prove them for yourself;" 
"It will be read. And what else?" 
"All you have to do is listen to folks in Harlem. All they talk ab out 
is him. Never nothing about what the rest of us do. I tell you, Bro thers, this 
man constitutes a danger to the people of Harlem. He ought to be thrown 
out!" 
"That is for the committee to decide," Brother Jack said. Then to me,
"And what have you to say in your defense, Brother?" 
"In my defense?" I said, "Nothing. I haven't anything to defe nd. I've 
tried to do my work and if the brothers don't know that, then it's to o late to 
tell them. I don't know what's behind this, but I haven't gott en around to 
controlling magazine writers. And I didn't realize that I was com ing to stand 
trial either." 
"This was not intended as a trial," Brother Jack said. "If you're ever 
put on trial, and I hope you'll never be, you'll know it. Meanti me, since this 
is an emergency the committee asks that you leave the room while we read 
and discuss the questioned interview." 
I left the room and went into a vacant office, boiling with ange r and 
disgust. Wrestrum had snatched me back to the South in the midst of one of
the top Brotherhood committees and I felt naked. I could have th rottled him 
-- forcing me to take part in a childish dispute before the others. Yet I had 
to fight him as I could, in terms he understood, even though we so unded like 
characters in a razor-slinging vaudeville skit. Perhaps I should mention the 
anonymous note, except that someone might take it to mean tha t I didn't 
have the full support of my district. If Clifton were here, he'd kn ow how to 
handle this clown. Were they taking him seriously just because he was black? 
What was wrong with them anyway, couldn't they see that they we re dealing 
with a clown? But I would have gone to pieces had they laughed o r even 
smiled, I thought, for they couldn't laugh at him without lau ghing at me as 
well . . . Yet if they had laughed, it would have been less unreal -- Where 
the hell am I? 
"You can come in now," a brother called to me; and I went out to 
hear their decision.
"Well," Brother Jack said, "we've all read the article, Brother, a nd 
we're happy to report that we found it harmless enough. True, it wou ld have 
been better had more wordage been given to other members of the Ha rlem 
district. But we found no evidence that you had anything to do w ith that.
Brother Wrestrum was mistaken." 
His bland manner and the knowledge that they had wasted time t o 
see the truth released the anger within me.
"I'd say that he was criminally mistaken," I said.
"Not criminal, over-zealous," he said.
"To me it seems both criminal and over-zealous," I said.
"No, Brother, not criminal." 
"But he attacked my reputation . . ." 
Brother Jack smiled. "Only because he was sincere, Brother. He wa s 
thinking of the good of the Brotherhood." 
"But why slander me? I don't follow you, Brother Jack. I'm no 
enemy, as he well knows. I'm a brother too," I said, seeing his s mile.
"The Brotherhood has many enemies, and we must not be too harsh 
with brotherly mistakes." 
Then I saw the foolish, abashed expression on Wrestrum's face an d 
relaxed.
"Very well, Brother Jack," I said. "I suppose I should be glad y ou 
found me innocent --" 
"Concerning the magazine article," he said, stabbing the air w ith his 
finger.
Something tensed in the back of my head; I got to my feet.
"Concerning the article! You mean to say that you believe that o ther 
pipe-dream? Is everyone reading Dick Tracy these days?" 
"This is no matter of Dick Tracy," he snapped. "The movement ha s 
many enemies." 
"So now I have become an enemy," I said. "What's happened to 
everybody? You act as though none of you has any contact with m e at all." 
Jack looked at the table. "Are you interested in our decision,
Brother?" 
"Oh, yes," I said. "Yes, I am. I'm interested in all manner of od d 
behavior. Who wouldn't be, when one wild man can make a roomful o f what 
I'd come to regard as some of the best minds in the country take hi m 
seriously. Certainly, I'm interested. Otherwise I'd act like a sensible man and 
run out of here!" 
There were sounds of protest and Brother Jack, his face red, rapped 
for order.
"Perhaps I should address a few words to the brother," Brother 
MacAfee said.
"Go ahead," Brother Jack said thickly.
"Brother, we understand how you feel," Brother MacAfee said, "bu t 
you must understand that the movement has many enemies. This i s very true,
and we are forced to think of the organization at the expense of ou r personal
feelings. The Brotherhood is bigger than all of us. None of us as individuals 
count when its safety is questioned. And be assured that none o f us have 
anything but goodwill toward you personally. Your work has been splendid.
This is simply a matter of the safety of the organization, and i t is our 
responsibility to make a thorough investigation of all such ch arges." 
I felt suddenly empty; there was a logic in what he said which I f elt 
compelled to accept. They were wrong, but they had the obligati on to discover 
their mistake. Let them go ahead, they'd find that none of the charges were 
true and I'd be vindicated. What was all this obsession with en emies anyway? 
I looked into their smoke-washed faces; not since the beginn ing had I faced 
such serious doubts. Up to now I had felt a wholeness about my wo rk and 
direction such as I'd never known; not even in my mistaken coll ege days.
Brotherhood was something to which men could give themselves c ompletely;
that was its strength and my strength, and it was this sense of wh oleness 
that guaranteed that it would change the course of history. Thi s I had 
believed with all my being, but now, though still inwardly aff irming that 
belief, I felt a blighting hurt which prevented me from trying fu rther to 
defend myself. I stood there silently, waiting their decisio n. Someone 
drummed his fingers against the table top. I heard the dry-leaf ru stle of
onionskin papers.
"Be assured that you can depend upon the fairness and wisdom of
the committee," Brother Tobitt's voice drifted from the end of t he table, but 
there was smoke between us and I could barely see his face.
"The committee has decided," Brother Jack began crisply, "tha t until
all charges have been cleared, you are to have the choice of becom ing 
inactive in Harlem, or accepting an assignment downtown. In t he latter case 
you are to wind up your present assignment immediately." 
I felt weak in my legs. "You mean I am to give up my work?" 
"Unless you choose to serve the movement elsewhere." 
"But can't you see --" I said, looking from face to face and seei ng 
the blank finality in their eyes.
"Your assignment, should you decide to remain active," Brothe r Jack 
said, reaching for his gavel, "is to lecture downtown on the Wom an 
Question." 
Suddenly I felt as though I had been spun like a top.
"The what!" 
"The Woman Question. My pamphlet, 'On the Woman Question in 
the United States,' will be your guide. And now, Brothers," he s aid, his eyes 
sweeping around the table, "the meeting is adjourned." 
I stood there, hearing the rapping of his gavel echoing in my ears,
thinking the woman question and searching their faces for sig ns of
amusement, listening to their voices as they filed out into t he hall for the 
slightest sound of suppressed laughter, stood there fighting t he sense that I 
had just been made the butt of an outrageous joke and all the more so since 
their faces revealed no awareness.
My mind fought desperately for acceptance. Nothing would cha nge 
matters. They would shift me and investigate and I, still beli eving, still
bending to discipline, would have to accept their decision. Now was certainly 
no time for inactivity; not just when I was beginning to approa ch some of
the aspects of the organization about which I knew nothing (of higher 
committees and the leaders who never appeared, of the sympathi zers and 
allies in groups that seemed far removed from our concerns), not a t a time 
when all the secrets of power and authority still shrouded from me in 
mystery appeared on the way toward revelation. No, despite my an ger and 
disgust, my ambitions were too great to surrender so easily. And w hy should 
I restrict myself, segregate myself? I was a spokesman -- why sho uldn't I 
speak about women, or any other subject? Nothing lay outside the scheme of
our ideology, there was a policy on everything, and my main con cern was to 
work my way ahead in the movement.
I left the building still feeling as though I had been violent ly spun 
but with optimism growing. Being removed from Harlem was a shock b ut one 
which would hurt them as much as me, for I had learned that the clu e to 
what Harlem wanted was what I wanted; and my value to the Brotherh ood 
was no different from the value to me of my most useful contact: i t 
depended upon my complete frankness and honesty in stating th e 
community's hopes and hates, fears and desires. One spoke to th e committee 
as well as to the community. No doubt it would work much the same
downtown. The new assignment was a challenge and an opportuni ty for 
testing how much of what happened in Harlem was due to my own eff orts 
and how much to the sheer eagerness of the people themselves. A nd, after 
all, I told myself, the assignment was also proof of the commit tee's goodwill.
For by selecting me to speak with its authority on a subject whi ch elsewhere 
in our society I'd have found taboo, weren't they reaffirming th eir belief both 
in me and in the principles of Brotherhood, proving that they drew n o lines 
even when it came to women? They had to investigate the charges against 
me, but the assignment was their unsentimental affirmation t hat their belief
in me was unbroken. I shivered in the hot street. I hadn't allowed the idea to 
take concrete form in my mind, but for a moment I had almost allow ed an 
old, southern backwardness which I had thought dead to wreck my c areer.
Leaving Harlem was not without its regrets, however, and I couldn 't 
bring myself to say good-bye to anyone, not even to Brother Tarp o r Clifton 
-- not to mention the others upon whom I depended for informatio n 
concerning the lowest groups in the community. I simply slippe d my papers 
into my brief case and left as though going downtown for a meeti ng.
Chapter 19 
I went to my first lecture with a sense of excitement. The theme w as 
a sure-fire guarantee of audience interest and the rest was up to me . If only 
I were a foot taller and a hundred pounds heavier, I could simply s tand 
before them with a sign across my chest, stating i KNOW ALL ABOUT
THEM, and they'd be as awed as though I were the original boogey m an -- 
somehow reformed and domesticated. I'd no more have to speak tha n Paul
Robeson had to act; they'd simply thrill at the sight of me.
And it went well enough; they made it a success through their ow n 
enthusiasm, and the barrage of questions afterwards left no dou bts in my 
mind. It was only after the meeting was breaking up that there ca me the 
developments which even my volatile suspicions hadn't allo wed me to foresee.
I was exchanging greetings with the audience when she appeared , the kind of
woman who glows as though consciously acting a symbolic role o f life and 
feminine fertility. Her problem, she said, had to do with certai n aspects of
our ideology.
"It's rather involved, really," she said with concern, "and whi le I 
shouldn't care to take up your time, I have a feeling that you -- " 
"Oh, not at all," I said, guiding her away from the others to stan d 
near a partly uncoiled firehose hanging beside the entrance, "n ot at all." 
"But, Brother," she said, "it's really so late and you must be tire d.
My problem could wait until some other time . . ." 
"I'm not that tired," I said. "And if there's something botherin g you,
it's my duty to do what I can to clear it up." 
"But it's quite late," she said. "Perhaps some evening when yo u're not 
busy you'll drop in to see us. Then we could talk at greater lengt h. Unless, of
course. . ." 
"Unless?" 
"Unless," she smiled, "I can induce you to stop by this evenin g. I 
might add that I serve a fair cup of coffee." 
"Then I'm at your service," I said, pushing open the door.
Her apartment was located in one of the better sections of the c ity,
and I must have revealed my surprise upon entering the spacious li ving room.
"You can see, Brother" -- the glow she gave the word was disturbin g 
-- "it is really the spiritual values of Brotherhood that interest me. Through 
no effort of my own, I have economic security and leisure, but wha t is that,
really, when so much is wrong with the world? I mean when there is no
spiritual or emotional security, and no justice?" 
She was slipping out of her coat now, looking earnestly into my face,
and I thought, Is she a Salvationist, a Puritan-with-reverse-E nglish? -- 
remembering Brother Jack's private description of wealthy membe rs who, he 
said, sought political salvation by contributing financial ly to the Brotherhood.
She was going a little fast for me and I looked at her gravely.
"I can see that you've thought deeply about this thing," I sai d.
"I've tried," she said, "and it's most perplexing -- But make yo urself
comfortable while I put away my things." 
She was a small, delicately plump woman with raven hair in whic h a 
thin streak of white had begun almost imperceptibly to show, an d when she 
reappeared in the rich red of a hostess gown she was so striking that I had 
to avert my somewhat startled eyes.
"What a beautiful room you have here," I said, looking across the
rich cherry glow of furniture to see a life-sized painting of a nud e, a pink 
Renoir. Other canvases were hung here and there, and the spacious walls 
seemed to flash alive with warm, pure color. What does one say to a ll this? I 
thought, looking at an abstract fish of polished brass mounted on a piece of
ebony.
"I'm glad you find it pleasant, Brother," she said. "We like it 
ourselves, though I must say that Hubert finds so little time to enjoy it. He's 
much too busy." 
"Hubert?" I said.
"My husband. Unfortunately he had to leave. He would have love d 
to've met you, but then he's always dashing off. Business, yo u know." 
"I suppose it's unavoidable," I said with sudden discomfort.
"Yes, it is," she said. "But we're going to discuss Brotherhood a nd 
ideology, aren't we?" 
And there was something about her voice and her smile that gave me 
a sense of both comfort and excitement. It was not merely the bac kground of
wealth and gracious living, to which I was alien, but simply th e being there 
with her and the sensed possibility of a heightened communic ation; as though 
the discordantly invisible and the conspicuously enigmatic were reaching a 
delicately balanced harmony. She's rich but human, I thought, watching the 
smooth play of her relaxed hands.
"There are so many aspects to the movement," I said. "Just where 
shall we start? Perhaps it's something that I'm unable to handl e." 
"Oh, it's nothing that profound," she said. "I'm sure you'll st raighten 
out my little ideological twists and turns. But sit here on the s ofa, Brother;
it's more comfortable." 
I sat, seeing her go toward a door, the train of her gown trailing 
sensuously over the oriental carpet. Then she turned and smiled .
"Perhaps you'd prefer wine or milk instead of coffee?" 
"Wine, thank you," I said, finding the idea of milk strangely 
repulsive. This isn't at all what I expected, I thought. She ret urned with a 
tray holding two glasses and a decanter, placing them before us o n a low 
cocktail table, and I could hear the wine trickle musically in to the glasses,
one of which she placed in front of me.
"Here's to the movement," she said, raising her glass with smil ing 
eyes.
"To the movement," I said.
"And to Brotherhood." 
"And to Brotherhood." 
"This is very nice," I said, seeing her nearly closed eyes, her chin 
tilting upward, toward me, "but just what phase of our ideology should we 
discuss?" 
"All of it," she said. "I wish to embrace the whole of it. Life is so 
terribly empty and disorganized without it. I sincerely believe that only 
Brotherhood offers any hope of making life worth living again -- O h, I know 
that it's too vast a philosophy to grasp immediately, as it were ; still, it's so 
vital and alive that one gets the feeling that one should at le ast make the try.
Don't you agree?" 
"Well, yes," I said. "It's the most meaningful thing that I kn ow." 
"Oh, I'm so pleased to have you agree with me. I suppose that's w hy 
I always thrill to hear you speak, somehow you convey the great t hrobbing 
vitality of the movement. It's really amazing. You give me suc h a feeling of
security -- although," she interrupted herself with a mysterious smile, "I must 
confess that you also make me afraid." 
"Afraid? You can't mean that," I said.
"Really," she repeated, as I laughed. "It's so powerful, so -- s o 
primitive!" 
I felt some of the air escape from the room, leaving it unnaturall y 
quiet. "You don't mean primitive?" I said.
"Yes, primitive; no one has told you, Brother, that at times you h ave 
tom-toms beating in your voice?" 
"My God," I laughed, "I thought that was the beat of profound 
ideas." 
"Of course, you're correct," she said. "I don't mean really primiti ve. I 
suppose I mean forceful, powerful. It takes hold of one's emoti ons as well as 
one's intellect. Call it what you will, it has so much naked po wer that it goes 
straight through one. I tremble just to think of such vitality."
I looked at her, so close now that I could see a single jet-black
strand of out-of-place hair. "Yes," I said, "the emotion is the re; but it's 
actually our scientific approach that releases it. As Brother J ack says, we're 
nothing if not organizers. And the emotion isn't merely released , it's guided,
channelized -- that is the real source of our effectiveness. Af ter all, this very 
good wine can please emotion, but I doubt seriously that it can organize 
anything." 
She leaned gracefully forward, her arm along the back of the sofa ,
saying, "Yes, and you do both in your speeches. One just has to respond,
even when one isn't too clear as to your meaning. Only I do know what 
you're saying and that's even more inspiring." 
"Actually, you know, I'm as much affected by the audience as i t is by 
me. Its response helps me do my best." 
"And there's another important aspect," she said; "one which c oncerns 
me greatly. It provides women the full opportunity for self-exp ression, which 
is so very important, Brother. It's as though every day were Leap Y ear -- 
which is as it should be. Women should be absolutely as free as m en." 
And if I were really free, I thought, lifting my glass, I'd get the hell
out of here.
"I thought you were exceptionally good tonight -- it's time th e woman 
had a champion in the movement. Until tonight I'd always heard you on 
minority problems." 
"This is a new assignment," I said. "But from now on one of our 
main concerns is to be the Woman Question." 
"That's wonderful and it's about time. Something has to give w omen 
an opportunity to come to close grips with life. Please go on, te ll me your 
ideas," she said, pressing forward, her hand light upon my arm.
And I went on talking, relieved to talk, carried away by my own 
enthusiasm and by the warmth of the wine. And it was only when I t urned 
to ask a question of her that I realized that she was leaning onl y a nose-tip 
away, her eyes upon my face.
"Go on, please go on," I heard. "You make it sound so clear -- 
please." 
I saw the rapid, moth-wing fluttering of her lids become the sof tness 
of her lips as we were drawn together. There was not an idea or conce pt in 
it but sheer warmth; then the bell was ringing and I shook it off a nd got to 
my feet, hearing it ring again as she arose with me, the red robe fall ing in 
heavy folds upon the carpet, and she saying, "You make it all so wonderfully 
alive," as the bell sounded again. And I was trying to move, to get out of the 
apartment, looking for my hat and filling with anger, thinking , Is she crazy? 
Doesn't she hear? as she stood before me in bewilderment, as thou gh I were 
acting irrationally. And now taking my arm with sudden energy, sa ying, "This 
way, in here," almost pulling me along as the bell rang again, th rough a door 
down a short hall, a satiny bedroom, in which she stood appraisin g me with 
a smile, saying, "This is mine," as I looked at her in outrageou s disbelief.
"Yours, yours? But what about that bell?" 
"Never mind," she cooed, looking into my eyes.
"But be reasonable," I said, pushing her aside. "What about th at 
door?" 
"Oh, of course, you mean the telephone, don't you, darling?" 
"But your old man -- your husband?" 
"In Chicago --" 
"But he might not --" 
"No, no, darling, he won't --" 
"But he might!" 
"But, Brother, darling, I talked with him, I know." 
"You what? What kind of game is this?" 
"Oh, you poor darling! It isn't a game, really you have no cause t o 
worry, we're free. He's in Chicago, seeking his lost youth, no do ubt," she said,
bursting into laughter of self-surprise. "He's not at all intere sted in uplifting 
things -- freedom and necessity, woman's rights and all that. Y ou know, the 
sickness of our class -- Brother, darling." 
I took a step across the room; there was another door to my left 
through which I saw the gleam of chromium and tile.
"Brotherhood, darling," she said, gripping my biceps with her li ttle 
hands. "Teach me, talk to me. Teach me the beautiful ideology of
Brotherhood." And I wanted both to smash her and to stay with her and 
knew that I should do neither. Was she trying to ruin me, or was th is a trap 
set by some secret enemy of the movement waiting outside the do or with 
cameras and wrecking bars? 
"You should answer the phone," I said with forced calm, trying to 
release my hands without touching her, for if I touched her -- 
"And you'll continue?" she said.
I nodded, seeing her turn without a word and go toward a vanity 
with a large oval mirror, taking up an ivory telephone. And in the m irrored 
instant I saw myself standing between her eager form and a huge white bed,
myself caught in a guilty stance, my face taut, tie dangling; and behind the 
bed another mirror which now like a surge of the sea tossed our ima ges back 
and forth, back and forth, furiously multiplying the time and th e place and 
the circumstance. My vision seemed to pulse alternately clear and vague,
driven by a furious bellows, as her lips said soundlessly, I'm s orry, and then 
impatiently into the telephone, "Yes, this is she," and then to me again,
smiling as she covered the mouthpiece with her hand, "It's onl y my sister;
it'll only take a second." And my mind whirled with forgotten st ories of male 
servants summoned to wash the mistress's back; chauffeurs sha ring the 
masters' wives; Pullman porters invited into the drawing room of ri ch wives 
headed for Reno -- thinking, But this is the movement, the Brot herhood. And 
now I saw her smile, saying, "Yes, Gwen, dear. Yes," as one free h and went 
up as though to smooth her hair and in one swift motion the red rob e swept 
aside like a veil, and I went breathless, at the petite and gene rously curved 
nude, framed delicate and firm in the glass. It was like a dream in terval and 
in an instant it swung back and I saw only her mysteriously smil ing eyes 
above the rich red robe.
I was heading for the door, torn between anger and a fierce 
excitement, hearing the phone click down as I started past and f eeling her 
swirl against me and I was lost, for the conflict between the id eological and 
the biological, duty and desire, had become too subtly confus ed. I went to 
her, thinking, Let them break down the door, whosoever will, let them come.
I DIDN'T know whether I was awake or dreaming. It was dead quiet ,
yet I was certain that there had been a noise and that it had come f rom 
across the room as she beside me made a soft sighing sound. It was strange.
My mind revolved. I was chased out of a chinkapin woods by a bull . I ran 
up a hill; the whole hill heaved. I heard the sound and looked up to see the 
man looking straight at me from where he stood in the dim light of t he hall,
looking in with neither interest nor surprise. His face expressi onless, his eyes 
staring. There was the sound of even breathing. Then I heard her st ir beside 
me.
"Oh, hello, dear," she said, her voice sounding far away. "Bac k so 
soon?" 
"Yes," he said. "Wake me early, I have a lot to do." 
"I'll remember, dear," she said sleepily. "Have a good night's re st . .
." 
"Night, and you too," he said with a short dry laugh.
The door closed. I lay there in the dark for a while, breathing 
rapidly. It was strange. I reached out and touched her. There was no answer.
I leaned over her, feeling her breath breezing warm and pure agains t my face.
I wanted to linger there, experiencing the sensation of someth ing precious 
perilously attained too late and now to be lost forever -- a poig nancy. But it 
was as though she'd never been awake and if she should awaken n ow, she'd 
scream, shriek. I slid hurriedly from the bed, keeping my eye on tha t part of
the darkness from where the light had come as I tried to find my clot hes. I 
blundered around, finding a chair, an empty chair. Where were my clo thes? 
What a fool! Why had I gotten myself into such a situation? I fe lt my way 
naked through darkness, found the chair with my clothes, dresse d hurriedly 
and slipped out, halting only at the door to look back through t he dim light 
from the hall. She slept without sigh or smile, a beautiful drea mer, one ivory 
arm flung above her jet-black head. My heart pounded as I closed the door 
and went down the hall, expecting the man, men, crowds -- to hal t me. Then 
I was taking the stairs.
The building was quiet. In the lobby the doorman dozed, his sta rched 
bib buckling beneath his chin with his breathing, his white he ad bare. I 
reached the street limp with perspiration, still unsure whether I had seen the 
man or had dreamed him. Could I have seen him without his seeing me? Or 
again, had he seen me and been silent out of sophistication, d ecadence,
over-civilization? I hurried down the street, my anxiety growing with each 
step. Why hadn't he said something, recognized me, cursed me? A ttacked me? 
Or at least been outraged with her? And what if it were a test to dis cover 
how I would react to such pressure? It was, after all, a point upon which our 
enemies would attack us violently. I walked in a sweat of agon y. Why did 
they have to mix their women into everything? Between us and e verything we 
wanted to change in the world they placed a woman: socially, po litically,
economically. Why, goddamit, why did they insist upon confu sing the class 
struggle with the ass struggle, debasing both us and them -- all human 
motives? 
All the next day I was in a state of exhaustion, waiting tensel y for 
the plan to be revealed. Now I was certain that the man had been in the 
doorway, a man with a brief case who had looked in and given no de finite 
sign that he had seen me. A man who had spoken like an indifferen t 
husband, but who yet seemed to recall to me some important membe r of the 
Brotherhood -- someone so familiar that my failure to identify h im was 
driving me almost to distraction. My work lay untouched before me . Each 
ring of the telephone filled me with dread. I toyed with Tarp's le g chain.
If they don't call by four o'clock, I'm saved, I told myself. B ut still
no sign, not even a call to a meeting. Finally I rang her number, h earing her 
voice, delighted, gay and discreet; but no mention of the nigh t or the man.
And hearing her so composed and gay I was too embarrassed to bring i t up.
Perhaps this was the sophisticated and civilized way? Perhaps he was there 
and they had an understanding, a woman with full rights.
Would I return for further discussion, she wanted to know.
"Yes, of course," I said.
"Oh, Brother," she said.
I hung up with a mixture of relief and anxiety, unable to shrug off
the notion that I had been tested and had failed. I went through the next 
week puzzling over it, and even more confused because I knew no thing 
definite of where I stood. I tried to detect any changes in my rela tions with 
Brother Jack and the others, but they gave no sign. And even if th ey had, I 
wouldn't have known its definite meaning, for it might have h ad to do with 
the charges. I was caught between guilt and innocence, so that now they 
seemed one and the same. My nerves were in a state of constant te nsion, my 
face took on a stiff, non-committal expression, beginning to look like Brother 
Jack's and the other leaders'. Then I relaxed a bit; work had to be done and 
I would play the waiting game. And despite my guilt and uncerta inty I 
learned to forget that I was a lone guilty black Brother and to go s triding 
confidently into a roomful of whites. It was chin up, a not too w ide-stretched 
smile, the out-thrust hand for the firm warm hand shake. And with it just 
the proper mixture of arrogance and down-to-earth humility to sat isfy all. I 
threw myself into the lectures, defending, asserting the rights of women; and 
though the girls continued to buzz around, I was careful to keep t he 
biological and ideological carefully apart -- which wasn't al ways easy, for it 
was as though many of the sisters were agreed among themselves (a nd 
assumed that I accepted it) that the ideological was merely a s uperfluous veil
for the real concerns of life.
I found that most downtown audiences seemed to expect some 
unnamed something whenever I appeared. I could sense it the mo ment I 
stood before them, and it had nothing to do with anything I migh t say. For I 
had merely to appear before them, and from the moment they turned t heir 
eyes upon me they seemed to undergo a strange unburdening -- not o f
laughter, nor of tears, nor of any stable, unmixed emotion. I di dn't get it.
And my guilt was aroused. Once in the middle of a passage I looke d into the 
sea of faces and thought, Do they know? Is that it? -- and almos t ruined my 
lecture. But of one thing I was certain, it was not the same attit ude they held 
for certain other black brothers who entertained them with storie s so often 
that they laughed even before these fellows opened their mout hs. No, it was 
something else. A form of expectancy, a mood of waiting, a hopi ng for 
something like justification; as though they expected me to be more than just 
another speaker, or an entertainer. Something seemed to occur t hat was 
hidden from my own consciousness. I acted out a pantomime more e loquent 
than my most expressive words. I was a partner to it but could no mo re 
fathom it than I could the mystery of the man in the doorway. Pe rhaps, I 
told myself, it's in your voice, after all. In your voice and i n their desire to 
see in you a living proof of their belief in Brotherhood, and to ea se my mind 
I stopped thinking about it.
Then one night when I had fallen asleep while making notes for a 
new series of lectures, the phone summoned me to an emergency mee ting at 
headquarters, and I left the house with feelings of dread. This i s it, I thought,
either the charges or the woman. To be tripped up by a woman! What would 
I say to them, that she was irresistible and I human? What had tha t to do 
with responsibility, with building Brotherhood? 
It was all I could do to make myself go, and I arrived late. The 
room was sweltering; three small fans stirred the heavy air, and the brothers 
sat in their shirtsleeves around a scarred table upon which a pitc her of iced 
water glistened with beads of moisture.
"Brothers, I'm sorry I'm late," I apologized. "There were some 
important last-minute details concerning tomorrow's lecture th at kept me." 
"Then you might have saved yourself the trouble and the committ ee 
this lost time," Brother Jack said.
"I don't understand you," I said, suddenly feverish.
"He means that you are no longer to concern yourself with the 
Woman Question. That's ended," Brother Tobitt said; and I brac ed myself for 
the attack, but before I could respond Brother Jack fired a startli ng question 
at me.
"What has become of Brother Tod Clifton?" 
"Brother Clifton -- why, I haven't seen him in weeks. I've been too 
busy downtown here. What's happened?" 
"He has disappeared," Brother Jack said, "disappeared! So don' t waste 
time with superfluous questions. You weren't sent for for that ." 
"But how long has this been known?" 
Brother Jack struck the table. "All we know is that he's gone. Le t's 
get on with our business. You, Brother, are to return to Harlem immed iately.
We're facing a crisis there, since Brother Tod Clifton has not onl y disappeared 
but failed in his assignment. On the other hand, Ras the Exhort er and his 
gang of racist gangsters are taking advantage of this and are incre asing their 
agitation. You are to get back there and take measures to regain ou r strength 
in the community. You'll be given the forces you need and you'l l report to us 
for a strategy meeting about which you'll be notified tomorrow. And please," 
he emphasized with his gavel, "be on time!" 
I was so relieved that none of my own problems were discussed that
I didn't linger to ask if the police had been consulted about t he 
disappearance. Something was wrong with the whole deal, for Cl ifton was too 
responsible and had too much to gain simply to have disappeared . Did it 
have any connection with Ras the Exhorter? But that seemed unli kely; Harlem 
was one of our strongest districts, and just a month ago when I wa s shifted 
Ras would have been laughed off the street had he tried to attack us. If only 
I hadn't been so careful not to offend the committee I would hav e kept in 
closer contact with Clifton and the whole Harlem membership. N ow it was as 
though I had been suddenly awakened from a deep sleep.
Chapter 20 
I had been away long enough for the streets to seem strange. The 
uptown rhythms were slower and yet were somehow faster; a differen t tension 
was in the hot night air. I made my way through the summer crowds, n ot to 
the district but to Barrelhouse's Jolly Dollar, a dark hole of a bar and grill
on upper Eighth Avenue, where one of my best contacts, Brother M aceo,
could usually be found about this time, having his evening's beer.
Looking through the window, I could see men in working clothes a nd 
a few rummy women leaning at the bar, and down the aisle between t he bar 
and counter were a couple of men in black and blue checked sport s hirts 
eating barbecue. A cluster of men and women hovered near the ju ke box at 
the rear. But when I went in Brother Maceo wasn't among them and I 
pushed to the bar, deciding to wait over a beer.
"Good evening, Brothers," I said, finding myself beside two me n 
whom I had seen around before; only to have them look at me oddly, the 
eyebrows of the tall one raising at a drunken angle as he looked at the other.
"Shit," the tall man said.
"You said it, man; he a relative of yourn?" 
"Shit, he goddam sho ain't no kin of mine!" 
I turned and looked at them, the room suddenly cloudy.
"He must be drunk," the second man said. "Maybe he thinks he's k in 
to you." 
"Then his whiskey's telling him a damn lie. I wouldn't be his k in 
even if I was -- Hey, Barrelhouse!" 
I moved away, down the bar, looking at them out of a feeling of
suspense. They didn't sound drunk and I had said nothing to off end, and I 
was certain that they knew who I was. What was it? The Brotherhood
greeting was as familiar as "Give me some skin" or "Peace, it's wonderful." 
I saw Barrelhouse rolling down from the other end of the bar, his 
white apron indented by the tension of its cord so that he looked like that 
kind of metal beer barrel which has a groove around its middle; and seeing 
me now, he began to smile.
"Well, I'll be damned if it ain't the good brother," he said, stre tching 
out his hand. "Brother, where you been keeping yourself?" 
"I've been working downtown," I said, feeling a surge of gratitu de.
"Fine, fine!" Barrelhouse said.
"Business good?" 
"I'd rather not discuss it, Brother. Business is bad. Very bad."
"I'm sorry to hear it. You'd better give me a beer," I said, "afte r 
you've served these gentlemen." I watched them in the mirror.
"Sure thing," Barrelhouse said, reaching for a glass and drawing a
beer. "What you putting down, ole man?" he said to the tall man.
"Look here, Barrel, we wanted to ask you one question," the tall o ne 
said. "We just wanted to know if you could tell us just whose bro ther this 
here cat's supposed to be? He come in here just now calling every body 
brother." 
"He's my brother," Barrel said, holding the foaming glass betwee n his 
long fingers. "Anything wrong with that?" 
"Look, fellow," I said down the bar, "that's our way of speakin g. I 
meant no harm in calling you brother. I'm sorry you misunderstood m e." 
"Brother, here's your beer," Barrelhouse said.
"So he's your brother, eh, Barrel?" 
Barrel's eyes narrowed as he pressed his huge chest across the bar,
looking suddenly sad. "You enjoying yourself, MacAdams?" he said gloomily.
"You like your beer?" 
"Sho," MacAdams said.
"It cold enough?" 
"Sho, but Barrel --" 
"You like the groovy music on the juke?" Barrelhouse said.
"Hell, yes, but --" 
"And you like our good, clean, sociable atmosphere?" 
"Sho, but that ain't what I'm talking about," the man said.
"Yeah, but that's what I'm talking about," Barrelhouse said 
mournfully. "And if you like it, like it, and don't start trying to bug my other 
customers. This here man's done more for the community than you' ll ever 
do." 
"What community?" MacAdams said, cutting his eyes around tow ard 
me. "I hear he got the white fever and left . . ." 
"You liable to hear anything," Barrelhouse said. "There's some paper 
back there in the gents' room. You ought to wipe out your ears." 
"Never mind my ears." 
"Aw come" on, Mac," his friend said. "Forgit it. Ain't the man do ne 
apologized?" 
"I said never mind my ears," MacAdams said. "You just tell your
brother he ought to be careful 'bout who he claims as kinfolks. S ome of us 
don't think so much of his kind of politics." 
I looked from one to the other. I considered myself beyond the sta ge 
of street-fighting, and one of the worst things I could do upon re turning to 
the community was to engage in a brawl. I looked at MacAdams and was 
glad when the other man pushed him down the bar.
"That MacAdams thinks he's right," Barrelhouse said. "He's the kind 
caint nobody please. Be frank though, there's lots feel like th at now." 
I shook my head in bafflement. I'd never met that kind of
antagonism before. "What's happened to Brother Maceo?" I said .
"I don't know, Brother. He don't come in so regular these days.
Things are kinda changing up here. Ain't much money floating aro und." 
"Times are hard everywhere. But what's been going on up here,
Barrel?" I said.
"Oh, you know how it is, Brother; things are tight and lots of folk s 
who got jobs through you people have lost them. You know how it g oes." 
"You mean people in our organization?" 
"Quite a few of them are. Fellows like Brother Maceo." 
"But why? They were doing all right." 
"Sure they was -- as long as you people was fighting for 'em. But the 
minute y'all stopped, they started throwing folks out on the st reet." 
I looked at him, big and sincere before me. It was unbelievable t hat 
the Brotherhood had stopped its work, and yet he wasn't lying. "G ive me 
another beer," I said. Then someone called him from the back, an d he drew 
the beer and left.
I drank it slowly, hoping Brother Maceo would appear before I had
finished. When he didn't I waved to Barrelhouse and left for the district.
Perhaps Brother Tarp could explain; or at least tell me somethin g about 
Clifton.
I walked through the dark block over to Seventh and started down;
things were beginning to look serious. Along the way I saw not a s ingle sign 
of Brotherhood activity. In a hot side street I came upon a couple striking 
matches along the curb, kneeling as though looking for a lost coin, the 
matches flaring dimly in their faces. Then I found myself in a s trangely 
familiar block and broke out in a sweat: I had walked almost to M ary's door,
and turned now and hurried away.
Barrelhouse had prepared me for the darkened windows of the 
district, but not, when I let myself in, to call in vain through t he dark to 
Brother Tarp. I went to the room where he slept, but he was not there; then 
I went through the dark hall to my old office and threw myself into my desk 
chair, exhausted. Everything seemed to be slipping away from m e and I could 
find no quick absorbing action that would get it under control . I tried to 
think of whom among the district committee I might call for inf ormation 
concerning Clifton, but here again I was balked. For if I select ed one who 
believed that I had requested to be transferred because I hated my own 
people it would only complicate matters. No doubt there would b e some 
who'd resent my return, so it was best to confront them all at once w ithout 
giving any one of them the opportunity to organize any sentimen t against me.
It was best that I talk with Brother Tarp, whom I trusted. When he c ame in 
he could give me an idea of the state of affairs, and perhaps tell me what 
had actually happened to Clifton.
But Brother Tarp didn't arrive. I went out and got a container of
coffee and returned to spend the night poring over the district's records.
When he hadn't returned by three A.M. I went to his room and took a lo ok 
around. It was empty, even the bed was gone. I'm all alone, I tho ught. A lot 
has occurred about which I wasn't told; something that had not o nly stifled 
the members' interest but which, according to the records, had sen t them 
away in droves. Barrelhouse had said that the organization had qu it fighting,
and that was the only explanation I could find for Brother Tarp' s leaving.
Unless, of course, he'd had disagreements with Clifton or some of the other 
leaders. And now returning to my desk I noticed his gift of Dougla ss' portrait 
was gone. I felt in my pocket for the leg chain, at least I hadn' t forgotten to 
take that along. I pushed the records aside; they told me nothin g of why 
things were as they were. Picking up the telephone I called Clif ton's number,
hearing it ring on and on. Finally I gave it up and went to sleep in my 
chair. Everything had to wait until the strategy meeting. Retu rning to the 
district was like returning to a city of the dead.
Somewhat to my surprise there were a good number of members in 
the hall when I awoke, and having no directives from the committ ee on how 
to proceed I organized them into teams to search for Brother Clift on. Not one 
could give me any definite information. Brother Clifton had ap peared at the 
district as usual up to the time of his disappearance. There had b een no 
quarrels with committee members, and he was as popular as ever. No r had 
there been any clashes with Ras the Exhorter -- although in the p ast week he 
had been increasingly active. As for the loss of membership and influence, it 
was a result of a new program which had called for the shelving of o ur old 
techniques of agitation. There had been, to my surprise, a switc h in emphasis 
from local issues to those more national and international in sc ope, and it 
was felt that for the moment the interests of Harlem were not of fi rst 
importance. I didn't know what to make of it, since there had bee n no such 
change of program downtown. Clifton was forgotten, everything which I was 
to do now seemed to depend upon getting an explanation from the
committee, and I waited with growing agitation to be called to the strategy 
meeting.
Such meetings were usually held around one o'clock and we were 
notified well ahead. But by eleven-thirty I had received no word and I 
became worried. By twelve an uneasy sense of isolation took hol d of me.
Something was cooking, but what, how, why? Finally I phoned h eadquarters,
but could reach none of the leaders. What is this, I wondered; the n I called 
the leaders of other districts with the same results. And now I wa s certain 
that the meeting was being held. But why without me? Had they i nvestigated 
Wrestrum's charges and decided they were true? It seemed that the 
membership had fallen off after I had gone downtown. Or was it t he woman? 
Whatever it was, now was not the time to leave me out of a meetin g; things 
were too urgent in the district. I hurried down to headquarters.
When I arrived the meeting was in session, just as I expected, an d 
word had been left that it was not to be disturbed by anyone. It w as obvious 
that they hadn't forgotten to notify me. I left the building in a rage. Very 
well, I thought, when they do decide to call me they'll have to find me. I 
should never have been shifted in the first place, and now that I was sent 
back to clean up the mess they should aid me as quickly as possi ble. I would 
do no more running downtown, nor would I accept any program that th ey 
sent up without consulting the Harlem committee. Then I decid ed, of all
things, to shop for a pair of new shoes, and walked over to Fift h Avenue.
It was hot, the walks still filled with noontime crowds moving with 
reluctance back to their jobs. I moved along close to the curb t o avoid the 
bumping and agitated changes of pace, the chattering women in summer 
dresses, finally entering the leather-smelling, air-cooled in terior of the shoe 
store with a sense of relief.
My feet felt light in the new summer shoes as I went back into th e 
blazing heat, and I recalled the old boyhood pleasure of discard ing winter 
shoes for sneakers and the neighborhood foot races that always f ollowed, that 
light-footed, speedy, floating sensation. Well, I thought , you've run your last 
foot race and you'd better get back to the district in case you're called. I 
hurried now, my feet feeling trim and light as I moved through the o ncoming 
rush of sunbeaten faces. To avoid the crowd on Forty-second Stree t I turned 
off at Forty-third and it was here that things began to boil.
A small fruit wagon with an array of bright peaches and pears stood 
near the curb, and the vendor, a florid man with bulbous nose and bright 
black Italian eyes, looked at me knowingly from beneath his hu ge 
white-and-orange umbrella then over toward a crowd that had forme d 
alongside the building across the street. What's wrong with him ? I thought.
Then I was across the street and passing the group standing with t heir backs 
to me. A clipped, insinuating voice spieled words whose meani ng I couldn't 
catch and I was about to pass on when I saw the boy. He was a slend er 
brown fellow whom I recognized immediately as a close friend of C lifton's,
and who now was looking intently across the tops of cars to where d own the 
block near the post office on the other side a tall policeman w as approaching.
Perhaps he'll know something, I thought, as he looked around to see me and 
stopped in confusion.
"Hello, there," I began, and when he turned toward the crowd and 
whistled I didn't know whether he was telling me to do the same or 
signalling to someone else. I swung around, seeing him step to where a large 
carton sat beside the building and sling its canvas straps to hi s shoulder as 
once more he looked toward the policeman, ignoring me. Puzzled, I moved 
into the crowd and pressed to the front where at my feet I saw a square
piece of cardboard upon which something was moving with furious action. It 
was some kind of toy and I glanced at the crowd's fascinated eye s and down 
again, seeing it clearly this time. I'd seen nothing like it be fore. A grinning 
doll of orange-and-black tissue paper with thin flat cardboard disks forming 
its head and feet and which some mysterious mechanism was caus ing to 
move up and down in a loose-jointed, shoulder-shaking, infuri atingly sensuous 
motion, a dance that was completely detached from the black, m ask-like face.
It's no jumping-jack, but what, I thought, seeing the doll th rowing itself about 
with the fierce defiance of someone performing a degrading act in public,
dancing as though it received a perverse pleasure from its motion s. And 
beneath the chuckles of the crowd I could hear the swishing of i ts ruffled 
paper, while the same out-of-the-corner-of-the-mouth voice c ontinued to spiel:
Shake it up! Shake it up!
He's Sambo, the dancing doll, ladies and gentlemen.
Shake him, stretch him by the neck and set him down,
-- He'll do the rest. Yes!
He'll make you laugh, he'll make you sigh, si-igh.
He'll make you want to dance, and dance -- 
Here you are, ladies and gentlemen, Sambo,
The dancing doll.
Buy one for your baby. Take him to your girl friend and she'll lov e 
you, loove you!
He'll keep you entertained. He'll make you weep sweet -- 
Tears from laughing.
Shake him, shake him, you cannot break him 
For he's Sambo, the dancing, Sambo, the prancing,
Sambo, the entrancing, Sambo Boogie Woogie paper doll.
And all for twenty-five cents, the quarter part of a dollar . . .
Ladies and gentlemen, he'll bring you joy, step up and meet him ,
Sambo the -- 
I knew I should get back to the district but I was held by the 
inanimate, boneless bouncing of the grinning doll and struggl ed between the 
desire to join in the laughter and to leap upon it with both feet , when it 
suddenly collapsed and I saw the tip of the spieler's toe press u pon the 
circular cardboard that formed the feet and a broad black hand come down,
its fingers deftly lifting the doll's head and stretching it up ward, twice its 
length, then releasing it to dance again. And suddenly the voi ce didn't go 
with the hand. It was as though I had waded out into a shallow po ol only to 
have the bottom drop out and the water close over my head. I look ed up.
"Not you . . ." I began. But his eyes looked past me deliberately
unseeing. I was paralyzed, looking at him, knowing I wasn't dre aming,
hearing:
What makes him happy, what makes him dance,
This Sambo, this jambo, this high-stepping joy boy? 
He's more than a toy, ladies and gentlemen, he's Sambo, the dan cing 
doll, the twentieth-century miracle.
Look at that rumba, that suzy-q, he's Sambo-Boogie,
Sambo-Woogie, you don't have to feed him, he sleeps collapse d, he'll
kill your depression 
And your dispossession, he lives upon the sunshine of your lo rdly 
smile 
And only twenty-five cents, the brotherly two bits of a dollar b ecause 
he wants me to eat.
It gives him pleasure to see me eat.
You simply take him and shake him . . . and he does the rest.
Thank you, lady . . .
It was Clifton, riding easily back and forth on his knees, flexi ng his 
legs without shifting his feet, his right shoulder raised at an angle and his 
arm pointing stiffly at the bouncing doll as he spieled from the corner of his 
mouth.
The whistle came again, and I saw him glance quickly toward his
lookout, the boy with the carton.
"Who else wants little Sambo before we take it on the lambo? Spe ak 
up, ladies and gentlemen, who wants little . . . ?" 
And again the whistle. "Who wants Sambo, the dancing, prancin g? 
Hurry, hurry, ladies and gentlemen. There's no license for litt le Sambo, the 
joy spreader. You can't tax joy, so speak up, ladies and gentlem en . . ." 
For a second our eyes met and he gave me a contemptuous smile,
then he spieled again. I felt betrayed. I looked at the doll and felt my throat 
constrict. The rage welled behind the phlegm as I rocked back on m y heels 
and crouched forward. There was a flash of whiteness and a splatt er like 
heavy rain striking a newspaper and I saw the doll go over backwa rds, wilting 
into a dripping rag of frilled tissue, the hateful head upturned o n its 
outstretched neck still grinning toward the sky. The crowd turned on me 
indignantly. The whistle came again. I saw a short pot-bellie d man look 
down, then up at me with amazement and explode with laughter, p ointing 
from me to the doll, rocking. People backed away from me. I saw Cli fton step 
close to the building where beside the fellow with the carton I n ow saw a 
whole chorus-line of dolls flouncing themselves with a perve rse increase of
energy and the crowd laughing hysterically.
"You, you!" I began, only to see him pick up two of the dolls and
step forward. But now the lookout came close. "He's coming," h e said,
nodding toward the approaching policeman as he swept up the dol ls, dropping 
them into the carton and starting away.
"Follow little Sambo around the corner, ladies and gentlemen," Clifton 
called. "There's a great show coming up . . ." 
It happened so fast that in a second only I and an old lady in a 
blue polka-dot dress were left. She looked at me then back to the walk,
smiling. I saw one of the dolls. I looked. She was still smilin g and I raised 
my foot to crush it, hearing her cry, "Oh, no!" The policeman was just 
opposite and I reached down instead, picking it up and walking off in the 
same motion. I examined it, strangely weightless in my hand, h alf expecting 
to feel it pulse with life. It was a still frill of paper. I dropped it in the 
pocket where I carried Brother Tarp's chain link and started after t he 
vanished crowd. But I couldn't face Clifton again. I didn't wa nt to see him. I 
might forget myself and attack him. I went in the other directio n, toward 
Sixth Avenue, past the policeman. What a way to find him, I tho ught. What 
had happened to Clifton? It was all so wrong, so unexpected. Ho w on earth 
could he drop from Brotherhood to this in so short a time? And why if h e 
had to fall back did he try to carry the whole structure with him? W hat 
would non-members who knew him say? It was as though he had chos en -- 
how had he put it the night he fought with Ras? -- to fall outsid e of history.
I stopped in the middle of the walk with the thought. "To plung e," he had 
said. But he knew that only in the Brotherhood could we make ourse lves 
known, could we avoid being empty Sambo dolls. Such an obscen e flouncing 
of everything human! My God! And I had been worrying about bein g left out 
of a meeting! I'd overlook it a thousand times; no matter why I w asn't called.
I'd forget it and hold on desperately to Brotherhood with all my st rength. For 
to break away would be to plunge . . . To plunge! And those dolls, where 
had they found them? Why had he picked that way to earn a quarter? W hy 
not sell apples or song sheets, or shine shoes? 
I wandered past the subway and continued around the corner to 
Forty-second Street, my mind grappling for meaning. And when I c ame 
around the corner onto the crowded walk into the sun, they were alre ady 
lining the curb and shading their faces with their hands. I sa w the traffic 
moving with the lights, and across the street a few pedestrians w ere looking 
back toward the center of the block where the trees of Bryant Park ro se 
above two men. I saw a flight of pigeons whirl out of the trees and it all
happened in the swift interval of their circling, very abruptl y and in the noise 
of the traffic -- yet seeming to unfold in my mind like a slow-mo tion movie 
run off with the sound track dead.
At first I thought it was a cop and a shoeshine boy; then there was
a break in the traffic and across the sun-glaring bands of trolley ra ils I 
recognized Clifton. His partner had disappeared now and Clifto n had the box 
slung to his left shoulder with the cop moving slowly behind a nd to one side 
of him. They were coming my way, passing a newsstand, and I saw t he rails 
in the asphalt and a fire plug at the curb and the flying birds, an d thought,
You'll have to follow and pay his fine . . . just as the cop pushe d him, jolting 
him forward and Clifton trying to keep the box from swinging aga inst his leg 
and saying something over his shoulder and going forward as on e of the 
pigeons swung down into the street and up again, leaving a feat her floating 
white in the dazzling backlight of the sun, and I could see the cop push 
Clifton again, stepping solidly forward in his black shirt, hi s arm shooting out 
stiffly, sending him in a head-snapping forward stumble unti l he caught 
himself, saying something over his shoulder again, the two m oving in a kind 
of march that I'd seen many times, but never with anyone like Cl ifton. And I 
could see the cop bark a command and lunge forward, thrusting out his arm 
and missing, thrown off balance as suddenly Clifton spun on hi s toes like a 
dancer and swung his right arm over and around in a short, jolting a rc, his 
torso carrying forward and to the left in a motion that sent the bo x strap 
free as his right foot traveled forward and his left arm followed th rough in a 
floating uppercut that sent the cop's cap sailing into the stre et and his feet 
flying, to drop him hard, rocking from left to right on the walk as Cl ifton 
kicked the box thudding aside and crouched, his left foot forw ard, his hands 
high, waiting. And between the flashing of cars I could see the cop propping 
himself on his elbows like a drunk trying to get his head up, sha king it and 
thrusting it forward -- And somewhere between the dull roar of traf fic and 
the subway vibrating underground I heard rapid explosions and saw each 
pigeon diving wildly as though blackjacked by the sound, and the cop sitting 
up straight now, and rising to his knees looking steadily at Cli fton, and the 
pigeons plummeting swiftly into the trees, and Clifton still facing the cop and 
suddenly crumpling.
He fell forward on his knees, like a man saying his prayers just as a 
heavy-set man in a hat with a turned-down brim stepped from around the 
newsstand and yelled a protest. I couldn't move. The sun seeme d to scream 
an inch above my head. Someone shouted. A few men were starting i nto the 
street. The cop was standing now and looking down at Clifton as though 
surprised, the gun in his hand. I took a few steps forward, walkin g blindly 
now, unthinking, yet my mind registering it all vividly. Across and starting up 
on the curb, and seeing Clifton up closer now, lying in the sam e position, on 
his side, a huge wetness growing on his shirt, and I couldn't set my foot 
down. Cars sailed close behind me, but 1 couldn't take the step that would 
raise me up to the walk. I stood there, one leg in the street and the other 
raised above the curb, hearing whistles screeching and looked t oward the 
library to see two cops coming on in a lunging, big-bellied run. I looked back 
to Clifton, the cop was waving me away with his gun, sounding l ike a boy 
with a changing voice.
"Get back on the other side," he said. He was the cop that I'd 
passed on Forty-third a few minutes before. My mouth was dry.
"He's a friend of mine, I want to help . . ." I said, finally stepp ing 
upon the curb.
"He don't need no help, Junior. Get across that street!" 
The cop's hair hung on the sides of his face, his uniform was dirt y,
and I watched him without emotion, hesitated, hearing the sou nd of footfalls 
approaching. Everything seemed slowed down. A pool formed slo wly on the 
walk. My eyes blurred. I raised my head. The cop looked at me curiou sly.
Above in the park I could hear the furious flapping of wings; on m y neck,
the pressure of eyes. I turned. A round-headed, apple-cheeked bo y with a 
thickly freckled nose and Slavic eyes leaned over the fence of the park above,
and now as he saw me turn, he shrilled something to someone behin d him,
his face lighting up with ecstasy . . . What does it mean, I wond ered, turning 
back to that to which I did not wish to turn.
There were three cops now, one watching the crowd and the others 
looking at Clifton. The first cop had his cap on again.
"Look, Junior," he said very clearly, "I had enough trouble for t oday 
-- you going to get on across that street?" 
I opened my mouth but nothing would come. Kneeling, one of the
cops was examining Clifton and making notes on a pad.
"I'm his friend," I said, and the one making notes looked up.
"He's a cooked pigeon, Mac," he said. "You ain't got any friend any 
more." 
I looked at him.
"Hey, Mickey," the boy above us called, "the guy's out cold!"
I looked down. "That's right," the kneeling cop said. "What's your 
name?" 
I told him. I answered his questions about Clifton as best I cou ld 
until the wagon came. For once it came quickly. I watched numb ly as they 
moved him inside, placing the box of dolls in with him. Across t he street the 
crowd still churned. Then the wagon was gone and I started back to ward the 
subway.
"Say, mister," the boy's voice shrilled down. "Your friend sure k nows 
how to use his dukes. Biff, bang! One, two, and the cop's on his ass!" 
I bowed my head to this final tribute, and now walking away in th e 
sun I tried to erase the scene from my mind.
I WANDERED down the subway stairs seeing nothing, my mind 
plunging. The subway was cool and I leaned against a pillar, he aring the roar 
of trains passing across on the other side, feeling the rushing ro ar of air.
Why should a man deliberately plunge outside of history and pe ddle an 
obscenity, my mind went on abstractedly. Why should he choose to disarm 
himself, give up his voice and leave the only organization off ering him a 
chance to "define" himself? The platform vibrated and I looked down. Bits of
paper whirled up in the passage of air, settling quickly as a trai n moved past.
Why had he turned away? Why had he chosen to step off the platform and 
fall beneath the train? Why did he choose to plunge into nothin gness, into 
the void of faceless faces, of soundless voices, lying outsi de history? I tried to 
step away and look at it from a distance of words read in books,
half-remembered. For history records the patterns of men's lives , they say:
Who slept with whom and with what results; who fought and who wo n and 
who lived to lie about it afterwards. All things, it is said, are duly recorded -- 
all things of importance, that is. But not quite, for actually it is only the 
known, the seen, the heard and only those events that the recorde r regards as 
important that are put down, those lies his keepers keep their po wer by. But 
the cop would be Clifton's historian, his judge, his witness, and his 
executioner, and I was the only brother in the watching crowd. An d I, the 
only witness for the defense, knew neither the extent of his g uilt nor the 
nature of his crime. Where were the historians today? And how would they 
put it down? 
I stood there with the trains plunging in and out, throwing blue 
sparks. What did they ever think of us transitory ones? Ones suc h as I had 
been before I found Brotherhood -- birds of passage who were too obs cure 
for learned classification, too silent for the most sensitiv e recorders of sound;
of natures too ambiguous for the most ambiguous words, and too d istant 
from the centers of historical decision to sign or even to applau d the signers 
of historical documents? We who write no novels, histories or ot her books.
What about us, I thought, seeing Clifton again in my mind and g oing to sit 
upon a bench as a cool gust of air rolled up the tunnel.
A body of people came down the platform, some of them Negroes.
Yes, I thought, what about those of us who shoot up from the Sout h into the 
busy city like wild jacks-in-the-box broken loose from our spri ngs -- so 
sudden that our gait becomes like that of deep-sea divers suff ering from the 
bends? What about those fellows waiting still and silent the re on the 
platform, so still and silent that they clash with the crowd in t heir very 
immobility; standing noisy in their very silence; harsh as a c ry of terror in 
their quietness? What about those three boys, coming now alon g the platform,
tall and slender, walking stiffly with swinging shoulders in t heir well-pressed,
too-hot-for-summer suits, their collars high and tight about their necks, their 
identical hats of black cheap felt set upon the crowns of their heads with a 
severe formality above their hard conked hair? It was as though I' d never 
seen their like before: Walking slowly, their shoulders swayi ng, their legs 
swinging from their hips in trousers that ballooned upward from cu ffs fitting 
snug about their ankles; their coats long and hip-tight with shoulders far too 
broad to be those of natural western men. These fellows whose bod ies seemed 
-- what had one of my teachers said of me? -- "You're like one of th ese 
African sculptures, distorted in the interest of a design." Well , what design 
and whose? 
I stared as they seemed to move like dancers in some kind of funera l
ceremony, swaying, going forward, their black faces secret, mo ving slowly 
down the subway platform, the heavy heel-plated shoes making a rhythmical
tapping as they moved. Everyone must have seen them, or heard t heir muted 
laughter, or smelled the heavy pomade on their hair -- or perhap s failed to 
see them at all. For they were men outside of historical time, th ey were 
untouched, they didn't believe in Brotherhood, no doubt had ne ver heard of
it; or perhaps like Clifton would mysteriously have rejected it s mysteries; men 
of transition whose faces were immobile.
I got up and went behind them. Women shoppers with bundles and 
impatient men in straw hats and seersucker suits stood along th e platform as 
they passed. And suddenly I found myself thinking, Do they co me to bury the 
others or to be entombed, to give life or to receive it? Do the oth ers see 
them, think about them, even those standing close enough to s peak? And if
they spoke back, would the impatient businessmen in convent ional suits and 
tired housewives with their plunder, understand? What would th ey say? For 
the boys speak a jived-up transitional language full of count ry glamour, think 
transitional thoughts, though perhaps they dream the same old a ncient 
dreams. They were men out of time -- unless they found Brotherhood . Men 
out of time, who would soon be gone and forgotten . . . But who kne w (and 
now I began to tremble so violently I had to lean against a refuse can) -- 
who knew but that they were the saviors, the true leaders, the beare rs of
something precious? The stewards of something uncomfortable, burdensome,
which they hated because, living outside the realm of history , there was no 
one to applaud their value and they themselves failed to unde rstand it. What 
if Brother Jack were wrong? What if history was a gambler, instead of a force 
in a laboratory experiment, and the boys his ace in the hole? Wha t if history 
was not a reasonable citizen, but a madman full of paranoid guil e and these 
boys his agents, his big surprise! His own revenge? For they were o utside, in 
the dark with Sambo, the dancing paper doll; taking it on the la mbo with my 
fallen brother, Tod Clifton (Tod, Tod) running and dodging the f orces of
history instead of making a dominating stand.
A train came. I followed them inside. There were many seats and th e 
three sat together. I stood, holding onto the center pole, look ing down the 
length of the car. On one side I saw a white nun in black telling h er beads,
and standing before the door across the aisle there was another d ressed 
completely in white, the exact duplicate of the other except that she was 
black and her black feet bare. Neither of the nuns was looking a t the other 
but at their crucifixes, and suddenly I laughed and a verse I'd h eard long ago 
at the Golden Day paraphrased itself in my mind:
Bread and Wine,
Bread and Wine,
Your cross ain't nearly so 
Heavy as mine . . .
And the nuns rode on with lowered heads.
I looked at the boys. They sat as formally as they walked. From ti me 
to time one of them would look at his reflection in the window an d give his 
hat brim a snap, the others watching him silently, communicati ng ironically 
with their eyes, then looking straight ahead. I staggered with the lunging of
the train, feeling the overhead fans driving the hot air down upo n me. What 
was I in relation to the boys, I wondered. Perhaps an accident, li ke Douglass.
Perhaps each hundred years or so men like them, like me, appeared i n 
society, drifting through; and yet by all historical logic we, I , should have 
disappeared around the first part of the nineteenth century, rati onalized out of
existence. Perhaps, like them, I was a throwback, a small dista nt meteorite 
that died several hundred years ago and now lived only by virtue of the light 
that speeds through space at too great a pace to realize that its s ource has 
become a piece of lead . . . This was silly, such thoughts. I loo ked at the 
boys; one tapped another on the knee, and I saw him remove three ro lled 
magazines from an inner pocket, passing two around and keeping one for 
himself. The others took theirs silently and began to read in com plete 
absorption. One held his magazine high before his face and for a n instant I 
saw a vivid scene: The shining rails, the fire hydrant, the falle n policeman,
the diving birds and in the mid-ground, Clifton, crumpling. The n I saw the 
cover of a comic book and thought, Clifton would have known th em better 
than I. He knew them all the time. I studied them closely until they left the 
train, their shoulders rocking, their heavy heel plates clicki ng remote, cryptic 
messages in the brief silence of the train's stop.
I came out of the subway, weak, moving through the heat as thoug h 
I carried a heavy stone, the weight of a mountain on my shoulders. My new 
shoes hurt my feet. Now, moving through the crowds along 125th St reet, I 
was painfully aware of other men dressed like the boys, and of gi rls in dark 
exotic-colored stockings, their costumes surreal variations o f downtown styles.
They'd been there all along, but somehow I'd missed them. I'd m issed them 
even when my work had been most successful. They were outside th e groove 
of history, and it was my job to get them in, all of them. I looke d into the 
design of their faces, hardly a one that was unlike someone I'd known down 
South. Forgotten names sang through my head like forgotten scen es in 
dreams. I moved with the crowd, the sweat pouring off me, listeni ng to the 
grinding roar of traffic, the growing sound of a record shop loudspe aker 
blaring a languid blues. I stopped. Was this all that would be re corded? Was 
this the only true history of the times, a mood blared by trumpets ,
trombones, saxophones and drums, a song with turgid, inadequat e words? My 
mind flowed. It was as though in this short block I was forced to w alk past 
everyone I'd ever known and no one would smile or call my name. No one 
fixed me in his eyes. I walked in feverish isolation. Near the c orner now a 
couple of boys darted out of the Five and Ten with handfuls of ca ndy bars,
dropping them along the walks as they ran with a man right behind. They 
came toward me, pumping past, and I killed an impulse to trip the man and 
was confused all the more when an old woman standing further alo ng threw 
out her leg and swung a heavy bag. The man went down, sliding ac ross the 
walk as she shook her head in triumph. A pressure of guilt came ove r me. I 
stood on the edge of the walk watching the crowd threatening to a ttack the 
man until a policeman appeared and dispersed them. And althoug h I knew no 
one man could do much about it, I felt responsible. All our work h ad been 
very little, no great change had been made. And it was all my fau lt. I'd been 
so fascinated by the motion that I'd forgotten to measure what i t was 
bringing forth. I'd been asleep, dreaming.
Chapter 21 
When I got back to the district a small group of youth members 
stopped their joking to welcome me, but I couldn't break the ne ws. I went 
through to the office with only a nod, shutting the door upon th eir voices 
and sat staring out through the trees. The once fresh green of the tre es was 
dark and drying now and somewhere down below a clothesline pedd ler 
clanged his bell and called. Then, as I fought against it, the scene came back 
-- not of the death, but of the dolls. Why had I lost my head and s pat upon 
the doll, I wondered. What had Clifton felt when he saw me? He mu st have 
hated me behind his spiel, yet he'd ignored me. Yes, and been am used by my 
political stupidity. I had blown up and acted personally inst ead of denouncing 
the significance of the dolls, him, the obscene idea, and sei zing the 
opportunity to educate the crowd. We lost no opportunity to educ ate, and I 
had failed. All I'd done was to make them laugh all the louder . . . I had 
aided and abetted social backwardness . . . The scene changed - - he lay in 
the sun and this time I saw a trail of smoke left by a sky-writing p lane 
lingering in the sky, a large woman in a kelly-green dress stood ne ar me 
saying, "Oh, Oh!" . . .
I turned and faced the map, removing the doll from my pocket and 
tossing it upon the desk. My stomach surged. To die for such a th ing! I 
picked it up with an unclean feeling, looked at the frilled pap er. The joined 
cardboard feet hung down, pulling the paper legs in elastic fol ds, a 
construction of tissue, cardboard and glue. And yet I felt a hatre d as for 
something alive. What had made it seem to dance? Its cardboard h ands were 
doubled into fists, the fingers outlined in orange paint, and I noticed that it 
had two faces, one on either side of the disk of cardboard, and bo th grinning.
Clifton's voice came to me as he spieled his directions for mak ing it dance,
and I held it by the feet and stretched its neck, seeing it crumpl e and slide 
forward. I tried again, turning its other face around. It gave a ti red bounce,
shook itself and fell in a heap.
"Go on, entertain me," I said, giving it a stretch. "You entertai ned 
the crowd." I turned it around. One face grinned as broadly as the ot her. It 
had grinned back at Clifton as it grinned forward at the crowd, and their 
entertainment had been his death. It had still grinned when I pl ayed the tool
and spat upon it, and it was still grinning when Clifton ignored me. Then I 
saw a fine black thread and pulled it from the trilled paper. There w as a 
loop tied in the end. I slipped it over my finger and stood stret ching it taut.
And this time it danced. Clifton had been making it dance all t he time and 
the black thread had been invisible.
Why didn't you hit him? I asked myself; try to break his jaw? Why
didn't you hurt him and save him? You might have started a fight a nd both 
of you would have been arrested with no shooting . . . But why had h e 
resisted the cop anyway? He'd been arrested before; he knew how fa r to go 
with a cop. What had the cop said to make him angry enough to los e his 
head? And suddenly it occurred to me that he might have been angr y before 
he resisted, before he'd even seen the cop. My breath became short ; I felt 
myself go weak. What if he believed I'd sold out? It was a sicke ning thought.
I sat holding myself as though I might break. For a moment I weig hed the 
idea, but it was too big for me. I could only accept responsibil ity for the 
living, not for the dead. My mind backed away from the notion. T he incident 
was political. I looked at the doll, thinking, The political equivalent of such 
entertainment is death. But that's too broad a definition. Its economic 
meaning? That the lite of a man is worth the sale of a two-bit pap er doll . .
. But that didn't kill the idea that my anger helped speed him o n to death.
And still my mind fought against it. For what had I to do with th e crisis that 
had broken his integrity? What had I to do with his selling the do lls in the 
first place? And finally I had to give that up too. I was no detec tive, and,
politically, individuals were without meaning. The shootin g was all that was 
left of him now, Clifton had chosen to plunge out of history an d, except for 
the picture it made in my mind's eye, only the plunge was recorded , and that 
was the only important thing.
I sat rigid, as though waiting to hear the explosions again, fi ghting 
against the weight that seemed to pull me down. I heard the clot hesline 
peddler's bell . . . What would I tell the committee when the new spaper 
accounts were out? To hell with them. How would I explain the do lls? But 
why should I say anything? What could we do to fight back. That was my 
worry. The bell tolled again in the yard below. I looked at the do ll. I could 
think of no justification for Clifton's having sold the doll s, but there was 
justification enough for giving him a public funeral, and I se ized upon the 
idea now as though it would save my life. Even though I wanted t o turn 
away from it as I'd wanted to turn from Clifton's crumpled body on t he walk.
But the odds against us were too great for such weakness. We had t o use 
every politically effective weapon against them; Clifton u nderstood that. He 
had to be buried and I knew of no relatives; someone had to see tha t he was 
placed in the ground. Yes, the dolls were obscene and his act a be trayal. But 
he was only a salesman, not the inventor, and it was necessary t hat we make 
it known that the meaning of his death was greater than the inci dent or the 
object that caused it. Both as a means of avenging him and of pre venting 
other such deaths . . . yes, and of attracting lost members back i nto the 
ranks. It would be ruthless, but a ruthlessness in the interest of Brotherhood,
for we had only our minds and bodies, as against the other side 's vast power.
We had to make the most of what we had. For they had the power to u se a 
paper doll, first to destroy his integrity and then as an excuse f or killing him.
All right, so we'll use his funeral to put his integrity together again . . . For 
that's all that he had had or wanted. And now I could see the dol l only 
vaguely and drops of moisture were thudding down upon its absorb ent paper 
. . .
I was bent over, staring, when the knock came at the door and I 
jumped as at a shot, sweeping the doll into my pocket, and hast ily wiping my 
eyes.
"Come in," I said.
The door opened slowly. A group of youth members crowded forward,
their faces a question. The girls were crying.
"Is it true?" they said.
"That he is dead? Yes," I said, looking among them. "Yes." 
"But why . . . ?" 
"It was a case of provocation and murder!" I said, my emotions 
beginning to turn to anger.
They stood there, their faces questioning me.
"He's dead," a girl said, her voice without conviction. "Dead ." 
"But what do they mean about his selling dolls?" a tall youth s aid.
"I don't know," I said. "I only know that he was shot down.
Unarmed. I know how you feel, I saw him fall." 
"Take me home," a girl screamed. "Take me home!" 
I stepped forward and caught her, a little brown thing in bobby 
socks, holding her against me. "No, we can't go home," I said, "none of us.
We've got to fight. I'd like to get out into the air and forget it , if I ever 
could. What we want is not tears but anger. We must remember now th at we 
are fighters, and in such incidents we must see the meaning of ou r struggle.
We must strike back. I want each of you to round up all the members y ou 
can. We've got to make our reply." 
One of the girls was still crying piteously when they went out, but 
they were moving quickly.
"Come on, Shirley," they said, taking the girl from my shoulder.
I tried to get in touch with headquarters, but again I was unable t o 
reach anyone. I called the Chthonian but there was no answer. So I called a 
committee of the district's leading members and we moved slowl y ahead on 
our own. I tried to find the youth who was with Clifton, but he ha d 
disappeared. Members were set on the streets with cans to solicit funds for 
his burial. A committee of three old women went to the morgue to cl aim his 
body. We distributed black-bordered leaflets, denouncing the police 
commissioner. Preachers were notified to have their congregatio ns send letters 
of protest to the mayor. The story spread. A photograph of Clifton was sent 
to the Negro papers and published. People were stirred and angry. S treet 
meetings were organized. And, released (by the action) from my in decision, I 
threw everything I had into organizing the funeral, though movi ng in a kind 
of numb suspension. I didn't go to bed for two days and nights, but caught 
catnaps at my desk. I ate very little.
THE funeral was arranged to attract the largest number. Instead of
holding it in a church or chapel, we selected Mount Morris Park, an d an 
appeal went out for all former members to join the funeral march.
It took place on a Saturday, in the heat of the afternoon. There wa s 
a thin overcast of clouds, and hundreds of people formed for the p rocession.
I went around giving orders and encouragement in a feverish daze, a nd yet 
seeming to observe it all from off to one side. Brothers and siste rs turned up 
whom I hadn't seen since my return. And members from downtown and 
outlying districts. I watched them with surprise as they gathere d and 
wondered at the depths of their sorrow as the lines began to form.
There were half-draped flags and black banners. There were 
black-bordered signs that read:
BROTHER TOD CLIFTON 
OUR HOPE SHOT DOWN 
There was a hired drum corps with crape-draped drums. There was a 
band of thirty pieces. There were no cars and very few flowers.
It was a slow procession and the band played sad, romantic, mili tary 
marches. And when the band was silent the drum corps beat the time on 
drums with muffled heads. It was hot and explosive, and delive ry men 
avoided the district and the police details were increased in nu mber. And up 
and down the streets people looked out of their apartment windo ws and men 
and boys stood on the roofs in the thin-veiled sun. I marched at t he head 
with the old community leaders. It was a slow march and as I looke d back 
from time to time I could see young zoot-suiters, hep cats, and m en in 
overalls and pool-hall gamblers stepping into the procession. Men came out of
barber shops with lathered faces, their neckcloths hanging, to watch and 
comment in hushed voices. And I wondered, Are they all Clifton' s friends, or 
is it just for the spectacle, the slow-paced music? A hot wind blew from 
behind me, bringing the sick sweetish odor, like the smell of so me female 
dogs in season.
I looked back. The sun shone down on a mass of unbared heads,
and above flags and banners and shining horns I could see the che ap gray 
coffin moving high upon the shoulders of Clifton's tallest co mpanions, who 
from time to time shifted it smoothly on to others. They bore him h igh and 
they bore him proudly and there was an angry sadness in their eyes . The 
coffin floated like a heavily loaded ship in a channel, windi ng its way slowly 
above the bowed and submerged heads. I could hear the steady rol ling of the 
drums with muffled snares, and all other sounds were suspended i n silence.
Behind, the tramp of feet; ahead, the crowds lining the curbs fo r blocks.
There were tears and muffled sobs and many hard, red eyes. We moved 
ahead.
We wound through the poorest streets at first, a black image of
sorrow, then turned into Seventh Avenue and down and over to Leno x. Then 
I hurried with the leading brothers to the park in a cab. A brother in t he 
Park Department had opened the lookout tower, and a crude platform of
planks and ranked saw horses had been erected beneath the black i ron bell,
and when the procession started into the park we were standing hig h above,
waiting. At our signal he struck the bell, and I could feel my ea rdrums 
throbbing with the old, hollow, gut-vibrant Doom-Dong-Doom.
Looking down, I could see them winding upward in a mass to the 
muffled sound of the drums. Children stopped their playing on t he grass to 
stare, and nurses at the nearby hospital came out on the roof to wa tch, their 
white uniforms glowing in the now unveiled sun like lilies. An d crowds 
approached the park from all directions. The muffled drums now bea ting, now 
steadily rolling, spread a dead silence upon the air, a prayer tor the unknown 
soldier. And looking down I felt a lostness. Why were they here? W hy had 
they found us? Because they knew Clifton? Or for the occasion his death gave 
them to express their protestations, a time and place to come to gether, to 
stand touching and sweating and breathing and looking in a com mon 
direction? Was either explanation adequate in itself? Did it signify love or 
politicalized hate? And could politics ever be an expression of love? 
Over the park the silence spread from the slow muffled rolling of t he 
drums, the crunching of footsteps on the walks. Then somewhere i n the 
procession an old, plaintive, masculine voice arose in a song, wavering,
stumbling in the silence at first alone, until in the band a eup honium horn 
fumbled for the key and took up the air, one catching and rising a bove the 
other and the other pursuing, two black pigeons rising above a s kull-white 
barn to tumble and rise through still, blue air. And for a few bars th e pure 
sweet tone of the horn and the old man's husky baritone sang a due t in the 
hot heavy silence. "There's Many a Thousand Gone." And standi ng high up 
over the park something fought in my throat. It was a song from the past,
the past of the campus and the still earlier past of home. And no w some of
the older ones in the mass were joining in. I hadn't thought of i t as a march 
before, but now they were marching to its slow-paced rhythm, up th e hill. I 
looked for the euphonium player and saw a slender black man wi th his face 
turned toward the sun, singing through the upturned bells of the h orn. And 
several yards behind, marching beside the young men floating th e coffin 
upward, I looked into the face of the old man who had aroused the s ong and 
felt a twinge of envy. It was a worn, old, yellow face and his eye s were 
closed and I could see a knife welt around his upturned neck as hi s throat 
threw out the song. He sang with his whole body, phrasing each ve rse as 
naturally as he walked, his voice rising above all the others, bl ending with 
that of the lucid horn. I watched him now, wet-eyed, the sun hot upon my 
head, and I felt a wonder at the singing mass. It was as though t he song had 
been there all the time and he knew it and aroused it; and I knew th at I 
had known it too and had failed to release it out of a vague, name less shame 
or fear. But he had known and aroused it. Even white brothers and si sters 
were joining in. I looked into that face, trying to plumb its se cret, but it told 
me nothing. I looked at the coffin and the marchers, listening t o them, and 
yet realizing that I was listening to something within myself , and for a second 
I heard the shattering stroke of my heart. Something deep had shak en the 
crowd, and the old man and the man with the horn had done it. They h ad 
touched upon something deeper than protest, or religion; thou gh now images 
of all the church meetings of my life welled up within me with mu ch 
suppressed and forgotten anger. But that was past, and too many o f those 
now reaching the top of the mountain and spreading massed toget her had 
never shared it, and some had been born in other lands. And yet al l were 
touched; the song had aroused us all. It was not the words, for th ey were all
the same old slave-borne words; it was as though he'd changed th e emotion 
beneath the words while yet the old longing, resigned, transcen dent emotion 
still sounded above, now deepened by that something for whic h the theory of
Brotherhood had given me no name. I stood there trying to contain it as they 
brought Tod Clifton's coffin into the tower and slowly up the s piral stairs.
They set it down upon the platform and I looked at the shape of th e cheap 
gray coffin and all I could remember was the sound of his name.
The song had ended. Now the top of the little mountain bristled with 
banners, horns and uplifted faces. I could look straight down Fi fth Avenue to 
125th Street, where policemen were lined behind an array ot hot-do g wagons 
and Good Humor carts; and among the carts I saw a peanut vendor st anding 
beneath a street lamp upon which pigeons were gathered, and now I saw him 
stretch out his arms with his palms turned upward, and suddenly he was 
covered, head, shoulders and outflung arms, with fluttering, fe asting birds.
Someone nudged me and I started. It was time for final words. But I 
had no words and I'd never been to a Brotherhood funeral and had no i dea 
of a ritual. But they were waiting. I stood there alone; there was n o 
microphone to support me, only the coffin before me upon the back s of its 
wobbly carpenter's horses.
I looked down into their sun-swept faces, digging for the word s, and 
feeling a futility about it all and an anger. For this they gath ered by 
thousands. What were they waiting to hear? Why had they come? Fo r what 
reason that was different from that which had made the red-cheeke d boy 
thrill at Clifton's falling to the earth? What did they want and what could 
they do? Why hadn't they come when they could have stopped it a ll? 
"What are you waiting for me to tell you?" I shouted suddenly, m y 
voice strangely crisp on the windless air. "What good will it do? What if I 
say that this isn't a funeral, that it's a holiday celebration, that if you stick 
around the band will end up playing 'Damit-the-Hell the Fun's All Over'? Or 
do you expect to see some magic, the dead rise up and walk again? Go 
home, he's as dead as he'll ever die. That's the end in the begi nning and 
there's no encore. There'll be no miracles and there's no one here to preach a 
sermon. Go home, forget him. He's inside this box, newly dead. G o home and 
don't think about him. He's dead and you've got all you can do t o think 
about you." I paused. They were whispering and looking upward.
"I've told you to go home," I shouted, "but you keep standing t here.
Don't you know it's hot out here in the sun? So what if you wait fo r what 
little I can tell you? Can I say in twenty minutes what was buil ding 
twenty-one years and ended in twenty seconds? What are you wait ing for,
when all I can tell you is his name? And when I tell you, what wil l you 
know that you didn't know already, except perhaps, his name?" 
They were listening intently, and as though looking not at me, but at 
the pattern of my voice upon the air.
"All right, you do the listening in the sun and I'll try to tell y ou in 
the sun. Then you go home and forget it. Forget it. His name was Cl ifton 
and they shot him down. His name was Clifton and he was tall and some 
folks thought him handsome. And though he didn't belilve it, I think he was.
His name was Clifton and his face was black and his hair was thi ck with 
tight-rolled curls -- or call them naps or kinks. He's dead, uni nterested, and,
except to a few young girls, it doesn't matter . . . Have you got i t? Can you 
see him? Think of your brother or your cousin John. His lips were thick with 
an upward curve at the corners. He often smiled. He had good eyes a nd a 
pair of fast hands, and he had a heart. He thought about things a nd he felt 
deeply. I won't call him noble because what's such a word to do w ith one of
us? His name was Clifton, Tod Clifton, and, like any man, he wa s born of
woman to live awhile and fall and die. So that's his tale to the minute. His 
name was Clifton and for a while he lived among us and aroused a f ew 
hopes in the young manhood of man, and we who knew him loved him and 
he died. So why are you waiting? You've heard it all. Why wait for more,
when all I can do is repeat it?" 
They stood; they listened. They gave no sign.
"Very well, so I'll tell you. His name was Clifton and he was yo ung 
and he was a leader and when he fell there was a hole in the heel of his 
sock and when he stretched forward he seemed not as tall as when h e stood.
So he died; and we who loved him are gathered here to mourn him. It's as 
simple as that and as short as that. His name was Clifton and he w as black 
and they shot him. Isn't that enough to tell? Isn't it all you n eed to know? 
Isn't that enough to appease your thirst for drama and send you h ome to 
sleep it off? Go take a drink and forget it. Or read it in The Daily N ews. His 
name was Clifton and they shot him, and I was there to see him fal l. So I 
know it as I know it.
"Here are the facts. He was standing and he fell. He fell and he 
kneeled. He kneeled and he bled. He bled and he died. He tell in a heap like 
any man and his blood spilled out like any blood; red as any bloo d, wet as 
any blood and reflecting the sky and the buildings and birds and trees, or 
your face if you'd looked into its dulling mirror -- and it dried i n the sun as 
blood dries. That's all. They spilled his blood and he bled. Th ey cut him 
down and he died; the blood flowed on the walk in a pool, gleame d a while,
and, after awhile, became dull then dusty, then dried. That's the story and 
that's how it ended. It's an old story and there's been too much blood to 
excite you. Besides, it's only important when it fills the vei ns of a living man.
Aren't you tired of such stories? Aren't you sick of the blood? The n why 
listen, why don't you go? It's hot out here. There's the odor of e mbalming 
fluid. The beer is cold in the taverns, the saxophones will be m ellow at the 
Savoy; plenty good-laughing-lies will be told in the barber shops and beauty 
parlors; and there'll be sermons in two hundred churches in the cool of the 
evening, and plenty of laughs at the movies. Go listen to 'Amo s and Andy'
and forget it. Here you have only the same old story. There's not e ven a 
young wife up here in red to mourn him. There's nothing here to pity, no 
one to break down and shout. Nothing to give you that good old fri ghtened 
feeling. The story's too short and too simple. His name was Cli fton, Tod 
Clifton, he was unarmed and his death was as senseless as his li fe was futile.
He had struggled for Brotherhood on a hundred street corners and he 
thought it would make him more human, but he died like any dog in a road.
"All right, all right," I called out, feeling desperate. It wasn 't the way 
I wanted it to go, it wasn't political. Brother Jack probably wo uldn't approve 
of it at all, but I had to keep going as I could go.
"Listen to me standing up on this so-called mountain!" I shou ted.
"Let me tell it as it truly was! His name was Tod Clifton and he wa s full of
illusions. He thought he was a man when he was only Tod Clifton . He was 
shot for a simple mistake of judgment and he bled and his blood dried and 
shortly the crowd trampled out the stains. It was a normal mistake of which 
many are guilty: He thought he was a man and that men were not mean t to 
be pushed around. But it was hot downtown and he forgot his histo ry, he 
forgot the time and the place. He lost his hold on reality. There w as a cop 
and a waiting audience but he was Tod Clifton and cops are every where. The 
cop? What about him? He was a cop. A good citizen. But this cop h ad an 
itching finger and an eager ear for a word that rhymed with 'trigg er,' and 
when Clifton fell he had found it. The Police Special spoke it s lines and the 
rhyme was completed. Just look around you. Look at what he made, look 
inside you and feel his awful power. It was perfectly natural. Th e blood ran 
like blood in a comic-book killing, on a comic-book street in a comic-book 
town on a comic-book day in a comic-book world.
"Tod Clifton's one with the ages. But what's that to do with yo u in 
this heat under this veiled sun? Now he's part of history, and h e has received 
his true freedom. Didn't they scribble his name on a standardized pad? His 
Race: colored! Religion: unknown, probably born Baptist. Plac e of birth: U.S.
Some southern town. Next of kin: unknown. Address: unknown. Oc cupation:
unemployed. Cause of death (be specific): resisting reality i n the form of a 
.38 caliber revolver in the hands of the arresting officer, on Fort y-second 
between the library and the subway in the heat of the afternoon, of gunshot 
wounds received from three bullets, fired at three paces, one bull et entering 
the right ventricle of the heart, and lodging there, the other sev ering the 
spinal ganglia traveling downward to lodge in the pelvis, the o ther breaking 
through the back and traveling God knows where.
"Such was the short bitter life of Brother Tod Clifton. Now he's in 
this box with the bolts tightened down. He's in the box and we' re in there 
with him, and when I've told you this you can go. It's dark in thi s box and 
it's crowded. It has a cracked ceiling and a clogged-up toilet i n the hall. It 
has rats and roaches, and it's far, far too expensive a dwelling. The air is bad 
and it'll be cold this winter. Tod Clifton is crowded and he need s the room.
'Tell them to get out of the box,' that's what he would say if yo u could hear 
him. 'Tell them to get out of the box and go teach the cops to forg et that 
rhyme. Tell them to teach them that when they call you nigger to make a 
rhyme with trigger it makes the gun backfire.'
"So there you have it. In a few hours Tod Clifton will be cold bone s 
in the ground. And don't be fooled, for these bones shall not ris e again. You 
and I will still be in the box. I don't know if Tod Clifton had a s oul. I only 
know the ache that I feel in my heart, my sense of loss. I don't kn ow if you 
have a soul. I only know you are men of flesh and blood; and that b lood will
spill and flesh grow cold. I do not know if all cops are poets, but I know 
that all cops carry guns with triggers. And I know too how we are lab eled.
So in the name of Brother Clifton beware of the triggers; go home, k eep cool,
stay safe away from the sun. Forget him. When he was alive he was o ur 
hope, but why worry over a hope that's dead? So there's only one t hing left 
to tell and I've already told it. His name was Tod Clifton, he be lieved in 
Brotherhood, he aroused our hopes and he died." 
I couldn't go on. Below, they were waiting, hands and handkerch iefs 
shading their eyes. A preacher stepped up and read something ou t of his 
Bible, and I stood looking at the crowd with a sense of failure. I had let it 
get away from me, had been unable to bring in the political issue s. And they 
stood there sun-beaten and sweat-bathed, listening to me repe at what was 
known. Now the preacher had finished, and someone signaled th e bandmaster 
and there was solemn music as the pallbearers carried the coffin do wn the 
spiraling stairs. The crowd stood still as we walked slowly throu gh. I could 
feel the bigness of it and the unknownness of it and a pent-up t ension -- 
whether of tears or anger, I couldn't tell. But as we walked throu gh and 
down the hill to the hearse, I could feel it. The crowd sweated an d throbbed,
and though it was silent, there were many things directed toward m e through 
its eyes. At the curb were the hearse and a few cars, and in a few min utes 
they were loaded and the crowd was still standing, looking on as we carried 
Tod Clifton away. And as I took one last look I saw not a crowd but the set 
faces of individual men and women.
We drove away and when the cars stopped moving there was a grave 
and we placed him in it. The gravediggers sweated heavily and kn ew their 
business and their brogue was Irish. They filled the grave quick ly and we left.
Tod Clifton was underground.
I returned through the streets as tired as though I'd dug the grave 
myself alone. I felt confused and listless moving through the crowds that 
seemed to boil along in a kind of mist, as though the thin humid clouds had 
thickened and settled directly above our heads. I wanted to go somewhere, to 
some cool place to rest without thinking, but there was still to o much to be 
done; plans had to be made; the crowd's emotion had to be organiz ed. I 
crept along, walking a southern walk in southern weather, closin g my eyes 
from time to time against the dazzling reds, yellows and greens o f cheap 
sport shirts and summer dresses. The crowd boiled, sweated, heav ed; women 
with shopping bags, men with highly polished shoes. Even dow n South they'd 
always shined their shoes. "Shined shoes, shoed shines," it rang in my head.
On Eighth Avenue, the market carts were parked hub to hub along the curb,
improvised canopies shading the withering fruits and vegetabl es. I could smell
the stench of decaying cabbage. A watermelon huckster stood i n the shade 
beside his truck, holding up a long slice of orange-mealed melo n, crying his 
wares with hoarse appeals to nostalgia, memories of childhood, green shade 
and summer coolness. Oranges, cocoanuts and alligator pears l ay in neat piles 
on little tables. I passed, winding my way through the slowly m oving crowd.
Stale and wilted flowers, rejected downtown, blazed feverishl y on a cart, like 
glamorous rags festering beneath a futile spray from a punctured fru it juice 
can. The crowd were boiling figures seen through steaming glass f rom inside 
a washing machine; and in the streets the mounted police detai l stood looking 
on, their eyes noncommittal beneath the short polished visors of their caps,
their bodies slanting forward, reins slackly alert, men and hors es of flesh 
imitating men and horses of stone. Tod Clifton's Tod, I though t. The 
hucksters cried above the traffic sounds and I seemed to hear the m from a 
distance, unsure of what they said. In a side street children wit h warped 
tricycles were parading along the walk carrying one of the signs, BROTHER 
TOD CLIFTON, OUR HOPE SHOT DOWN.
And through the haze I again felt the tension. There was no denyi ng 
it; it was there and something had to be done before it simmered aw ay in 
the heat.
Chapter 22 
When I saw them sitting in their shirtsleeves, leaning forward ,
gripping their crossed knees with their hands, I wasn't surprise d. I'm glad it's 
you, I thought, this will be business without tears. It was as t hough I had 
expected to find them there, just as in those dreams in which I en countered 
my grandfather looking at me from across the dimensionless spac e of a 
dream-room. I looked back without surprise or emotion, although I knew even 
in the dream that surprise was the normal reaction and that the lack of it 
was to be distrusted, a warning.
I stood just inside the room, watching them as I slipped off my 
jacket, seeing them grouped around a small table upon which the re rested a 
pitcher of water, a glass and a couple of smoking ash trays. One h alf of the 
room was dark and only one light burned, directly above the table. They 
regarded me silently, Brother Jack with a smile that went no deep er than his 
lips, his head cocked to one side, studying me with his penetra ting eyes; the 
others blank-faced, looking out of eyes that were meant to revea l nothing and 
to stir profound uncertainty. The smoke rose in spirals from their cigarettes 
as they sat perfectly contained, waiting. So you came, after a ll, I thought,
going over and dropping into one of the chairs. I rested my arm on th e 
table, noticing its coolness.
"Well, how did it go?" Brother Jack said, extending his claspe d hands 
across the table and looking at me with his head to one side.
"You saw the crowd," I said. "We finally got them out." 
"No, we did not see the crowd. How was it?" 
"They were moved," I said, "a great number of them. But beyond 
that I don't know. They were with us, but how far I don't know . . . " And 
for a moment I could hear my own voice in the quiet of the high-c eilinged 
hall.
"Sooo! Is that all the great tactician has to tell us?" Brother T obitt 
said. "In what direction were they moved?" 
I looked at him, aware of the numbness of my emotions; they had 
flowed in one channel too long and too deeply.
"That's for the committee to decide. They were aroused, that wa s all
we could do. We tried again and again to reach the committee for g uidance 
but we couldn't." 
"So?" 
"So we went ahead on my personal responsibility." 
Brother Jack's eyes narrowed. "What was that?" he said. "Your wh at?" 
"My personal responsibility," I said.
"His personal responsibility," Brother Jack said. "Did you hea r that,
Brothers? Did I hear him correctly. Where did you get it, Brother?" he said.
"This is astounding, where did you get it?" 
"From your ma --" I started and caught myself in time. "From the 
committee," I said.
There was a pause. I looked at him, his face reddening, as I tried t o 
get my bearings. A nerve trembled in the center of my stomach.
"Everyone came out," I said, trying to fill it in. "We saw the 
opportunity and the community agreed with us. It's too bad you m issed it . .
." 
"You see, he's sorry we missed it," Brother Jack said. He held up his 
hand. I could see the deeply etched lines in his palm. "The grea t tactician of
personal responsibility regrets our absence . . ." 
Doesn't he see how I feel, I thought, can't he see why I did it? 
What's he trying to do? Tobitt's a fool, but why is he taking it up? 
"You could have taken the next step," I said, forcing the words. "We 
went as far as we could . . ." 
"On your personal re-spon-si-bility," Brother Jack said, bowi ng his 
head in time with the words.
I looked at him steadily now. "I was told to win back our follow ing,
so I tried. The only way I knew how. What's your criticism? What' s wrong?" 
"So now," he said, rubbing his eye with a delicate circular move ment 
of his fist, "the great tactician asks what's wrong. Is it possi ble that 
something could be wrong? Do you hear him, Brothers?" 
There was a cough. Someone poured a glass of water and I could 
hear it fill up very fast, then the rapid rill-like trickle of the final drops 
dripping from the pitcher-lip into the glass. I looked at him, my mind trying 
to bring things into focus.
"You mean he admits the possibility of being incorrect?" Tobit t said.
"Sheer modesty, Brother. The sheerest modesty. We have here an 
extraordinary tactician, a Napoleon of strategy and personal res ponsibility.
'Strike while the iron is hot' is his motto. 'Seize the instance by its throat,'
'Shoot at the whites of their eyes,' 'Give 'em the ax, the ax, t he ax,' and so 
forth." 
I stood up. "I don't know what this is all about, Brother. What are
you trying to say?" 
"Now there is a good question, Brothers. Sit down, please, it's h ot.
He wants to know what we're trying to say. We have here not only an
extraordinary tactician, but one who has an appreciation for su btleties of
expression." 
"Yes, and for sarcasm, when it's good," I said.
"And for discipline? Sit down, please, it's hot . . ." 
"And for discipline. And for orders and consultation when it's
possible to have them," I said.
Brother Jack grinned. "Sit down, sit down -- And for patience?"
"When I'm not sleepy and exhausted," I said, "and not overheat ed as 
I am just now." 
"You'll learn," he said. "You'll learn and you'll surrender yours elf to it 
even under such conditions. Especially under such conditio ns; that's its value.
That makes it patience." 
"Yes, I guess I'm learning now," I said. "Right now." 
"Brother," he said drily, "you have no idea how much you're learnin g 
-- Please sit down." 
"All right," I said, sitting down again. "But while ignoring my
personal education for a second I'd like you to remember that th e people 
have little patience with us these days. We could use this tim e more 
profitably." 
"And I could tell you that politicians are not personal persons, " 
Brother Jack said, "but I won't. How could we use it more profitab ly?" 
"By organizing their anger." 
"So again our great tactician has relieved himself. Today he's a busy 
man. First an oration over the body of Brutus, and now a lecture on t he 
patience of the Negro people." 
Tobitt was enjoying himself. I could see his cigarette tremble in his 
lips as he struck a match to light it.
"I move we issue his remarks in a pamphlet," he said, running his 
finger over his chin. "They should create a natural phenomenon . . ." 
This had better stop right here, I thought. My head was getting 
lighter and my chest felt tight.
"Look," I said, "an unarmed man was killed. A brother, a leading 
member shot down by a policeman. We had lost our prestige in the
community. I saw the chance to rally the people, so I acted. If t hat was 
incorrect, then I did wrong, so say it straight without this crap. I t'll take 
more than sarcasm to deal with that crowd out there." 
Brother Jack reddened; the others exchanged glances.
"He hasn't read the newspapers," someone said.
"You forget," Brother Jack said, "it wasn't necessary; he was t here." 
"Yes, I was there," I said. "If you're referring to the killing." 
"There, you see," Brother Jack said. "He was on the scene." 
Brother Tobitt pushed the table edge with his palms. "And stil l you 
organized that side show of a funeral!" 
My nose twitched. I turned toward him deliberately, forcing a grin .
"How could there be a side show without you as the star attractio n,
who'd draw the two bits admission, Brother Twobits? What was wro ng with 
the funeral?" 
"Now we're making progress," Brother Jack said, straddling his ch air.
"The strategist has raised a very interesting question. What's wrong, he asks.
All right, I'll answer. Under your leadership, a traitorous mercha nt of vile 
instruments of anti-Negro, anti-minority racist bigotry has rec eived the funeral
of a hero. Do you still ask what's wrong?" 
"But nothing was done about a traitor," I said.
He half-stood, gripping the back of his chair. "We all heard you 
admit it." 
"We dramatized the shooting down of an unarmed black man." 
He threw up his hands. To hell with you, I thought. To hell with 
you. He was a man!
"That black man, as you call him, was a traitor," Brother Jack sai d.
"A traitor!" 
"What is a traitor, Brother?" I asked, feeling an angry amusement as 
I counted on my fingers. "He was a man and a Negro; a man and a brothe r;
a man and a traitor, as you say; then he was a dead man, and alive or dead 
he was jam-full of contradictions. So full that he attracted ha lf of Harlem to 
come out and stand in the sun in answer to our call. So what is a t raitor?" 
"So now he retreats," Brother Jack said. "Observe him, Brothers.
After putting the movement in the position of forcing a traitor down the 
throats of the Negroes he asks what a traitor is." 
"Yes," I said. "Yes, and, as you say, it's a fair question, Brot her.
Some folks call me traitor because I've been working downtown; some would 
call me a traitor if I was in Civil Service and others if I simply s at in my 
corner and kept quiet. Sure, I considered what Clifton did --" 
"And you defend him!" 
"Not for that. I was as disgusted as you. But hell, isn't the sh ooting 
of an unarmed man of more importance politically than the fact th at he sold 
obscene dolls?" 
"So you exercised your personal responsibility," Jack said.
"That's all I had to go on. I wasn't called to the strategy meeti ng,
remember." 
"Didn't you see what you were playing with?" Tobitt said. "Hav e you 
no respect for your people?" 
"It was a dangerous mistake to give you the opportunity," one of the 
others said.
I looked across at him. "The committee can take it away, if it wi shes.
But meantime, why is everyone so upset? If even one-tenth of t he people 
looked at the dolls as we do, our work would be a lot easier. The do lls are 
nothing." 
"Nothing," Jack said. "That nothing that might explode in ou r face." 
I sighed. "Your faces are safe, Brother," I said. "Can't you see t hat 
they don't think in such abstract terms? If they did, perhaps the new 
program wouldn't have flopped. The Brotherhood isn't the Negro pe ople; no 
organization is. All you see in Clifton's death is that it migh t harm the 
prestige of the Brotherhood. You see him only as a traitor. But Harle m 
doesn't react that way." 
"Now he's lecturing us on the conditioned reflexes of the Negro 
people," Tobitt said.
I looked at him. I was very tired. "And what is the source of your 
great contributions to the movement, Brother? A career in burlesqu e? And of
your profound knowledge of Negroes? Are you from an old plantatio n-owning 
family? Does your black mammy shuffle nightly through your dre ams?" 
He opened his mouth and closed it like a fish. "I'll have you kn ow 
that I'm married to a fine, intelligent Negro girl," he said.
So that's what makes you so cocky, I thought, seeing now how th e 
light struck him at an angle and made a wedge-shaped shadow ben eath his 
nose. So that's it . . . and how did I guess there was a woman in it?
"Brother, I apologize," I said. "I misjudged you. You have our 
number. In fact, you must be practically a Negro yourself. Was it b y 
immersion or injection?" 
"Now see here," he said, pushing back his chair.
Come on, I thought, just make a move. Just another little move .
"Brothers," Jack said, his eyes on me. "Let's stick to the discu ssion.
I'm intrigued. You were saying?" 
I watched Tobitt. He glared. I grinned.
"I was saying that up here we know that the policemen didn't care
about Clifton's ideas. He was shot because he was black and be cause he 
resisted. Mainly because he was black." 
Brother Jack frowned. "You're riding 'race' again. But how do they
feel about the dolls?" 
"I'm riding the race I'm forced to ride," I said. "And as for the dol ls,
they know that as far as the cops were concerned Clifton could ha ve been 
selling song sheets. Bibles, matzos. If he'd been white, he' d be alive. Or if
he'd accepted being pushed around . . ." 
"Black and white, white and black," Tobitt said. "Must we lis ten to 
this racist nonsense?" 
"You don't, Brother Negro," I said. "You get your own informatio n 
straight from the source. Is it a mulatto source, Brother? Don't ans wer -- the 
only thing wrong is that your source is too narrow. You don't really think 
that crowd turned out today because Clifton was a member of the 
Brotherhood?" 
"And why did they turn out?" Jack said, getting set as if to poun ce 
forward.
"Because we gave them the opportunity to express their feeling s, to 
affirm themselves." 
Brother Jack rubbed his eye. "Do you know that you have become 
quite a theoretician?" he said. "You astound me." 
"I doubt that, Brother, but there's nothing like isolating a man to 
make him think," I said.
"Yes, that's true; some of our best ideas have been thought in p rison.
Only you haven't been in prison, Brother, and you were not hired to t hink.
Had you forgotten that? If so, listen to me: You were not hired to t hink." He 
was speaking very deliberately and I thought, So . . . So here it i s, naked 
and old and rotten. So now it's out in the open . . .
"So now I know where I am," I said, "and with whom --" 
"Don't twist my meaning. For all of us, the committee does the
thinking. For all of us. And you were hired to talk." 
"That's right, I was hired. Things have been so brotherly I had 
forgotten my place. But what if I wish to express an idea?" 
"We furnish all ideas. We have some acute ones. Ideas are part of
our apparatus. Only the correct ideas for the correct occasion." 
"And suppose you misjudge the occasion?" 
"Should that ever happen, you keep quiet." 
"Even though I am correct?" 
"You say nothing unless it is passed by the committee. Otherw ise I 
suggest you keep saying the last thing you were told." 
"And when my people demand that I speak?" 
"The committee will have an answer!" 
I looked at him. The room was hot, quiet, smoky. The others looke d 
at me strangely. I heard the nervous sound of someone mashing ou t a 
cigarette in a glass ash tray. I pushed back my chair, breathing de eply,
controlled. I was on a dangerous road and I thought of Clifton and tried to 
get off of it. I said nothing.
Suddenly Jack smiled and slipped back into his fatherly role.
"Let us handle the theory and the business of strategy," he sai d. "We 
are experienced. We're graduates and while you are a smart beginner you 
skipped several grades. But they were important grades, especial ly for gaining 
strategical knowledge. For such it is necessary to see the ove rall picture. More 
is involved than meets the eye. With the long view and the short view and 
the overall view mastered, perhaps you won't slander the politi cal
consciousness of the people of Harlem." 
Can't he see I'm trying to tell them what's real, I thought. Doe s my 
membership stop me from feeling Harlem? 
"All right," I said. "Have it your way, Brother; only the politic al
consciousness of Harlem is exactly a thing I know something ab out. That's 
one class they wouldn't let me skip. I'm describing a part of real ity which I 
know." 
"And that is the most questionable statement of all," Tobitt said.
"I know," I said, running my thumb along the edge of the table,
"your private source tells you differently. History's made at n ight, eh,
Brother?" 
"I've warned you," Tobitt said.
"Brother to brother, Brother," I said, "try getting around more. You
might learn that today was the first time that they've listened to our appeals 
in weeks. And I'll tell you something else: If we don't follow through on what 
was done today, this might be the last . . ." 
"So, he's finally gotten around to predicting the future," Broth er Jack 
said.
"It's possible . . . though I hope not." 
"He's in touch with God," Tobitt said. "The black God." 
I looked at him and grinned. He had gray eyes and his irises were 
very wide, the muscles ridged out on his jaws. I had his guard dow n and he 
was swinging wild.
"Not with God, nor with your wife, Brother," I told him. "I've ne ver 
met either. But I've worked among the people up here. Ask your wif e to take 
you around to the gin mills and the barber shops and the juke joi nts and the 
churches, Brother. Yes, and the beauty parlors on Saturdays when th ey're 
frying hair. A whole unrecorded history is spoken then, Brother. Y ou wouldn't 
believe it but it's true. Tell her to take you to stand in the area way of a 
cheap tenement at night and listen to what is said. Put her out on the 
corner, let her tell you what's being put down. You'll learn that a lot of
people are angry because we failed to lead them in action. I'll stand on that 
as I stand on what I see and feel and on what I've heard, and what I know." 
"No," Brother Jack said, getting to his feet, "you'll stand on the 
decision of the committee. We've had enough of this. The comm ittee makes 
your decisions and it is not its practice to give undue importan ce to the 
mistaken notions of the people. What's happened to your disc ipline?" 
"I'm not arguing against discipline. I'm trying to be useful. I'm trying 
to point out a part of reality which the committee seems to have m issed.
With just one demonstration we could --" 
"The committee has decided against such demonstrations," Bro ther 
Jack said. "Such methods are no longer effective." 
Something seemed to move out from under me, and out of the 
corner of my eye I was suddenly aware of objects on the dark side of the 
hall. "But didn't anyone see what happened today?" I said. "W hat was that, a 
dream? What was ineffective about that crowd?" 
"Such crowds are only our raw materials, one of the raw materials to 
be shaped to our program." 
I looked around the table and shook my head. "No wonder they 
insult me and accuse us of betraying them . . ." 
There was a sudden movement.
"Repeat that," Brother Jack shouted, stepping forward.
"It's true, I'll repeat it. Until this afternoon they've been sa ying that 
the Brotherhood betrayed them. I'm telling you what's been said to me, and 
that it why Brother Clifton disappeared." 
"That's an indefensible lie," Brother Jack said.
And I looked at him slowly now, thinking, If this is it, this is it . . .
"Don't call me that," I said softly. "Don't ever call me that, none of you. I've 
told you what I've heard." My hand was in my pocket now, Brother T arp's 
leg chain around my knuckles. I looked at each of them individu ally, trying to 
hold myself back and yet feeling it getting away from me. My hea d was 
whirling as though I were riding a supersonic merry-go-round. Jack looked at 
me, a new interest behind his eyes, leaned forward.
"So you've heard it," he said. "Very well, so now hear this: We d o 
not shape our policies to the mistaken and infantile notions of the man in 
the street. Our job is not to ask them what they think but to tell them!" 
"You've said that," I said, "and that's one thing you can tell them 
yourself. Who are you, anyway, the great white father?" 
"Not their father, their leader. And .your leader. And don't forg et it." 
"My leader sure, but what's your exact relationship to them?" 
His red head bristled. "The leader. As leader of the Brotherhood, I
am their leader." 
"But are you sure you aren't their great white father?" I said,
watching him closely, aware of the hot silence and feeling ten sion race from 
my toes to my legs as I drew my feet quickly beneath me. "Wouldn' t it be 
better if they called you Marse Jack?" 
"Now see here," he began, leaping to his feet to lean across the 
table, and I spun my chair half around on its hind legs as he came between 
me and the light, gripping the edge of the table, spluttering an d lapsing into 
a foreign language, choking and coughing and shaking his head as I balanced 
on my toes now, set to propel myself forward; seeing him above me and the 
others behind him as suddenly something seemed to erupt out of h is face.
You're seeing things, I thought, hearing it strike sharply again st the table and 
roll as his arm shot out and snatched an object the size of a large m arble 
and dropped it, plop! into his glass, and I could see the water s hooting up in 
a ragged, light-breaking pattern to spring in swift droplets acros s the oiled 
table top. The room seemed to flatten. I shot to a high plateau a bove them 
and down, feeling the jolt on the end of my spine as the chair le gs struck 
the floor. The merry-go-round had speeded up, I heard his voice bu t no 
longer listened. I stared at the glass, seeing how the light sh one through,
throwing a transparent, precisely fluted shadow against the dark grain of the 
table, and there on the bottom of the glass lay an eye. A glass ey e. A 
buttermilk white eye distorted by the light rays. An eye staring f ixedly at me 
as from the dark waters of a well. Then I was looking at him standin g above 
me, outlined by the light against the darkened half of the hall .
". . . You must accept discipline. Either you accept decision s or you 
get out . . ." 
I stared into his face, feeling a sense of outrage. His left eye h ad 
collapsed, a line of raw redness showing where the lid refused to c lose, and 
his gaze had lost its command. I looked from his face to the glas s, thinking,
he's disemboweled himself just in order to confound me . . . And the others 
had known it all along. They aren't even surprised. I stared at the eye, aware 
of Jack pacing up and down, shouting.
"Brother, are you following me?" He stopped, squinting at me wit h 
Cyclopean irritation. "What is the matter?" 
I stared up at him, unable to answer.
Then he understood and approached the table, smiling maliciou sly.
"So that's it. So it makes you uncomfortable, does it? You're a s entimentalist," 
he said, sweeping up the glass and causing the eye to turn over i n the water 
so that now it seemed to peer down at me from the ringed bottom of t he 
glass. He smiled, holding the tumbler level with his empty so cket, swirling the 
glass. "You didn't know about this?" 
"No, and I didn't want to know." 
Someone laughed.
"See, that demonstrates how long you've been with us." He lowe red 
the glass. "I lost my eye in the line of duty. What do you think o f that?" he 
said with a pride that made me all the angrier.
"I don't give a damn how you lost it as long as you keep it hidden ." 
"That is because you don't appreciate the meaning of sacrifice . I was 
ordered to carry through an objective and I carried it through. Unders tand? 
Even though I had to lose my eye to do it . . ." 
He was gloating now, holding up the eye in the glass as though i t 
were a medal of merit.
"Not much like that traitor Clifton, is it?" Tobitt said.
The others were amused.
"All right," I said. "All right! It was a heroic act. It saved the w orld,
now hide the bleeding wound!" 
"Don't overevaluate it," Jack said, quieter now. "The heroes a re those 
who die. This was nothing -- after it happened. A minor lesson in discipline.
And do you know what discipline is, Brother Personal Responsib ility? It's 
sacrifice, sacrifice, SACRIFICE!" 
He slammed the glass upon the table, splashing the water on th e 
back of my hand. I shook like a leaf. So that is the meaning of di scipline, I 
thought, sacrifice . . . yes, and blindness; he doesn't see me. He doesn't even 
see me. Am I about to strangle him? I do not know. He cannot possi bly. I 
still do not know. See! Discipline is sacrifice. Yes, and blin dness. Yes. And me 
sitting here while he tries to intimidate me. That's it, with hi s goddam blind 
glass eye . . . Should you show him you get it? Shouldn't you? Sh ouldn't he 
know it? Hurry! Shouldn't you? Look at it there, a good job, an al most 
perfect imitation that seemed alive . . . Should you, shouldn' t you? Maybe he 
got it where he learned that language he lapsed into. Shouldn't you? Make 
him speak the unknown tongue, the language of the future. What 's mattering 
with you? Discipline. Is learning, didn't he say? Is it? I stan d? You're sitting 
here, ain't I? You're holding on, ain't I? He said you'd learn so y ou're 
learning, so he saw it all the time. He's a riddler, shouldn't we s how him? So 
sit still is the way, and learn, never mind the eye, it's dead . . . All right 
now, look at him, see him turning now, left, right, coming short- legged 
toward you. See him, hep, hep! the one-eyed beacon. All right, a ll right . . .
Hep, hep! The short-legged deacon. All right! Nail him! The sho rt-changing 
dialectical deacon . . . All right. There, so now you're learning . . . Get it 
under control . . . Patience . . . Yes . . .
I looked at him again as for the first time, seeing a little bant am 
rooster of a man with a high-domed forehead and a raw eye-socket t hat 
wouldn't quite accept its lid. I looked at him carefully now wi th some of the 
red spots fading and with the feeling that I was just awakening from a 
dream. I had boomeranged around.
"I realize how you feel," he said, becoming an actor who'd just
finished a part in a play and was speaking again in his natural vo ice. "I 
remember the first time I saw myself this way and it wasn't pleas ant. And 
don't think I wouldn't rather have my old one back." He felt in t he water for 
his eye now, and I could see its smooth half-spherical, half-a morphous form 
slip between his two fingers and spurt around the glass as though looking for 
a way to break out. Then he had it, shaking off the water and breat hing 
upon it as he walked across to the dark side of the room.
"But who knows, Brothers," he said, with his back turned, "perhap s if
we do our work successfully the new society will provide me with a living 
eye. Such a thing is not at all fantastic, although I've been w ithout mine for 
quite a while . . . What time is it, by the way?" 
But what kind of society will make him see me, I thought, hearin g 
Tobitt answer, "Six-fifteen." 
"Then we'd better leave immediately, we've got a long way to t ravel," 
he said, coming across the floor. He had his eye in place now and h e was 
smiling. "How's that?" he asked me.
I nodded, I was very tired. I simply nodded.
"Good," he said. "I sincerely hope it never happens to you. Sin cerely." 
"If it should, maybe you'll recommend me to your oculist," I sa id,
"then I may not-see myself as others see-me-not." 
He looked at me oddly then laughed. "See, Brothers, he's joking . He 
feels brotherly again. But just the same, I hope you'll never ne ed one of
these. Meanwhile go and see Hambro. He'll outline the program an d give you 
the instructions. As for today, just let things float. It is a d evelopment that is 
important only if we make it so. Otherwise it will be forgotten, " he said,
getting into his jacket. "And you'll see that it's best. The B rotherhood must 
act as a co-ordinated unit." 
I looked at him. I was becoming aware of smells again and I neede d 
a bath. The others were standing now and moving toward the door. I s tood 
up, feeling the shirt sticking to my back.
"One last thing," Jack said, placing his hand on my shoulder a nd 
speaking quietly. "Watch that temper, that's discipline, to o. Learn to demolish 
your brotherly opponents with ideas, with polemic skill. The o ther is for our 
enemies. Save it for them. And go get some rest." 
I was beginning to tremble. His face seemed to advance and reced e,
recede and advance. He shook his head and smiled grimly.
"I know how you feel," he said. "And it's too bad all that effort was 
for nothing. But that in itself is a kind of discipline. I spea k to you of what I 
have learned and I'm a great deal older than you. Good night." 
I looked at his eye. So he knows how I feel. Which eye is really th e 
blind one? "Good night," I said.
"Good night, Brother," they all except Tobitt said.
It'll be night, but it won't be good, I thought, calling a fina l "Good 
night." 
They left and I took my jacket and went and sat at my desk. I heard
them passing down the stairs and the closing of the door below. I felt as 
though I'd been watching a bad comedy. Only it was real and I was living it 
and it was the only historically meaningful life that I could l ive. If I left it,
I'd be nowhere. As dead and as meaningless as Clifton. I felt fo r the doll in 
the shadow and dropped it on the desk. He was dead all right, and n othing 
would come of his death now. He was useless even for a scavenge r action.
He had waited too long, the directives had changed on him. He'd barely 
gotten by with a funeral. And that was all. It was only a matter o f a few 
days, but he had missed and there was nothing I could do. But at l east he 
was dead and out of it.
I sat there a while, growing wilder and fighting against it. I co uldn't 
leave and I had to keep contact in order to fight. But I would nev er be the 
same. Never. After tonight I wouldn't ever look the same, or fe el the same.
Just what I'd be, I didn't know; I couldn't go back to what I was -- which 
wasn't much -- but I'd lost too much to be what I was. Some of me, too,
had died with Tod Clifton. So I would see Hambro, for whatever i t was 
worth. I got up and went out into the hall. The glass was still on the table 
and I swept it across the room, hearing it rumble and roll in the dark. Then 
I went downstairs.
Chapter 23 
The bar downstairs was hot and crowded and there was a heated 
argument in progress over Clifton's shooting. I stood near the d oor and 
ordered a bourbon. Then someone noticed me, and they tried to draw me in.
"Please, not tonight," I said. "He was one of my best friends."
"Oh, sure," they said, and I had another bourbon and left.
When I reached 125th Street, I was approached by a group of
civil-liberties workers circulating a petition demanding the d ismissal of the 
guilty policeman, and a block further on even the familiar wom an street 
preacher was shouting a sermon about the slaughter of the innoc ents. A much 
broader group was stirred up over the shooting than I had imagined . Good, I 
thought, perhaps it won't die down after all. Maybe I'd better see Hambro 
tonight.
Little groups were all along the street, and I moved with increasi ng 
speed until suddenly I had reached Seventh Avenue, and there be neath a 
street lamp with the largest crowd around him was Ras the Exhorter - - the 
last man in the world I wanted to see. And I had just turned back wh en I 
saw him lean down between his flags, shouting, "Look, look, B lack ladies and 
gentlemahn! There goes the representative of the Brotherhood. Do es Ras see 
correctly? Is that gentlemahn trying to pass us unnoticed? Ask him about it.
What are you people waiting for, sir? What are you doing about our b lack 
youth shot down beca'se of your deceitful organization?" 
They turned, looking at me, closing in. Some came up behind me 
and tried to push me further into the crowd. The Exhorter leaned do wn,
pointing at me, beneath the green traffic light.
"Ask him what they are doing about it, ladies and gentlemahn. A re 
they afraid -- or are the white folks and their black stooges sti cking together 
to betray us?" 
"Get your hands off me," I shouted as someone reached around and
seized my arm.
I heard a voice cursing me softly.
"Give the brother a chance to answer!" someone said.
Their faces pressed in upon me. I wanted to laugh, for suddenly I 
realized that I didn't know whether I had been part of a sellout o r not. But 
they were in no mood for laughter.
"Ladies and gentlemen, brothers and sisters," I said, "I disdai n to 
answer such an attack. Since you all know me and my work, I don't think it's 
necessary. But it seems highly dishonorable to use the unfortu nate death of
one of our most promising young men as an excuse for attacking a n 
organization that has worked to bring an end to such outrages. Who was the 
first organization to act against this killing? The Brotherhood ! Who was the 
first to arouse the people? The Brotherhood! Who will always be th e first to 
advance the cause of the people? Again the Brotherhood!
"We acted and we shall always act, I assure you. But in our own 
disciplined way. And we'll act positively. We refuse to waste our energies and 
yours in premature and ill-considered actions. We are Americans, a ll of us,
whether black or white, regardless of what the man on the ladder there tells 
you, Americans. And we leave it to the gentleman up there to abus e the 
name of the dead. The Brotherhood grieves and feels deeply the lo ss of its 
brother. And we are determined that his death shall be the beginni ng of
profound and lasting changes. It's easy enough to wait around f or the minute 
a man is safely buried and then stand on a ladder and smear the me mory of
everything he believed in. But to create something lasting of his death takes 
time and careful planning --" 
"Gentlemahn," Ras shouted, "stick to the issue. You are not an swering 
my question. What are you doing about the shooting?" 
I moved toward the edge of the crowd. If this went any further, it 
could be disastrous.
"Stop abusing the dead for your own selfish ends," I said. "Le t him 
rest in peace. Quit mangling his corpse!" 
I pushed away as he raged, hearing shouts of, "Tell him about it! " 
"Grave robber!" 
The Exhorter waved his arms and pointed, shouting, "That mahn i s a 
paid stooge of the white enslaver! Wheere has he been for the las t few 
months when our black babies and women have been suffering --"
"Let the dead rest in peace," I shouted, hearing someone call "A w 
man, go back to Africa. Everybody knows the brother." 
Good, I thought, good. Then there was a scuffle behind me and I 
whirled to see two men stop short. They were Ras's men.
"Listen, mister," I said up to him, "if you know what's good for you,
you'll call off your goons. Two of them seem to want to follow m e." 
"And that is a dahm lie!" he shouted.
"There are witnesses if anything should happen to me. A man who' ll
dig up the dead hardly before he's buried will try anything, but I warn you 
--" 
There were angry shouts from some of the crowd and I saw the men 
continue past me with hate in their eyes, leaving the crowd to d isappear 
around the corner. Ras was attacking the Brotherhood now and others were 
answering him from the audience, and I went on, moving back towa rd Lenox,
moving past a movie house when they grabbed me and started punch ing. But 
this time they'd picked the wrong spot, and the movie doorman in tervened 
and they ran back toward Ras's street meeting. I thanked the doorm an and 
went on. I had been lucky; they hadn't hurt me, but Ras was becom ing bold 
again. On a less crowded street they might have done some damage .
Reaching the Avenue I stepped to the curb and signaled a cab, s eeing 
it sail by. An ambulance went past, then another cab with its f lag down. I 
looked back. I felt that they were watching me from somewhere up t he street 
but I couldn't see them. Why didn't a taxi come! Then three men i n natty 
cream-colored summer suits came to stand near me at the curb, an d 
something about them struck me like a hammer. They were all wearin g dark 
glasses. I had seen it thousands of times, but suddenly what I had considered 
an empty imitation of a Hollywood fad was flooded with persona l significance.
Why not, I thought, why not, and shot across the street and into t he 
air-conditioned chill of a drugstore.
I saw them on a case strewn with sun visors, hair nets, rubber 
gloves, a card of false eyelashes, and seized the darkest lense s I could find.
They were of a green glass so dark that it appeared black, and I put t hem on 
immediately, plunging into blackness and moving outside.
I could barely see; it was almost dark now, and the streets swarmed
in a green vagueness. I moved slowly across to stand near the sub way and 
wait for my eyes to adjust. A strange wave of excitement boiled within me as 
I peered out at the sinister light. And now through the hot gusts from the 
underground people were emerging and I could feel the trains vibrat ing the 
walk. A cab rolled up to discharge a passenger and I was about to t ake it 
when the woman came up the stairs and stopped before me, smiling . Now 
what, I thought, seeing her standing there, smiling in her tig ht-fitting summer 
dress; a large young woman who reeked with Christmas Night perfume who 
now came close.
"Rinehart, baby, is that you?" she said.
Rinehart, I thought. So it works. She had her hand on my arm and 
faster than I thought I heard myself answer, "Is that you, baby? " and waited 
with tense breath.
"Well, for once you're on time," she said. "But what you doing 
bareheaded, where's your new hat I bought you?" 
I wanted to laugh. The scent of Christmas Night was enfolding m e 
now and I saw her face draw closer, her eyes widening.
"Say, you ain't Rinehart, man. What you trying to do? You don't even 
talk like Rine. What's your story?" 
I laughed, backing away. "I guess we were both mistaken," I sai d.
She stepped backward clutching her bag, watching me, confuse d.
"I really meant no harm," I said. "I'm sorry. Who was it you mistoo k 
me for?" 
"Rinehart, and you'd better not let him catch you pretending to be 
him." 
"No," I said. "But you seemed so pleased to see him that I could n't 
resist it. He's really a lucky man." 
"And I could have sworn you was -- Man, you git away from here 
before you get me in trouble," she said, moving aside, and I left .
It was very strange. But that about the hat was a good idea, I 
thought, hurrying along now and looking out for Ras's men. I wa s wasting 
time. At the first hat shop I went in and bought the widest hat in stock and 
put it on. With this, I thought, I should be seen even in a snows torm -- only 
they'd think I was someone else.
Then I was back in the street and moving toward the subway. My 
eyes adjusted quickly; the world took on a dark-green intensity , the lights of
cars glowed like stars, faces were a mysterious blur; the garish sig ns of movie 
houses muted down to a soft sinister glowing. I headed back fo r Ras's 
meeting with a bold swagger. This was the real test, if it worked I would go 
on to Hambro's without further trouble. In the angry period to com e I would 
be able to move about.
A couple of men approached, eating up the walk with long jaunty
strides that caused their heavy silk sport shirts to flounce rhyt hmically upon 
their bodies. They too wore dark glasses, their hats were set hig h upon their 
heads, the brims turned down. A couple of hipsters, I thought, ju st as they 
spoke.
"What you sayin', daddy-o," they said.
"Rinehart, poppa, tell us what you putting down," they said.
Oh, hell, they're probably his friends, I thought, waving and mo ving 
on.
"We know what you're doing, Rinehart," one of them called. "Pla y it 
cool, ole man, play it cool!" 
I waved again as though in on the joke. They laughed behind me. I 
was nearing the end of the block now, wet with sweat. Who was thi s 
Rinehart and what was he putting down? I'd have to learn more abou t him 
to avoid further misidentifications . . .
A car passed with its radio blaring. Ahead I could hear the Exhort er 
barking harshly to the crowd. Then I was moving close, and coming to a stop 
conspicuously in the space left for pedestrians to pass throug h the crowd. To 
the rear they were lined up two deep before the store windows. Befo re me 
the listeners merged in a green-tinted gloom. The Exhorter gestu red violently,
blasting the Brotherhood.
"The time for ahction is here. We mahst chase them out of Harlem, " 
he cried. And for a second I thought he had caught me in the sweep of his 
eyes, and tensed.
"Ras said chase them! It is time Ras the Exhorter become Ras the
DESTROYER!" 
Shouts of agreement arose and I looked behind me, seeing the men
who had followed me and thinking, What did he mean, destroyer? 
"I repeat, black ladies and gentlemahn, the time has come for 
ahction! I, Ras the Destroyer, repeat, the time has come!" 
I trembled with excitement; they hadn't recognized me. It works , I 
thought. They see the hat, not me. There is a magic in it. It hide s me right 
in front of their eyes . . . But suddenly I wasn't sure. With Ras ca lling for 
the destruction of everything white in Harlem, who could notic e me? I needed 
a better test. If I was to carry out my plan . . . What plan? Hell, I don't 
know, come on . . .
I weaved out of the crowd and left, heading for Hambro's.
A group of zoot-suiters greeted me in passing. "Hey now, daddy-o ," 
they called. "Hey now!" 
"Hey now!" I said.
It was as though by dressing and walking in a certain way I had 
enlisted in a fraternity in which I was recognized at a glance -- n ot by 
features, but by clothes, by uniform, by gait. But this gave rise to another 
uncertainty. I was not a zoot-suiter, but a kind of politician. Or was I? What 
would happen in a real test? What about the fellows who'd been s o insulting 
at the Jolly Dollar? I was halfway across Eighth Avenue at the th ought and 
retraced my steps, running for an uptown bus.
There were many of the regular customers draped around the bar.
The room was crowded and Barrelhouse was on duty. I could feel the f rame 
of the glasses cutting into the ridge of my nose as I tilted my ha t and 
squeezed up to the bar. Barrelhouse looked at me roughly, his lips pushed 
out.
"What brand you drinking tonight, Poppa-stopper?" he said.
"Make it Ballantine's," I said in my natural voice.
I watched his eyes as he set the beer before me and slapped the ba r 
with his enormous hand for his money. Then, my heart beating fas ter, I 
made my old gesture of payment, spinning the coin upon the bar a nd waited.
The coin disappeared into his fist.
"Thanks, pops," he said, moving on and leaving me puzzled. Fo r 
there had been recognition of a kind in his voice but not for me. H e never 
called me "pops" or "poppa-stopper." It's working, I thought, perhaps it's 
working very well.
Certainly something was working on me, and profoundly. Still I w as 
relieved. It was hot. Perhaps that was it. I drank the cold beer, lo oking back 
to the rear of the room to the booths. A crowd of men and women moile d 
like nightmare figures in the smoke-green haze. The juke box was dinning 
and it was like looking into the depths of a murky cave. And now s omeone 
moved aside and looking down along the curve of the bar past th e bobbing 
heads and shoulders I saw the juke box, lit up like a bad dream of t he Fiery 
Furnace, shouting:
Jelly, Jelly 
Jelly,
All night long.
And yet, I thought, watching a numbers runner paying off a bet, t his 
is one place that the Brotherhood definitely penetrated. Let Ha mbro explain 
that, too, along with all the rest he'd have to explain.
I drained the glass and turned to leave, when there across at the 
lunch counter I saw Brother Maceo. I moved impulsively, forget ting my 
disguise until almost upon him, then checked myself and put m y disguise 
once more to a test. Reaching roughly across his shoulder I picke d up a 
greasy menu that rested between the sugar shaker and the hot-sa uce bottle 
and pretended to read it through my dark lenses.
"How're the ribs, pops?" I said.
"Fine, least these here I'm eatin' is." 
"Yeah? How much you know about ribs?" 
He raised his head slowly, looking across at the spitted chicke ns 
revolving before the low blue rotisserie flames. "I reckon I know a s much 
about 'em as you," he said, "and probably more, since I probably b een eatin'
'em a few years longer than you, and in a few more places. What mak es you 
think you kin come in here messing with me anyhow?" 
He turned, looking straight into my face now, challenging me. H e 
was very game and I wanted to laugh.
"Oh, take it easy," I growled. "A man can ask a question, can't h e?" 
"You got your answer," he said, turning completely around on the
stool. "So now I guess you ready to pull your knife." 
"Knife?" I said, wanting to laugh. "Who said anything about a knife?" 
"That's what you thinking about. Somebody say something you don't 
like and you kinda fellows pull your switch blades. So all righ t, go ahead and 
pull it. I'm as ready to die as I'm gon' ever be. Let's see you, go ahead!" 
He reached for the sugar shaker now, and I stood there feeling 
suddenly that the old man before me was not Brother Maceo at all, but 
someone else disguised to confuse me. The glasses were working too well.
He's a game old brother, I thought, but this'll never do.
I pointed toward his plate. "I asked you about the ribs," I said, "not 
your ribs. Who said anything about a knife?" 
"Never mind that, just go on and pull it," he said.
"Let's see you. Or is you waiting for me to turn my back. All right ,
here it is, here's my back," he said, turning swiftly on the stool and around 
again, his arm set to throw the shaker.
Customers were turning to look, were moving clear.
"What's the matter, Maceo?" someone said.
"Nothing I caint handle; this confidencing sonofabitch com e in here 
bluffing --" 
"You take it easy, old man," I said. "Don't let your mouth get y our 
head in trouble," thinking, Why am I talking like this? 
"You don't have to worry about that, sonofabitch, pull your sw itch 
blade!" 
"Give it to him, Maceo, coolcrack the motherfouler!" 
I marked the position of the voice by ear now, turning so that I 
could see Maceo, the agitator, and the customers blocking the d oor. Even the 
juke box had stopped and I could feel the danger mounting so sw iftly that I 
moved without thinking, bounding over quickly and sweeping up a beer 
bottle, my body trembling.
"All right," I said, "if that's the way you want it, all right! Th e next 
one who talks out of turn gets this!" 
Maceo moved and I feinted with the bottle, seeing him dodge, h is 
arm set to throw and held only because I was crowding him; a dark old man 
in overalls and a gray long-billed cloth cap, who looked dreamli ke through 
the green glasses.
"Throw it," I said. "Go on," overcome with the madness of the thi ng.
Here I'd set out to test a disguise on a friend and now I was ready to beat 
him to his knees -- not because I wanted to but because of place and 
circumstance. Okay, okay, it was absurd and yet real and dangerou s and if he 
moved, I'd let him have it as brutally as possible. To protect my self I'd have 
to, or the drunks would gang me. Maceo was set, looking at me col dly, and 
suddenly I heard a voice boom out, "Ain't going to be no fightin g in my 
joint!" It was Barrelhouse. "Put them things down y'all, they c ost money." 
"Hell, Barrelhouse, let 'em fight!" 
"They can fight in the streets, not in here -- Hey, y'all," he cal led 
"look over here . . ." 
I saw him now, leaning forward with a pistol in his huge fist, res ting 
it steady upon the bar.
"Now put 'em down y'all," he said mournfully. "I done ask you to
put my property down." 
Brother Maceo looked from me to Barrelhouse.
"Put it down, old man," I said, thinking, Why am I acting from pri de 
when this is not really me? 
"You put yourn down," he said.
"Both of y'all put 'em down; and you, Rinehart," Barrelhouse sai d,
gesturing at me with his pistol, "you get out of my joint and sta y out. We 
don't need your money in here." 
I started to protest, but he held up his palm.
"Now you all right with me, Rinehart, don't get me wrong. But I jus t 
can't stand trouble," Barrelhouse said.
Brother Maceo had replaced the shaker now and I put my bottle 
down and backed to the door.
"And Rine," Barrelhouse said, "don't go try to pull no pistol ne ither,
'cause this here one is loaded and I got a permit." 
I backed to the door, my scalp prickling, watching them both.
"Next time don't ask no questions you don't want answered," Ma ceo 
called. "An' if you ever want to finish this argument I be right h ere." 
I felt the outside air explode around me and I stood just beyond the 
door laughing with the sudden relief of the joke restored, looki ng back at the 
defiant old man in his long-billed cap and the confounded eye s of the crowd.
Rinehart, Rinehart, I thought, what kind of man is Rinehart? 
I was still chuckling when, in the next block, I waited for the traffic 
lights near a group of men who stood on the corner passing a bottl e of
cheap wine between them as they discussed Clifton's murder.
"What we need is some guns," one of them said. "An eye for an 
eye." 
"Hell yes, machine guns. Pass me the sneakypete, Muckleroy."
"Wasn't for that Sullivan Law this here New York wouldn't be 
nothing but a shooting gallery," another man said.
"Here's the sneakypete, and don't try to find no home in that bo ttle." 
"It's the only home I got, Muckleroy. You want to take that away
from me?" 
"Man, drink up and pass the damn bottle." 
I started around them, hearing one of them say, "What you saying,
Mr. Rinehart, how's your hammer hanging?" 
Even up here, I thought, beginning to hurry. "Heavy, man," I sai d,
knowing the answer to that one, "very heavy." They laughed.
"Well, it'll be lighter by morning." 
"Say, look ahere, Mr. Rinehart, how about giving me a job?" one of
them said, approaching me, and I waved and crossed the street, wa lking 
rapidly down Eighth toward the next bus stop.
The shops and groceries were dark now, and children were running 
and yelling along the walks, dodging in and out among the adul ts. I walked,
struck by the merging fluidity of forms seen through the lenses. C ould this be 
the way the world appeared to Rinehart? All the dark-glass boys? " For now 
we see as through a glass darkly but then -- but then --" I couldn' t 
remember the rest.
She was carrying a shopping bag and moved gingerly on her feet.
Until she touched my arm I thought that she was talking to hersel f.
"I say, pardon me, son, look like you trying to pass on by me 
tonight. What's the final figger?" 
"Figure? What figure?" 
"Now you know what I mean," she said, her voice rising as she put
her hands on her hips and looked forward. "I mean today's last n umber. Ain't 
you Rine the runner?" 
"Rine the runner?" 
"Yas, Rinehart the number man. Who you trying to fool?" 
"But that's not my name, madame," I said, speaking as precisel y as I 
could and stepping away from her. "You've made a mistake." 
Her mouth fell wide. "You ain't? Well, why you look so much lik e 
him?" she said with hot doubt in her voice. "Now, ain't this he re something.
Let me get on home; if my dream come out, I'm-a have to go look tha t 
rascal up. And here I needs that money too." 
"I hope you won," I said, straining to see her clearly, "and I hop e he 
pays off." 
"Thanks, son, but he'll pay off all right. I can see you ain't Ri nehart 
now though. I'm sorry for stopping you." 
"It's all right," I said.
"If I'd looked at your shoes I woulda known --" 
"Why?" 
" 'Cause Rine the runner is known for them knobtoed kind." 
I watched her limp away, rocking like the Old Ship of Zion. No 
wonder everyone knows him, I thought, in that racket you have t o get 
around. I was aware of my black-and-white shoes for the first tim e since the 
day of Clifton's shooting.
When the squad car veered close to the curb and rolled along slow ly 
beside me I knew what was coming before the cop opened his mouth .
"That you, Rinehart, my man?" the cop who was not driving said. H e 
was white. I could see the shield gleaming on his cap but the nu mber was 
vague.
"Not this time, officer," I said.
"The hell you say; what're you trying to pull? Is this a holdout ?" 
"You're making a mistake," I said. "I'm not Rinehart." 
The car stopped, a flashlight beamed in my green-lensed eyes. He 
spat into the street. "Well, you better be by morning," he said, "and you 
better have our cut in the regular place. Who the hell you think you are?" he 
called as the car speeded up and away.
And before I could turn a crowd of men ran up from the corner 
pool hall. One of them carried an automatic in his hand.
"What were those sonsabitches trying to do to you, daddy?" he s aid.
"It was nothing, they thought I was someone else." 
"Who'd they take you for?" 
I looked at them -- were they criminals or simply men who were 
worked up over the shooting? 
"Some guy named Rinehart," I said.
"Rinehart -- Hey, y'all hear that?" snorted the fellow with the gun.
"Rinehart! Them paddies must be going stone blind. Anybody ca n see you 
ain't Rinehart." 
"But he do look like Rine," another man said, staring at me with his 
hands in his trousers pockets.
"Like hell he does." 
"Hell, man, Rinehart would be driving that Cadillac this time o f
night. What the hell you talking about?" 
"Listen, Jack," the fellow with the gun said, "don't let nobo dy make 
you act like Rinehart. You got to have a smooth tongue, a heartle ss heart and 
be ready to do anything. But if them paddies bother you agin, ju st let us 
know. We aim to stop some of this head-whupping they been doin g." 
"Sure," I said.
"Rinehart," he said again. "Ain't that a bitch?" 
They turned and went arguing back to the pool hall and I hurried 
out of the neighborhood. Having forgotten Hambro for the moment I walked 
east instead of west. I wanted to remove the glasses but decide d against it.
Ras's men might still be on the prowl.
It was quieter now. No one paid me any special attention, alth ough 
the street was alive with pedestrians, all moiling along in the mysterious tint 
of green. Perhaps I'm out of his territory at last, I thought and be gan trying 
to place Rinehart in the scheme of things. He's been around all t he while,
but I have been looking in another direction. He was around and o thers like 
him, but I had looked past him until Clifton's death (or was it Ras?) had 
made me aware. What on earth was hiding behind the face of things ? If dark 
glasses and a white hat could blot out my identity so quickly, who actually 
was who? 
The perfume was exotic and seemed to roll up the walk behind me 
as I became aware of a woman strolling casually behind me.
"I've been waiting for you to recognize me, daddy," a voice sai d. "I've 
been waiting for you a long time." 
It was a pleasant voice with a slightly husky edge and plenty o f sleep 
in it.
"Don't you hear me, daddy?" she said. And I started to look aroun d,
hearing, "No, daddy, don't look back; my old man might be cold t railing me.
Just walk along beside me while I tell you where to meet me. I swe ar I 
thought you'd never come. Will you be able to see me tonight?"
She had moved close to me now and suddenly I felt a hand fumblin g 
at my jacket pocket.
"All right, daddy, you don't have to jump evil on me, here it is; n ow 
will you see me?" 
I stopped dead, grabbing her hand and looking at her, an exotic g irl
even through the green glasses, looking at me with a smile that s uddenly 
broke. "Rinehart, daddy, what's the matter?" 
So here it goes again, I thought, holding her tightly.
"I'm not Rinehart, Miss," I said. "And for the first time tonigh t I'm 
truly sorry." 
"But Bliss, daddy -- Rinehart! You're not trying to put your bab y 
down -- Daddy, what did I do?" 
She seized my arm and we were poised face to face in the middle of
the walk. And suddenly she screamed, "Oooooooh! You really aren 't! And me 
trying to give you his money. Get away from me, you dumb John. Ge t away 
from me!" 
I backed off. Her face was distorted as she stamped her high hee ls 
and screamed. Behind me I heard someone say, "Hey, what was that ?" 
followed by the sound of running feet as I shot off and around the corner 
away from her screams. That lovely girl, I thought, that lovely g irl.
Several blocks away I stopped, out of breath. And both pleased a nd 
angry. How stupid could people be? Was everyone suddenly nut s? I looked 
about me. It was a bright street, the walks full of people. I stoo d at the curb 
trying to breathe. Up the street a sign with a cross glowed above t he walk:
HOLY WAY STATION 
BEHOLD THE LIVING GOD 
The letters glowed dark green and I wondered if it were from the lense s or 
the actual color of the neon tubes. A couple of drunks stumbled past. I 
headed for Hambro's, passing a man sitting on the curb with his head bent 
over his knees. Cars passed. I went on. Two solemn-faced child ren came 
passing out handbills which first I refused, then went back and took. After 
all, I had to know what was going on in the community. I took the bill and 
stepped close to the street light, reading.
Behold the Invisible 
Thy will be done O Lord!
I See all, Know all. Tell all, Cure all.
You shall see the unknown wonders.
-- REV. B. P. RINEHART,
Spiritual Technologist.
The old is ever new 
Way Stations in New Orleans, the home of mystery,
Birmingham, New York, Chicago, Detroit and L. A.
No Problem too Hard for God.
Come to the Way Station.
BEHOLD THE INVISIBLE!
Attend our services, prayer meetings Thrice weekly 
Join us in the NEW REVELATION of the OLD TIME RELIGION!
BEHOLD THE SEEN UNSEEN 
BEHOLD THE INVISIBLE 
YE WHO ARE WEARY COME HOME!
I DO WHAT YOU WANT DONE! DON'T WAIT!
I dropped the leaflet into the gutter and moved on. I walked slo wly,
my breath still coming hard. Could it be? Soon I reached the sign. It hung 
above a store that had been converted into a church, and I stepped into the 
shallow lobby and wiped my face with a handkerchief. Behind me I heard the 
rise and fall of an old-fashioned prayer such as I hadn't heard si nce leaving 
the campus; and then only when visiting country preachers were a sked to 
pray. The voice rose and fell in a rhythmical, dreamlike recital-p art 
enumeration of earthly trials undergone by the congregation, part rapt display 
of vocal virtuosity, part appeal to God. I was still wiping my fa ce and 
squinting at crude Biblical scenes painted on the windows whe n two old 
ladies came up to me.
"Even', Rever'n Rinehart," one of them said. "How's our dear pa stor 
this warm evening?" 
Oh, no, I thought, but perhaps agreeing will cause less trouble t han 
denying, and I said, "Good evening, sisters," muffling my voi ce with my 
handkerchief and catching the odor of the girl's perfume from my h and.
"This here's Sister Harris, Rever'n. She come to join our little b and." 
"God bless you, Sister Harris," I said, taking her extended han d.
"You know, Rever'n, I once heard you preach years ago. You was just
a lil' ole twelve-year-old boy, back in Virginia. And here I come North and 
find you, praise God, still preaching the gospel, doing the Lord 's work. Still
preaching the ole time religion here in this wicked city --" 
"Er, Sister Harris," the other sister said, "we better get on in a nd 
find our seats. Besides, the pastor's kind of got things to do. Though you are 
here a little early, aren't you, Rever'n?" 
"Yes," I said, dabbing my mouth with my handkerchief. They were
motherly old women of the southern type and I suddenly felt a nam eless 
despair. I wanted to tell them that Rinehart was a fraud, but now t here came 
a shout from inside the church and I heard a burst of music.
"Just lissen to it, Sister Harris. That's the new kind of guitar music I 
told you Rever'n Rinehart got for us. Ain't it heavenly?" 
"Praise God," Sister Harris said. "Praise God!" 
"Excuse us, Rever'n, I have to see Sister Judkins about the mon ey 
she collected for the building fund. And, Rever'n, last night I sold ten 
recordings of your inspiring sermon. Even sold one to the white la dy I work 
for." 
"Bless you," I found myself saying in a voice heavy with despa ir,
"bless you, bless you." 
Then the door opened and I looked past their heads into a small
crowded room of men and women sitting in folding chairs, to the fro nt where 
a slender woman in a rusty black robe played passionate boogie- woogie on an 
upright piano along with a young man wearing a skull cap who struc k 
righteous riffs from an electric guitar which was connected to an amplifier 
that hung from the ceiling above a gleaming white and gold pulp it. A man in 
an elegant red cardinal's robe and a high lace collar stood restin g against an 
enormous Bible and now began to lead a hard-driving hymn which th e 
congregation shouted in the unknown tongue. And back and high on the wall
above him there arched the words in letters of gold:
LET THERE BE LIGHT!
The whole scene quivered vague and mysterious in the green light ,
then the door closed and the sound muted down.
It was too much for me. I removed my glasses and tucked the white
hat carefully beneath my arm and walked away. Can it be, I though t, can it 
actually be? And I knew that it was. I had heard of it before but I' d never 
come so close. Still, could he be all of them: Rine the runner an d Rine the 
gambler and Rine the briber and Rine the lover and Rinehart the R everend? 
Could he himself be both rind and heart? What is real anyway? But h ow 
could I doubt it? He was a broad man, a man of parts who got around.
Rinehart the rounder. It was true as I was true. His world was possibi lity 
and he knew it. He was years ahead of me and I was a fool. I must hav e 
been crazy and blind. The world in which we lived was without bou ndaries. A 
vast seething, hot world of fluidity, and Rine the rascal was at home. Perhaps 
only Rine the rascal was at home in it. It was unbelievable, but perhaps only 
the unbelievable could be believed. Perhaps the truth was alwa ys a lie.
Perhaps, I thought, the whole thing should roll off me like drops of
water rolling off Jack's glass eye. I should search out the prope r political
classification, label Rinehart and his situation and quickl y forget it. I hurried 
away from the church so swiftly that I found myself back at the of fice before 
I remembered that I was going to Hambro's.
I was both depressed and fascinated. I wanted to know Rinehart a nd 
yet, I thought, I'm upset because I know I don't have to know hi m, that 
simply becoming aware of his existence, being mistaken for hi m, is enough to 
convince me that Rinehart is real. It couldn't be, but it is. And it can be, is,
simply because it's unknown. Jack wouldn't dream of such a pos sibility, nor 
Tobitt, who thinks he's so close. Too little was known, too mu ch was in the 
dark. I thought of Clifton and of Jack himself; how much was real ly known 
about either of them? How much was known about me? Who from my ol d 
life had challenged me? And after all this time I had just disc overed Jack's 
missing eye.
My entire body started to itch, as though I had just been removed 
from a plaster cast and was unused to the new freedom of movement . In the 
South everyone knew you, but coming North was a jump into the un known.
How many days could you walk the streets of the big city without
encountering anyone who knew you, and how many nights? You cou ld 
actually make yourself anew. The notion was frightening, for n ow the world 
seemed to flow before my eyes. All boundaries down, freedom was n ot only 
the recognition of necessity, it was the recognition of possib ility. And sitting 
there trembling I caught a brief glimpse of the possibilities po sed by 
Rinehart's multiple personalities and turned away. It was too v ast and 
confusing to contemplate. Then I looked at the polished lens es of the glasses 
and laughed. I had been trying simply to turn them into a disgui se but they 
had become a political instrument instead; for if Rinehart cou ld use them in 
his work, no doubt I could use them in mine. It was too simple, an d yet 
they had already opened up a new section of reality for me. What w ould the 
committee say about that? What did their theory tell them of s uch a world? I 
recalled a report of a shoeshine boy who had encountered the best t reatment 
in the South simply by wearing a white turban instead of his usu al Dobbs or 
Stetson, and I fell into a fit of laughing. Jack would be outrag ed at the very 
suggestion of such a state of things. And yet there was truth in i t; this was 
the real chaos which he thought he was describing -- so long ago i t seemed 
now . . . Outside the Brotherhood we were outside history; but ins ide of it 
they didn't see us. It was a hell of a state of affairs, we were now here. I 
wanted to back away from it, but still I wanted to discuss it, to consult 
someone who'd tell me it was only a brief, emotional illusion. I wanted the 
props put back beneath the world. So now I had a real need to see Ham bro.
Getting up to go, I looked at the wall map and laughed at Columb us.
What an India he'd found! I was almost across the hall when I reme mbered 
and came back and put on the hat and glasses. I'd need them to ca rry me 
through the streets.
I took a cab. Hambro lived in the West Eighties, and once in the 
vestibule I tucked the hat under my arm and put the glasses in my pocket 
along with Brother Tarp's leg chain and Clifton's doll. My pock et was getting 
overloaded.
I was shown into a small, book-lined study by Hambro himself. F rom 
another part of the apartment came a child's voice singing Hump ty Dumpty,
awakening humiliating memories of my first Easter program during which I 
had stood before the church audience and forgotten the words . . .
"My kid," Hambro said, "filibustering against going to bed. A re al sea 
lawyer, that kid." 
The child was singing Hickory Dickory Dock, very fast, as Ham bro 
shut the door. He was saying something about the child and I loo ked at him 
with sudden irritation. With Rinehart on my mind, why had I come h ere? 
Hambro was so tall that when he crossed his legs both feet touche d 
the floor. He had been my teacher during my period of indoctrinati on and 
now I realized that I shouldn't have come. Hambro's lawyer's min d was too 
narrowly logical. He'd see Rinehart simply as a criminal, my obse ssion as a 
fall into pure mysticism . . . You'd better hope that is the way h e'll see it, I 
thought. Then I decided to ask him about conditions uptown an d leave . . .
"Look, Brother Hambro," I said, "what's to be done about my 
district?" 
He looked at me with a dry smile. "Have I become one of those 
bores who talk too much about their children?" 
"Oh, no, it's not that," I said. "I've had a hard day. I'm nervou s.
With Clifton's death and things in the district so bad, I guess . . ." 
"Of course," he said, still smiling, "but why are you worried abou t 
the district?" 
"Because things are getting out of hand. Ras's men tried to rough me 
up tonight and our strength is steadily going to hell." 
"That's regrettable," he said, "but there's nothing to be done a bout it 
that wouldn't upset the larger plan. It's unfortunate, Brother, but your 
members will have to be sacrificed." 
The distant child had stopped singing now, and it was dead qui et. I 
looked at the angular composure ot his face searching for the si ncerity in his 
words. I could feel some deep change. It was as though my discov ery of
Rinehart had opened a gulf between us over which, though we sat within 
touching distance, our voices barely carried and then fell flat , without an 
echo. I tried to shake it away, but still the distance, so great t hat neither 
could grasp the emotional tone of the other, remained.
"Sacrifice?" my voice said. "You say that very easily." 
"Just the same, though, all who leave must be considered expen dable.
The new directives must be followed rigidly." 
It sounded unreal, an antiphonal game. "But why?" I said. "Why
must the directives be changed in my district when the old metho ds are 
needed -- especially now?" Somehow I couldn't get the needed urgency into 
my words, and beneath it all something about Rinehart bothered m e, darted 
just beneath the surface of my mind; something that had to do wi th me 
intimately.
"It's simple, Brother," Hambro was saying. "We are making tempora ry 
alliances with other political groups and the interests of one group of brothers 
must be sacrificed to that ot the whole." 
"Why wasn't I told of this?" I said.
"You will be, in time, by the committee -- Sacrifice is necessa ry now 
--" 
"But shouldn't sacrifice be made willingly by those who know w hat 
they are doing? My people don't understand why they're being sac rificed.
They don't even know they're being sacrificed -- at least not by us . . ." But 
what, my mind went on, if they're as willing to be duped by the Bro therhood 
as by Rinehart? 
I sat up at the thought and there must have been an odd expression
on my face, for Hambro, who was resting his elbows upon the arms of his 
chair and touching his fingertips together, raised his eyebrows as though 
expecting me to continue. Then he said, "The disciplined mem bers will
understand." 
I pulled Tarp's leg chain from my pocket and slipped it over my 
knuckles. He didn't notice. "Don't you realize that we have on ly a handful of
disciplined members left? Today the funeral brought out hundred s who'll drop 
away as soon as they see we're not following through. And now we' re being 
attacked on the streets. Can't you understand? Other groups are c irculating 
petitions, Ras is calling for violence. The committee is mis taken if they think 
this is going to die down." 
He shrugged. "It's a risk which we must take. All of us must sacrif ice 
for the good of the whole. Change is achieved through sacrifice . We follow 
the laws of reality, so we make sacrifices." 
"But the community is demanding equality of sacrifice," I sai d.
"We've never asked for special treatment." 
"It isn't that simple, Brother," he said. "We have to protect our gains.
It's inevitable that some must make greater sacrifices than ot hers . . ." 
"That 'some' being my people . . ." 
"In this instance, yes." 
"So the weak must sacrifice for the strong? Is that it, Brother?" 
"No, a part of the whole is sacrificed -- and will continue to be u ntil
a new society is formed." 
"I don't get it," I said. "I just don't get it. We work our hearts o ut 
trying to get the people to follow us and just when they do, jus t when they 
see their relationship to events, we drop them. I don't see it."
Hambro smiled remotely. "We don't have to worry about the 
aggressiveness of the Negroes. Not during the new period or any ot her. In 
fact, we now have to slow them down for their own good. It's a sc ientific 
necessity." 
I looked at him, at the long, bony, almost Lincolnesque face. I might 
have liked him, I thought, he seems to be a really kind and since re man and 
yet he can say this to me . . .
"So you really believe that," I said quietly.
"With all my integrity," he said.
For a second I thought I'd laugh. Or let fly with Tarp's link.
Integrity! He talks to me of integrity! I described a circle in the air. I'd tried 
to build my integrity upon the role of Brotherhood and now it had ch anged 
to water, air. What was integrity? What did it have to do with a worl d in 
which Rinehart was possible and successful? 
"But what's changed?" I said. "Wasn't I brought in to arouse the ir 
aggressiveness?" My voice fell sad, hopeless.
"For that particular period," Hambro said, leaning a little for ward.
"Only for that period." 
"And what will happen now?" I said.
He blew a smoke ring, the blue-gray circle rising up boiling withi n 
its own jetting form, hovering for an instant then disintegrati ng into a 
weaving strand.
"Cheer up!" he said. "We shall progress. Only now they must be 
brought along more slowly . . ." 
How would he look through the green lenses? I thought, saying, " Are 
you sure you're not saying that they must be held back?" 
He chuckled. "Now, listen," he said. "Don't stretch me on a rack of
dialectic. I'm a brother." 
"You mean the brakes must be put on the old wheel of history," I 
said. "Or is it the little wheels within the wheel?" 
His face sobered. "I mean only that they must be brought along 
more slowly. They can't be allowed to upset the tempo of the mas ter plan.
Timing is all important. Besides, you still have a job to do, on ly now it will
be more educational." 
"And what about the shooting?" 
"Those who are dissatisfied will drop away and those who remain 
you'll teach . . ." 
"I don't think I can," I said.
"Why? It's just as important." 
"Because they are against us; besides, I'd feel like Rinehart . . ." It 
slipped out and he looked at me.
"Like who?" 
"Like a charlatan," I said.
Hambro laughed. "I thought you had learned about that, Brother."
I looted at him quickly. "Learned what?" 
"That it's impossible not to take advantage of the people." 
"That's Rinehartism -- cynicism . . ." 
"What?" 
"Cynicism," I said.
"Not cynicism -- realism. The trick is to take advantage of them in 
their own best interest." 
I sat forward in my chair, suddenly conscious of the unreality of the 
conversation. "But who is to judge? Jack? The committee?" 
"We judge through cultivating scientific objectivity," he s aid with a 
voice that had a smile in it, and suddenly I saw the hospital ma chine, felt as 
though locked in again.
"Don't kid yourself," I said. "The only scientific objectivi ty is a 
machine." 
"Discipline, not machinery," he said. "We're scientists. We must take 
the risks of our science and our will to achieve. Would you like to resurrect 
God to take responsibility?" He shook his head. "No, Brother, we have to 
make such decisions ourselves. Even if we must sometimes appe ar as 
charlatans." 
"You're in for some surprises," I said.
"Maybe so and maybe not," he said. "At any rate, through our very
position in the vanguard we must do and say the things necessar y to get the 
greatest number of the people to move toward what is for their ow n good." 
Suddenly I couldn't stand it.
"Look at me! Look at me!" I said. "Everywhere I've turned somebo dy 
has wanted to sacrifice me for my good -- only they were the ones w ho 
benefited. And now we start on the old sacrificial merry-go-roun d. At what 
point do we stop? Is this the new true definition, is Brotherhood a matter of
sacrificing the weak? If so, at what point do we stop?" 
Hambro looked as though I were not there. "At the proper moment 
science will stop us. And of course we as individuals must symp athetically 
debunk ourselves. Even though it does only a little good. But t hen," he 
shrugged, "if you go too far in that direction you can't pretend t o lead. You'll
lose your confidence. You won't believe enough in your own co rrectness to 
lead others. You must therefore have confidence in those who lea d you -- in 
the collective wisdom of Brotherhood." 
I left in a worse state than that in which I'd come. Several build ings 
away I heard him call behind me, watched him approach through the dark.
"You left your hat," he said, handing it to me along with the 
mimeographed sheets of instructions outlining the new program. I looked at 
the hat and at him, thinking of Rinehart and invisibility, but knew that for 
him it would have no reality. I told him good night and went throu gh the 
hot street to Central Park West, starting toward Harlem.
Sacrifice and leadership, I thought. For him it was simple. For them 
it was simple. But hell, I was both. Both sacrificer and victim . I couldn't get 
away from that, and Hambro didn't have to deal with it. That was re ality too,
my reality. He didn't have to put the knife blade to his own throa t. What 
would he say if he were the victim? 
I walked along the park in the dark. Cars passed. From time to time 
the sound of voices, squealing laughter, arose from beyond the t rees and 
hedges. I could smell the sun-singed grass. The sky against wh ich an airplane 
beacon played was still overcast. I thought of Jack, the peopl e at the funeral,
Rinehart. They'd asked us for bread and the best I could give was a glass eye 
-- not so much as an electric guitar.
I stopped and dropped to a bench. I should leave, I thought. Tha t 
would be the honest thing to do. Otherwise I could only tell th em to have 
hope and try to hold on to those who'd listen. Was that also wha t Rinehart 
was, a principle of hope for which they gladly paid? Otherwise there was 
nothing but betrayal, and that meant going back to serve Bleds oe, and 
Emerson, jumping from the pot of absurdity to the fire of the ridicu lous. And 
either was a self-betrayal. But I couldn't leave; I had to sett le with Jack and 
Tobitt. I owed it to Clifton and Tarp and the others. I had to hold on ... and 
then I had an idea that shook me profoundly: You don't have to wo rry about 
the people. If they tolerate Rinehart, then they will forget it a nd even with 
them you are invisible. It lasted only the fraction of a second a nd I rejected 
it immediately; still it had flashed across the dark sky of my mi nd. It was 
just like that. It didn't matter because they didn't realize j ust what had 
happened, neither my hope nor my failure. My ambition and inte grity were 
nothing to them and my failure was as meaningless as Clifton's . It had been 
that way all along. Only in the Brotherhood had there seemed a cha nce for 
such as us, the mere glimmer of a light, but behind the polished and humane 
fa?de of Jack's eye I'd found an amorphous form and a harsh red rawne ss.
And even that was without meaning except for me.
Well, I was and yet I was invisible, that was the fundamental
contradiction. I was and yet I was unseen. It was frightening an d as I sat 
there I sensed another frightening world of possibilities. For now I saw that I 
could agree with Jack without agreeing. And I could tell Harlem t o have hope 
when there was no hope. Perhaps I could tell them to hope until I f ound the 
basis of something real, some firm ground for action that would l ead them 
onto the plane of history. But until then I would have to move t hem without 
myself being moved . . . I'd have to do a Rinehart.
I leaned against a stone wall along the park, thinking of Jack a nd 
Hambro and of the day's events and shook with rage. It was all a sw indle, an 
obscene swindle! They had set themselves up to describe the wo rld. What did 
they know of us, except that we numbered so many, worked on certai n jobs,
offered so many votes, and provided so many marchers for some prote st 
parade of theirs! I leaned there, aching to humiliate them, to ref ute them.
And now all past humiliations became precious parts of my experi ence, and 
for the first time, leaning against that stone wall in the swel tering night, I 
began to accept my past and, as I accepted it, I felt memories we lling up 
within me. It was as though I'd learned suddenly to look around c orners;
images of past humiliations flickered through my head and I saw that they 
were more than separate experiences. They were me; they defined me . I was 
my experiences and my experiences were me, and no blind men, no ma tter 
how powerful they became, even if they conquered the world, coul d take that,
or change one single itch, taunt, laugh, cry, scar, ache, rage o r pain of it.
They were blind, bat blind, moving only by the echoed sounds of their own 
voices. And because they were blind they would destroy themsel ves and I'd 
help them. I laughed. Here I had thought they accepted me becau se they felt 
that color made no difference, when in reality it made no differe nce because 
they didn't see either color or men . . . For all they were concern ed, we were 
so many names scribbled on fake ballots, to be used at their con venience and 
when not needed to be filed away. It was a joke, an absurd joke. A nd now I 
looked around a corner of my mind and saw Jack and Norton and Emerso n 
merge into one single white figure. They were very much the same, each 
attempting to force his picture of reality upon me and neither gi ving a hoot 
in hell for how things looked to me. I was simply a material, a na tural
resource to be used. I had switched from the arrogant absurdity of No rton 
and Emerson to that of Jack and the Brotherhood, and it all came ou t the 
same -- except I now recognized my invisibility.
So I'd accept it, I'd explore it, rine and heart. I'd plunge into i t with 
both feet and they'd gag. Oh, but wouldn't they gag. I didn't k now what my 
grandfather had meant, but I was ready to test his advice. I'd ov ercome them 
with yeses, undermine them with grins, I'd agree them to death an d 
destruction. Yes, and I'd let them swallow me until they vomit ed or burst 
wide open. Let them gag on what they refused to see. Let them cho ke on it.
That was one risk they hadn't calculated. That was a risk they ha d never 
dreamt of in their philosophy. Nor did they know that they coul d discipline 
themselves to destruction, that saying "yes" could destroy th em. Oh, I'd yes 
them, but wouldn't I yes them! I'd yes them till they puked and rolled in it.
All they wanted of me was one belch of affirmation and I'd bello w it out 
loud. Yesl Yes! YES! That was all anyone wanted of us, that we s hould be 
heard and not seen, and then heard only in one big optimistic cho rus of
yassuh, yassuh, yassuh! All right, I'd yea, yea and oui, oui an d si, si and see,
see them too; and I'd walk around in their guts with hobnailed b oots. Even 
those super-big shots whom I'd never seen at committee meetin gs. They 
wanted a machine? Very well, I'd become a supersensitive conf irmer of their 
misconceptions, and just to hold their confidence I'd try to be right part of
the time. Oh, I'd serve them well and I'd make invisibility fe lt if not seen,
and they'd learn that it could be as polluting as a decaying bod y, or a piece 
of bad meat in a stew. And if I got hurt? Very well again. Besides , didn't 
they believe in sacrifice? They were the subtle thinkers -- woul d this be 
treachery? Did the word apply to an invisible man? Could they rec ognize 
choice in that which wasn't seen . . . ? 
The more I thought of it the more I fell into a kind of morbid 
fascination with the possibility. Why hadn't I discovered it sooner? How 
different my life might have been! How terribly different! Why ha dn't I seen 
the possibilities? If a sharecropper could attend college by w orking during the 
summers as a waiter and factory hand or as a musician and then gra duate to 
become a doctor, why couldn't all those things be done at one an d the same 
time? And wasn't that old slave a scientist -- or at least call ed one,
recognized as one -- even when he stood with hat in hand, bowing and 
scraping in senile and obscene servility? My God, what possib ilities existed!
And that spiral business, that progress goo! Who knew all the sec rets; hadn't 
I changed my name and never been challenged even once? And tha t lie that 
success was a rising upward. What a crummy lie they kept us domina ted by.
Not only could you travel upward toward success but you could trav el
downward as well; up and down, in retreat as well as in advance, cra bways 
and crossways and around in a circle, meeting your old selves com ing and 
going and perhaps all at the same time. How could I have missed i t for so 
long? Hadn't I grown up around gambler-politicians, bootlegge r-judges and 
sheriffs who were burglars; yes, and Klansmen who were preachers and
members of humanitarian societies? Hell, and hadn't Bledsoe t ried to tell me 
what it was all about? I felt more dead than alive. It had been qu ite a day;
one that could not have been more shattering even if I had learned that the 
man whom I'd always called father was actually of no relation t o me.
I went to the apartment and fell across the bed in my clothes. It w as 
hot and the fan did little more than stir the heat in heavy leade n waves,
beneath which I lay twirling the dark glasses and watching the h ypnotic 
flickering of the lenses as I tried to make plans. I would hide my anger and 
lull them to sleep; assure them that the community was in full a greement 
with their program. And as proof I would falsify the attendance re cords by 
filling out membership cards with fictitious names -- all unem ployed, of
course, so as to avoid any question of dues. Yes, and I would mov e about the 
community by night and during times of danger by wearing the whi te hat 
and the dark glasses. It was a dreary prospect but a means of destro ying 
them, at least in Harlem. I saw no possibility of organizing a sp linter 
movement, for what would be the next step? Where would we go? Th ere were 
no allies with whom we could join as equals; nor were there time o r theorists 
available to work out an over-all program of our own -- although I f elt that 
somewhere between Rinehart and invisibility there were great pot entialities.
But we had no money, no intelligence apparatus, either in gove rnment,
business or labor unions; and no communications with our own people except 
through unsympathetic newspapers, a few Pullman porters who brou ght 
provincial news from distant cities and a group of domestics who reported the 
fairly uninteresting private lives of their employers. If only w e had some true 
friends, some who saw us as more than convenient tools for shapi ng their 
own desires! But to hell with that, I thought, I would remain and become a 
well-disciplined optimist, and help them to go merrily to hell . If I couldn't 
help them to see the reality of our lives I would help them to ign ore it until
it exploded in their faces.
Only one thing bothered me: Since I now knew that their real
objectives were never revealed at committee meetings I needed some channel
of intelligence through which I could learn what actually guid ed their 
operations. But how? If only I had resisted being shifted downt own I would 
now have enough support in the community to insist that they rev eal
themselves. Yes, but if I hadn't been shifted, I would still b e living in a world 
of illusion. But now that I had found the thread of reality, how c ould I hold 
on? They seemed to have me blocked at every turn, forcing me to fi ght them 
in the dark. Finally I tossed the glasses across the bed and dropp ed into a 
fitful nap during which I relived the events of the last few days ; except that 
instead ot Clifton being lost it was myself, and I awoke stale , sweaty and 
aware of perfume.
I lay on my stomach, my head resting upon the back of my hand 
thinking, where is it coming from? And just as I caught sight ot t he glasses I 
remembered grasping Rinehart's girl's hand. I lay there unmoving, and she 
seemed to perch on the bed, a bright-eyed bird with her glossy hea d and ripe 
breasts, and I was in a wood afraid to frighten the bird away. Then I was 
fully awake and the bird gone and the girl's image in my mind. Wha t would 
have happened if I had led her on, how far could I have gone? A de sirable 
girl like that mixed up with Rinehart. And now I sat breathless, a sking myself
how Rinehart would have solved the problem of information and it came 
instantly clear: It called for a woman. A wife, a girl friend, or s ecretary of
one ot the leaders, who would be willing to talk freely to me. My m ind swept 
back to early experiences in the movement. Little incidents sp rang to memory,
bringing images of the smiles and gestures of certain women met a fter rallies 
and at parties: Dancing with Emma at the Chthonian; she close, soft against 
me and the hot swift focusing of my desire and my embarrassment as I 
caught sight of Jack holding forth in a corner, and Emma holding m e tight,
her bound breasts pressing against me, looking with that teasi ng light in her 
eyes saying, "Ah, temptation," and my desperate grab for a soph isticated reply 
and managing only, "Oh, but there's always temptation," surpri sing myself
nevertheless and hearing her laughing, "Touche! Touche! You s hould come up 
and fence with me some afternoon." That had been during the early days 
when I had felt strong restrictions and resented Emma's boldness and her 
opinion that I should have been blacker to play my role of Harlem leader.
Well, there were no restrictions left, the committee had seen to t hat. She was 
fair game and perhaps she'd find me black enough, after all. A c ommittee 
meeting was set for tomorrow, and since it was Jack's birthday, a party at 
the Chthonian would follow. Thus I would launch my two-pronge d attack 
under the most favorable circumstance. They were forcing me to Ri nehart 
methods, so bring on the scientists!
Chapter 24 
I started yessing them the next day and it began beautifully. T he 
community was still going apart at the seams. Crowds formed at th e slightest 
incidents. Store windows were smashed and several clashes erupt ed during the 
morning between bus drivers and their passengers. The papers list ed similar 
incidents that had exploded during the night. The mirrored fa?de of one store 
on 125th Street was smashed and I passed to see a group of boys wat ching 
their distorted images as they danced before the jagged glass. A group of
adults looked on, refusing to move at the policemen's command , and 
muttering about Clifton. I didn't like the look of things, for all my wish to 
see the committee confounded.
When I reached the office, members were there with reports of
clashes in other parts of the district. I didn't like it at all; t he violence was 
pointless and, helped along by Ras, was actually being direct ed against the 
community itself. Yet in spite of my sense of violated respons ibility I was 
pleased by the developments and went ahead with my plan. I sen t out 
members to mingle with crowds and try to discourage any further vi olence 
and sent an open letter to all the press denouncing them for "di storting" and 
inflating minor incidents.
Late that afternoon at headquarters I reported that things were 
quieting down and that we were getting a large part of the communi ty 
interested in a clean-up campaign, which would clear all back yards, areaways,
and vacant lots of garbage and trash and take Harlem's mind off C lifton. It 
was such a bareface maneuver that I almost lost the confidence of my 
invisibility even as I stood before them. But they loved it, an d when I handed 
in my fake list of new members they responded with enthusiasm. T hey were 
vindicated; the program was correct, events were progressing in the ir 
predetermined direction, history was on their side, and Harlem l oved them. I 
sat there smiling inwardly as I listened to the remarks that follo wed. I could 
see the role which I was to play as plainly as I saw Jack's red hair. Incidents 
of my past, both recognized and ignored, sprang together in my mi nd in an 
ironic leap of consciousness that was like looking around a corn er. I was to 
be a justifier, my task would be to deny the unpredictable human element of
all Harlem so that they could ignore it when it in any way interfere d with 
their plans. I was to keep ever before them the picture of a bright , passive,
good-humored, receptive mass ever willing to accept their eve ry scheme. When 
situations arose in which others would respond with righteous an ger I would 
say that we were calm and unruffled (if it suited them to have us a ngry, then 
it was simple enough to create anger for us by stating it in thei r propaganda;
the facts were unimportant, unreal); and if other people were con fused by 
their maneuvering I was to reassure them that we pierced to the trut h with 
x-ray insight. If other groups were interested in becoming wealt hy, I was to 
assure the Brothers and the doubting members of other districts, t hat we 
rejected wealth as corrupt and intrinsically degrading; if other minorities loved 
the country despite their grievances, I would assure the commi ttee that we,
immune to such absurdly human and mixed reactions, hated it abs olutely;
and, greatest contradiction of all, when they denounced the Am erican scene as 
corrupt and degenerate, I was to say that we, though snarled inext ricably 
within its veins and sinews, were miraculously healthy. Yessu h, yessuh!
Though invisible I would be their assuring voice of denial; I' d out-Tobitt 
Tobitt, and as for that outhouse Wrestrum -- well. As I sat there o ne of them 
was inflating my faked memberships into meanings of national significance.
An illusion was creating a counter-illusion. Where would it end ? Did they 
believe their own propaganda? 
Afterwards at the Chthonian it was like old times. Jack's birth day 
was an occasion for champagne and the hot, dog-day evening wa s even more 
volatile than usual. I felt highly confident, but here my plan went slightly 
wrong. Emma was quite gay and responsive, but something about h er hard,
handsome face warned me to lay off. I sensed that while she migh t willingly 
surrender herself (in order to satisfy herself) she was far too sop histicated 
and skilled in intrigue to compromise her position as Jack's mi stress by 
revealing anything important to me. So as I danced and sparred wit h Emma I 
looked over the party for a second choice.
We were thrown together at the bar. Her name was Sybil and she 
was one of those who assumed that my lectures on the woman quest ion were 
based upon a more intimate knowledge than the merely political and had 
indicated several times a willingness to know me better. I had a lways 
pretended not to understand, for not only had my first such experi ence taught 
me to avoid such situations, but at the Chthonian she was usua lly slightly 
tipsy and wistful -- just the type of misunderstood married woma n whom,
even if I had been interested, I would have avoided like the pla gue. But now 
her unhappiness and the fact that she was one of the big shot's wives made 
her a perfect choice. She was very lonely and it went very smoot hly. In the 
noisy birthday party -- which was to be followed by a public cele bration the 
next evening -- we weren't noticed, and when she left fairly earl y in the 
evening I saw her home. She felt neglected and he was always bu sy, and 
when I left her I had arranged a rendezvous at my apartment for the 
following evening. George, the husband, would be at the birthd ay celebration 
and she wouldn't be missed.
IT WAS a hot dry August night. Lightning flashed across the eas tern 
sky and a breathless tension was in the humid air. I had spent the afternoon 
preparing, leaving the office on a pretense of illness to avoid h aving to attend 
the celebration. I had neither itch nor etchings, but there was a vase of
Chinese lilies in the living room, and another of American Beau ty roses on 
the table near the bed; and I had put in a supply of wine, whiske y and 
liqueur, extra ice cubes, and assortments of fruit, cheese, nuts , candy and 
other delicacies from the Vendome. In short, I tried to manage th ings as I 
imagined Rinehart would have done.
But I bungled it from the beginning. I made the drinks too strong - - 
which she liked too well; and I brought up politics -- which she all but hated 
-- too early in the evening. For all her exposure to ideology she had no 
interest in politics and no idea of the schemes that occupied h er husband 
night and day. She was more interested in the drinks, in which I ha d to join 
her glass for glass, and in little dramas which she had dreamed u p around 
the figures of Joe Louis and Paul Robeson. And, although I had n either the 
stature nor the temperament for either role, I was expected eith er to sing 
"Old Man River" and just keep rolling along, or to do fancy tricks with my 
muscles. I was confounded and amused and it became quite a con test, with 
me trying to keep the two of us in touch with reality and with her casting 
me in fantasies in which I was Brother 
Taboo-with-whom-all-things-are-possible.
Now it was late and as I came into the room with another round of
drinks she had let down her hair and was beckoning to me with a go ld 
hairpin in her teeth, saying, "Come to mamma, beautiful," from where she sat 
on the bed.
"Your drink, madame," I said, handing her a glass and hoping th e 
fresh drink would discourage any new ideas.
"Come on, dear," she said coyly. "I want to ask you something."
"What is it?" I said.
"I have to whisper it, beautiful." 
I sat and her lips came close to my ear. And suddenly she had 
drained the starch out of me. I pulled away. There was something a lmost 
prim about the way she sat there, and yet she had just made a modes t 
proposal that I join her in a very revolting ritual.
"What was that!" I said, and she repeated it. Had life suddenly
become a crazy Thurber cartoon? 
"Please, you'll do that for me, won't you, beautiful?" 
"You really mean it?" 
"Yes," she said, "yes!" 
There was a pristine incorruptibility about her face now that ups et 
me all the more, for she was neither kidding nor trying to insul t me; and I 
could not tell if it were horror speaking to me ont of innocence, o r innocence 
emerging unscathed from the obscene scheme of the evening. I on ly knew 
that the whole affair was a mistake. She had no information and I decided to 
get her out of the apartment before I had to deal definitely with either the 
horror or the innocence, while I could still deal with it as a jok e. What 
would Rinehart do about this, I thought, and knowing, determin ed not to let 
her provoke me to violence.
"But, Sybil, you can see I'm not like that. You make me feel a 
tender, protective passion -- Look, it's like an oven in here, wh y don't we get 
dressed and go for a walk in Central Park?" 
"But I need it," she said, uncrossing her thighs and sitting up
eagerly. "You can do it, it'll be easy for you, beautiful. Threa ten to kill me if
I don't give in. You know, talk rough to me, beautiful. A friend o f mine said 
the fellow said, 'Drop your drawers' . . . and --" 
"He said what!" I said.
"He really did," she said.
I looked at her. She was blushing, her cheeks, even her freckled
bosom, were bright red.
"Go on," I said, as she lay back again. "Then what happened?" 
"Well . . . he called her a filthy name," she said, hesitating c oyly.
She was a leathery old girl with chestnut hair of fine natural wa ve which was 
now fanned out over the pillow. She was blushing quite deeply . Was this 
meant to excite me, or was it an unconscious expression of revul sion? 
"A really filthy name," she said. "Oh, he was a brute, huge, with
white teeth, what they call a 'buck.' And he said, 'Bitch, drop your drawers,'
and then he did it. She's such a lovely girl, too, really delicat e with a 
complexion like strawberries and cream. You can't imagine anyon e calling her 
a name like that." 
She sat up now, her elbows denting the pillow as she looked int o my 
face.
"But what happened, did they catch him?" I said.
"Oh, of course not, beautiful, she only told two of us girls. She
couldn't afford to let her husband hear of it. He . . . well, it's too long a 
story." 
"It's terrible," I said. "Don't you think we should go . . . ?" 
"Isn't it, though? She was in a state for months . . ." her expres sion 
flickered, became indeterminate.
"What is it?" I said, afraid she might cry.
"Oh, I was just wondering how she really felt. I really do." Sudde nly 
she looked at me mysteriously. "Can I trust you with a deep secret ?" 
I sat up. "Don't tell me that it was you." 
She smiled, "Oh, no, that was a dear friend of mine. But do you 
know what, beautiful," she said leaning forward confidentia lly, "I think I'm a 
nymphomaniac." 
"You? Noooo!" 
"Uh huh. Sometimes I have such thoughts and dreams. I never giv e 
into them though, but I really think I am. A woman like me has to d evelop 
an iron discipline." 
I laughed inwardly. She would soon be a biddy, stout, with a lit tle 
double chin and a three-ply girdle. A thin gold chain showed arou nd a 
thickening ankle. And yet I was becoming aware of something wa rmly,
infuriatingly feminine about her. I reached out, stroking her ha nd. "Why do 
you have such ideas about yourself?" I said, seeing her raise up and pluck at 
the corner of the pillow, drawing out a speckled feather and stri pping the 
down from its shaft.
"Repression," she said with great sophistication. "Men have re pressed 
us too much. We're expected to pass up too many human things. Bu t do you 
know another secret?" 
I bowed my head.
"You don't mind my going on, do you, beautiful?" 
"No, Sybil." 
"Well, ever since I first heard about it, even when I was a very li ttle 
girl, I've wanted it to happen to me." 
"You mean what happened to your friend?" 
"Uh huh." 
"Good Lord, Sybil, did you ever tell that to anyone else?" 
"Of course not, I wouldn't've dared. Are you shocked?" 
"Some. But Sybil, why do you tell me?" 
"Oh, I know that I can trust you. I just knew you'd understand;
you're not like other men. We're kind of alike." 
She was smiling now and reached out and pushed me gently, and I 
thought, here it goes again.
"Lie back and let me look at you against that white sheet. You' re 
beautiful, I've always thought so. Like warm ebony against pu re snow -- see 
what you do, you make me talk poetry. 'Warm ebony against pure sn ow,' isn't 
that poetic?" 
"I'm the sensitive type, you musn't make fun of me." 
"But really you are, and I feel so free with you. You've no idea." 
I looked at the red imprint left by the straps of her bra, thinking,
Who's taking revenge on whom? But why be surprised, when that's w hat they 
hear all their lives. When it's made into a great power and they 're taught to 
worship all types of power? With all the warnings against it, som e are bound 
to want to try it out for themselves. The conquerors conquered. M aybe a 
great number secretly want it; maybe that's why they scream when it's 
farthest from possibility -- 
"That's it," she said tightly. "Look at me like that; just lik e you want 
to tear me apart. I love for you to look at me like that!" 
I laughed and touched her chin. She had me on the ropes; I felt 
punch drunk, I couldn't deliver and I couldn't be angry either. I thought of
lecturing her on the respect due one's bedmate in our society, b ut I no longer 
deluded myself that I either knew the society or where I fitted into it.
Besides, I thought, she thinks you're an entertainer. That's so mething else 
they're taught.
I raised my glass and she joined me in a drink, moving close.
"You will, won't you, beautiful?" she said, her lips, raw-loo king now 
without makeup, pouting babyishly. So why not entertain her, b e a gentleman,
or whatever it is she thinks you are -- What does she think you are ? A 
domesticated rapist, obviously, an expert on the woman questi on. Maybe that's 
what you are, house-broken and with a convenient verbal push-b utton 
arrangement for the ladies' pleasure. Well, so I had set this trap for myself.
"Take this," I said, shoving another glass into her hand. "It 'll be 
better after you've had a drink, more realistic." 
"Oh, yes, that'll be wonderful." She took a drink and looked up 
thoughtfully. "I get so tired of living the way I do, beautiful . Soon I'll be old 
and nothing will've happened to me. Do you know what that mean s? George 
talks a lot about women's rights, but what does he know about wh at a 
woman needs? Him with his forty minutes of brag and ten of bustle . Oh, you 
have no idea what you're doing for me." 
"Nor you for me, Sybil dear," I said, filling the glass again. A t last 
my drinks were beginning to work.
She shook her long hair out over her shoulders and crossed her 
knees, watching me. Her head had begun to weave.
"Don't drink too much, beautiful," she said. "It always takes the pep 
out of George." 
"Don't worry," I said. "I rapes real good when I'm drunk." 
She looked startled. "Ooooh, then pour me another," she said, g iving 
herself a bounce. She was as delighted as a child, holding out h er glass 
eagerly.
"What's happening here," I said, "a new birth of a nation?" 
"What'd you say, beautiful?" 
"Nothing, a bad joke. Forget it." 
"That's what I like about you, beautiful. You haven't told me a single 
one of those vulgar jokes. Come on, beautiful," she said, "po ur." 
I poured her another and another; in fact, I poured us both quite a
few. I was far away; it wasn't happening to me or to her and I fel t a certain 
confused pity which I didn't wish to feel. Then she looked at m e, her eyes 
bright behind narrowed lids and raised up and struck me where it hurt.
"Come on, beat me, daddy -- you -- you big black bruiser. What's 
taking you so long?" she said. "Hurry up, knock me down! Don't y ou want 
me?" 
I was annoyed enough to slap her. She lay aggressively receptive ,
flushed, her navel no goblet but a pit in an earth-quaking land , flexing taut 
and expansive. Then she said, "Come on, come on!" and I said, " Sure, sure," 
looking around wildly and starting to pour the drink upon her and was 
stopped, my emotions locked, as I saw her lipstick lying on th e table and 
grabbed it, saying, "Yes, yes," as I bent to write furiously acros s her belly in 
drunken inspiration:
SYBIL, YOU WERE RAPED 
BY 
SANTA CLAUS 
SURPRISE 
and paused there, trembling above her, my knees on the bed as she w aited 
with unsteady expectancy. It was a purplish metallic shade of lipstick and as 
she panted with anticipation the letters stretched and quivere d, up hill and 
down dale, and she was lit up like a luminescent sign.
"Hurry, boo'ful, hurry," she said.
I looked at her, thinking, Just wait until George sees that -- if
George ever gets around to seeing that. He'll read a lecture on an a spect of
the woman question he's never thought about. She lay anonymo us beneath my 
eyes until I saw her face, shaped by her emotion which I could n ot fulfill,
and I thought, Poor Sybil, she picked a boy for a man's job and n othing was 
as it was supposed to be. Even the black bruiser fell down on the job. She'd 
lost control of her liquor now and suddenly I bent and kissed he r upon the 
lips.
"Shhh, be quiet," I said, "that's no way to act when you're bein g --" 
and she raised her lips for more and I kissed her again and calmed her and 
she dozed off and I decided again to end the farce. Such games we re for 
Rinehart, not me. I stumbled out and got a damp towel and began ru bbing 
out the evidence of my crime. It was as tenacious as sin and it to ok some 
time. Water wouldn't do it, whiskey would have smelled and fi nally I had to 
find benzine. Fortunately she didn't arouse until I was almost finished.
"D'you do it, boo'ful?" she said.
"Yes, of course," I said. "Isn't that what you wanted?" 
"Yes, but I don't seem t'remember . . ." 
I looked at her and wanted to laugh. She was trying to see me but
her eyes wouldn't focus am aer head kept swinging to one side, yet she was 
making a real effort, and suddenly I felt lighthearted.
"By the way," I said, trying to do something with her hair, "wha t's 
your name, lady?" 
"It's Sybil," she said indignantly, almost tearfully. "Boo' ful, you know 
I'm Sybil." 
"Not when I grabbed you, I didn't." 
Her eyes widened and a smile wobbled across her face.
"That's right, you couldn't, could you? You never saw me before ." She 
was delighted, I could almost see the idea take form in her mind .
"That's right," I said. "I leaped straight out of the wall. I 
overpowered you in the empty lobby -- remember? I smothered your te rrified 
screams." 
" 'N' did I put up a good fight?" 
"Like a lioness defending her young . . ." 
"But you were such a strong big brute you made me give in. I didn't 
want to, did I now, boo'ful? You forced me 'gainst m' will." 
"Sure," I said, picking up some silken piece of clothing. "You brought 
out the beast in me. I overpowered you. But what could I do?" 
She studied that a while and for a second her face worked again a s 
though she would cry. But it was another smile that bloomed th ere.
"And wasn't I a good nymphomaniac?" she said, watching me clo sely.
"Really and truly?" 
"You have no idea," I said. "George had better keep an eye on you ." 
She twisted herself from side to side with irritation. "Oh, nuts! That 
ole Georgie porgie wouldn't know a nymphomaniac if she got right into bed 
with him!" 
"You're wonderful," I said. "Tell me about George. Tell me about that 
great master mind of social change." 
She steadied her gaze, frowning. "Who, Georgie?" she said, loo king at 
me out of one bleary eye. "Georgie's blind 'sa mole in a hole 'n d oesn't know 
a thing about it. 'D you ever hear of such a thing, fifteen years ! Say, what're 
you laughing at, boo'ful?" 
"Me," I said, beginning to roar, "just me . . ." 
"I've never seen anyone laugh like you, boo'ful. It's wonderf ul!" 
I was slipping her dress over her head now and her voice came 
muffled through the shantung cloth. Then I had it down around he r hips and 
her flushed face wavered through the collar, her hair down in dis order again.
"Boo'ful," she said, blowing the word, "will you do it again 
sometimes?" 
I stepped away and looked at her. "What?" 
"Please, pretty boo'ful, please," she said with a wobbly smil e.
I began to laugh, "Sure," I said, "sure . . ." 
"When, boo'ful, when?" 
"Any time," I said. "How about every Thursday at nine?" 
"Oooooh, boo'ful," she said, giving me an old-fashioned hug . "I've 
never seen anyone like you." 
"Are you sure?" I said.
"Really, I haven't, boo'ful . . . Honor bright . . . believe me?"
"Sure, it's good to be seen, but we've got to go now," I said seei ng 
her about to sag to the bed.
She pouted. "I need a lil nightcap, boo'ful," she said.
"You've had enough," I said.
"Ah, boo'ful, jus' one . . ." 
"Okay, just one." 
We had another drink and I looked at her and felt the pity and 
self-disgust returning and was depressed.
She looked at me gravely, her head to one side.
"Boo'ful," she said, "you know what lil ole Sybil thinks? She thinks 
you're trying to get rid of her." 
I looked at her out of a deep emptiness and refilled her glass an d 
mine. What had I done to her, allowed her to do? Had all of it filt ered down 
to me? My action . . . my -- the painful word formed as disconnecte dly as 
her wobbly smile -- my responsibility? All of it? I'm invisibl e. "Here," I said,
"drink." 
"You too, boo'ful," she said.
"Yes," I said. She moved into my arms.
I MUST have dozed. There came the tinkling of ice in a glass, the
shrill of bells. I felt profoundly sad, as though winter had fal len during the 
hour. She lay, her chestnut hair let down, watching through hea vy-lidded,
blue, eye-shadowed eyes. From far away a new sound arose.
"Don't answer, boo'ful," she said, her voice coming through su ddenly,
out of time with the working of her mouth.
"What?" I said.
"Don't answer, let'er ring," she said, reaching her red-nailed f ingers 
forth.
I took it from her hands, understanding now.
"Don't, boo'ful," she said.
It rang again in my hand now and for no reason at all the words of
a childhood prayer spilled through my mind like swift water. The n: "Hello," I 
said.
It was a frantic, unrecognizable voice from the district. "Brothe r, you 
better get up here right away --" it said.
"I'm ill," I said. "What's wrong?" 
"There's trouble, Brother, and you're the only one who can --" 
"What kind of trouble?" 
"Bad trouble, Brother; they trying to --" 
Then the harsh sound of breaking glass, distant, brittle and fin e,
followed by a crash, and the line went dead.
"Hello," I said, seeing Sybil wavering before me, her lips sayi ng,
"Boo'ful." 
I tried to dial now, hearing the busy signal throbbing back at me:
Amen-Amen-Amen Ah man; and I sat there a while. Was it a trick? Di d they 
know she was with me? I put it down. Her eyes were looking at me fro m 
out of their blue shadow. "Boo --" 
And now I stood and pulled her arm. "Let's go, Sybil. They need m e 
uptown" -- realizing only then that I would go.
'"No," she said.
s'"But yes. Come." 
She fell back upon the bed defying me. I released her arms and 
looked around, my head unclear. What kind of trouble at this hour? Why 
should I go? She watched me, her eyes brightly awash in blue sha dow. My 
heart felt low and deeply sad.
"Come back, boo'ful," she said.
"No, let's get some air," I said.
And now, avoiding the red, oily nails I gripped her wrists and pul led 
her up, toward the door. We tottered, her lips brushing mine as we w avered 
there. She clung to me and, for an instant, I to her with a feelin g 
immeasurably sad. Then she hiccupped and I looked vacantly ba ck into the 
room. The light caught in the amber liquid of our glasses.
"Boo'ful," she said, "life could be so diff'rent --" 
"But it never is," I said.
She said, "Boo'ful." 
The fan whirred. And in a corner, my brief case, covered with specks 
of dust like memories -- the night of the battle royal. I felt her breathing hot 
against me and pushed her gently away, steadying her against the door frame,
then went over as impulsively as the remembered prayer, and got th e brief
case, brushing the dust against my leg and feeling the unexpec ted weight as I 
hugged it beneath my arm. Something clinked inside.
She watched me still, her eyes alight as I took her arm.
"How're you doing, Syb?" I said.
"Don't go, boo'ful," she said. "Let Georgie do it. No speeches tonight." 
"Come on," I said, taking her arm quite firmly, pulling her alon g as 
she sighed, her wistful face turned toward me.
We went down smoothly into the street. My head was still badly 
fuzzed from the drink, and when I looked down the huge emptiness of the 
dark I felt like tears . . . What was happening uptown? Why should I worry 
over bureaucrats, blind men? I am invisible. I stared down the qu iet street,
feeling her stumbling beside me, humming a little tune; some thing fresh, na?e 
and carefree. Sybil, my too-late-too-early love . . . Ah! My throa t throbbed.
The heat of the street clung close. I looked for a taxi but none w as passing.
She hummed beside me, her perfume unreal in the night. We moved i nto the 
next block and still no taxis. Her high heels unsteadily scrun ched the walk. I 
stopped her.
"Poor boo'ful," she said. "Don't know his name . . ." 
I turned as though struck. "What?" 
"Anonymous brute 'n boo'ful buck," she said, her mouth a blear y 
smile.
I looked at her, skittering about on high heels, scrunch, scrunch on 
the walk.
"Sybil," I said, more to myself than to her, "where will it end?" 
Something told me to go.
"Aaaah," she laughed, "in bed. Don't go up, boo'ful, Sybil'l l tuck you 
in." 
I shook my head. The stars were there, high, high, revolving. Then I 
closed my eyes and they sailed red behind my lids; then somewha t steadied I 
took her arm.
"Look, Sybil," I said, "stand here a minute while I go over to Fi fth 
for a taxi. Stand right here, dear, and hold on." 
We tottered before an ancient-looking building, its windows d ark.
Huge Greek medallions showed in spots of light upon its fa?de, above a dark 
labyrinthine pattern in the stone, and I propped her against the stoop with 
its carved stone monster. She leaned there, her hair wild, look ing at me in 
the street light, smiling. Her face kept swinging to one side, her right eye 
desperately closed.
"Sure, boo'ful, sure," she said.
"I'll be right back," I said, backing away.
"Boo'ful," she called, "My boo'ful." 
Hear the true affection, I thought, the adoration of the Boogie Bear,
moving away. Was she calling me beautiful or boogieful, beau tiful or sublime 
. . . What'd either mean? I am invisible . . .
I went on through the late street quiet, hoping that a cab would p ass 
before I had gone all the way. Up ahead at Fifth the lights were bri ght, a 
few cars shooting across the gaping mouth of the street and above and 
beyond, the trees -- great, dark, tall. What was going on, I ponde red. Why 
call for me so late -- and who? 
I hurried ahead, my feet unsteady.
"Booo'ful," she called behind me, "boooooo'ful!" 
I waved without looking back. Never again, no more, no more. I 
went on.
At Fifth a cab passed and I tried to hail it, only to hear someone 's 
voice arise, the sound floating gaily by. I looked up the light ed avenue for 
another, hearing suddenly the screech of brakes and turning to see the cab 
stop and a white arm beckoning. The cab reversed, rolled close, se ttling with 
a bounce. I laughed. It was Sybil. I stumbled forward, came to t he door. She 
smiled out at me, her head, framed in the window, still pulling to one side,
her hair waving down.
"Get in, boo'ful, 'n take me to Harlem . . ." 
I shook my head, feeling it heavy and sad. "No," I said, "I've g ot 
work to do, Sybil. You'd better go home . . ." 
"No, boo'ful, take me with you." 
I turned to the driver, my hand upon the door. He was small,
dark-haired and disapproving, a glint of red from the traffic light coloring the 
tip of his nose.
"Look," I said, "take her home." 
I gave him the address and my last five-dollar bill. He took it,
glumly disapproving.
"No, boo'ful," she said, "I want to go to Harlem, be with you!" 
"Good night," I said, stepping back from the curb.
We were in the middle of the block and I saw them pull away.
"No," she said, "no, boo'ful. Don't leave . . ." Her face, wild -eyed and 
white, showed in the door. I stood there, watching him plunge sw iftly and 
contemptuously out of sight, his tail light as red as his nose.
I walked with eyes closed, seeming to float and trying to clea r my 
head, then opened them and crossed to the park side, along the co bbles.
High above, the cars sailed round and round the drive, their headl ights 
stabbing. All the taxies were hired, all going downtown. Cente r of gravity. I 
plodded on, my head awhirl.
Then near 110th Street I saw her again. She was waiting beneath a 
street lamp, waving. I wasn't surprised; I had become fatalisti c. I came up 
slowly, hearing her laugh. She was ahead of me and beginning to run,
barefoot, loosely, as in a dream. Running. Unsteadily but swif t and me 
surprised and unable to catch up, lead-legged, seeing her ahea d and calling,
"Sybil, Sybil!" running lead-legged along the park side.
"Come on, boo'ful," she called, looking back and stumbling. "Catch 
Sybil . . . Sybil," running barefoot and girdleless along the park .
I ran, the brief case heavy beneath my arm. Something told me I 
had to get to the office . . . "Sybil, wait!" I called.
She ran, the colors of her dress flaring flamelike in the bright pla ces 
of the dark. A rustling motion, legs working awkwardly beneath he r and white 
heels flashing, her skirts held high. Let her go, I thought. Bu t now she was 
crossing the street and running wildly only to go down at the curb and 
standing and going down again, with a bumped backside, compl etely unsteady,
now that her momentum was gone.
"Boo'ful," she said as I came up. "Damn, boo'ful, you push me? " 
"Get up," I said without anger. "Get up," taking her soft arm. Sh e 
stood, her arms flung wide for an embrace.
"No," I said, "this isn't Thursday. I've got to get there . . . Wha t do 
they plan for me, Sybil?" 
"Who, boo'ful?" 
"Jack and George . . . Tobitt and all?" 
"You ran me down, boo'ful," she said. "Forget them . . . bunch of
dead-heads . . . unhipped, y'know. We didn't make this stinki ng world,
boo'ful. Forget --" 
I saw the taxi just in time, approaching swiftly from the corner, a
double-decker bus looming two blocks behind. The cabbie loo ked over, his 
head out of the window, sitting high at the wheel as he made a sw ift U-turn 
and came alongside. His face was shocked, disbelieving.
"Come now, Sybil," I said, "and no tricks." 
"Pardon me, old man," the driver said, his voice concerned, "but
you're not taking her up in Harlem are you?" 
"No, the lady's going downtown," I said. "Get in Sybil." 
"Boo'ful's 'n ole dictator," she said to the driver, who looked a t me 
silently, as though I were mad.
"A game stud," he muttered, "a most game stud!" 
But she got in.
"Just 'n ole dictator, boo'ful." 
"Look," I told him, "take her straight home and don't let her ge t out 
of the cab. I don't want her running around Harlem. She's precious , a great 
lady --" 
"Sure, man, I don't blame you," he said. "Things is popping up 
there." 
The cab was already rolling as I yelled, "What's going on?" 
"They're taking the joint apart," he called above the shifting of the 
gears. I watched them go and made for the bus stop. This time I'l l make 
sure, I thought, stepping out and flagging the bus and getting on. If she 
comes back, she'll find me gone. And I knew stronger than ever t hat I should 
hurry but was still too foggy in my mind, couldn't get myself to gether.
I sat gripping my brief case, my eyes closed, feeling the bus sai ling 
swift beneath me. Soon it would turn up Seventh Avenue. Sybil, forgive me, I 
thought. The bus rolled.
But when I opened my eyes we were turning into Riverside Drive.
This too I accepted calmly, the whole night was out of joint. I 'd had too 
many drinks. Time ran fluid, invisible, sad. Looking out I coul d see a ship 
moving upstream, its running lights bright points in the night. The cool sea 
smell came through to me, constant and thick in the swiftly unf olding blur of
anchored boats, dark water and lights pouring past. Across the riv er was 
Jersey and I remembered my entry into Harlem. Long past, I thought , long 
past. I was as if drowned in the river.
To my right and ahead the church spire towered high, crowned with 
a red light of warning. And now we were passing the hero's tomb and I
recalled a visit there. You went up the steps and inside and you l ooked far 
below to find him, at rest, draped flags . . .
One Hundred and Twenty-fifth Street came quickly. I stumbled o ff,
hearing the bus pull away as I faced the water. There was a light bre eze, but 
now with the motion gone the heat returned, clinging. Far ahead in the dark 
I saw the monumental bridge, ropes of lights across the dark river; a nd 
closer, high above the shoreline, the Palisades, their revolut ionary agony lost 
in the riotous lights of roller coasters. "The Time Is Now . . ." th e sign 
across the river began, but with history stomping upon me with h obnailed 
boots, I thought with a laugh, why worry about time? I crossed th e street to 
the drinking fountain, feeling the water cooling, going down , then dampened a 
handkerchief and swabbed my face, eyes. The water flashed, gu rgled, sprayed.
I pressed forward my face, feeling wet cool, hearing the infant j oy of
fountains. Then heard the other sound. It was not the river nor t he curving 
cars that flashed through the dark, but pitched like a distant cro wd or a swift 
river at floodtide.
I moved forward, found the steps and started down. Below the brid ge 
lay the hard stone river of the street, and for a second I looked at the waves 
of cobblestones as though I expected water, as though the foun tain above had 
drawn from them. Still I would enter and go across to Harlem. Below the 
steps the trolley rails gleamed steely. I hurried, the sound drawi ng closer,
myriad-voiced, humming, enfolding me, numbing the air, as I st arted beneath 
the ramp. It came, a twitter, a coo, a subdued roar that seemed try ing to tell
me something, give me some message. I stopped, looking around me; the 
girders marched off rhythmically into the dark, over the cobblest ones the red 
lights shone. Then I was beneath the bridge and it was as though they had 
been waiting for me and no one but me -- dedicated and set aside for me -- 
for an eternity. And I looked above toward the sound, my mind form ing an 
image of wings, as something struck my face and streaked, and I c ould smell
the foul air now, and see the encrusted barrage, feeling it streak my jacket 
and raising my brief case above my head and running, hearing it spl attering 
around, falling like rain. I ran the gantlet, thinking, even the birds; even the 
pigeons and the sparrows and the goddam gulls! I ran blindly, boi ling with 
outrage and despair and harsh laughter. Running from the birds to w hat, I 
didn't know. I ran. Why was I here at all? 
I ran through the night, ran within myself. Ran.
Chapter 25 
When I reached Morningside the shooting sounded like a distant
celebration of the Fourth of July, and I hurried forward. At St. Nic holas the 
street lights were out. A thunderous sound arose and I saw four men running 
toward me pushing something that jarred the walk. It was a safe.
"Say," I began.
"Get the hell out the way!" 
I leaped aside, into the street, and there was a sudden and brilli ant 
suspension of time, like the interval between the last ax stro ke and the felling 
of a tall tree, in which there had been a loud noise followed by a l oud 
silence. Then I was aware of figures crouching in doorways and al ong the 
curb; then time burst and I was down in the street, conscious but unable to 
rise, struggling against the street and seeing the flashes as th e guns went off
back at the corner of the avenue, aware to my left of the men still speeding 
the rumbling safe along the walk as back up the street, behind me , two 
policemen, almost invisible in black shirts, thrust flaming p istols before them.
One of the safe rollers pitched forward, and farther away, past th e corner, a 
bullet struck an auto tire, the released air shrieking like a huge animal in 
agony. I rolled, flopping around, willing myself to crawl close r to the curb but 
unable, feeling a sudden wet warmth upon my face and seeing the safe 
shooting wildly into the intersection and the men rounding the corner into 
the dark, pounding, gone; gone now, as the skittering safe boun ded off at a 
tangent, shot into the intersection and lodged in the third rail and sent up a 
curtain of sparks that lit up the block like a blue dream; a dream I w as 
dreaming and through which I could see the cops braced as on a targe t 
range, feet forward, free arms akimbo, firing with deliberate aim.
"Get hold of Emergency!" one of them called, and I saw them turn 
and disappear where the dull glint of trolley rails faded off int o the dark.
Suddenly the block leaped alive. Men who seemed to rise up out o f
the sidewalks were rushing into the store fronts above me, their v oices rising 
excitedly. And now the blood was in my face and I could move, ge tting to 
my knees as someone out of the crowd was helping me to stand.
"You hurt, daddy?" 
"Some -- I don't know --" I couldn't quite see them.
"Damn! He's got a hole in his head!" a voice said.
A light flashed in my face, came close. I felt a hard hand upon my
skull and moved away.
"Hell, it's just a nick," a voice said. "One them forty-fives h it your 
little finger you got to go down!" 
"Well, this one over here is gone down for the last time," someo ne 
called from the walk. "They got him clean." 
I wiped my face, my head ringing. Something was missing.
"Here, buddy, this yours?" 
It was my brief case, extended to me by its handles. I seized it w ith 
sudden panic, as though something infinitely precious had al most been lost to 
me.
"Thanks," I said, peering into their dim, blue-tinted feature s. I looked 
at the dead man. He lay face forward, the crowd working around him. I 
realized suddenly that it might have been me huddled there, fee ling too that I 
had seen him there before, in the bright light of noon, long ago . . . how 
long? Knew his name, I thought, and suddenly my knees flowed f orward. I 
sat there, my fist that gripped the brief case bruising against th e street, my 
head slumped forward. They were going around me.
"Get off my foot, man," I heard. "Quit shoving. There's plenty f or 
everybody." 
There was something I had to do and I knew that my forgetfulness 
wasn't real, as one knows that the forgotten details of certain d reams are not 
truly forgotten but evaded. I knew, and in my mind I was trying to reach 
through the gray veil that now seemed to hang behind my eyes as op aquely 
as the blue curtain that screened the street beyond the safe. The dizziness left 
and I managed to stand, holding onto my brief case, pressing a ha ndkerchief
to my head. Up the street there sounded the crashing of huge sheet s of glass 
and through the blue mysteriousness of the dark the walks shimme red like 
shattered mirrors. All the street's signs were dead, all the day sou nds had lost 
their stable meaning. Somewhere a burglar alarm went off, a mean ingless 
blangy sound, followed by the joyful shouts of looters.
"Come on," someone called nearby.
"Let's go, buddy," the man who had helped me said. He took my 
arm, a thin man who carried a large cloth bag slung over his shoulde r.
"The shape you in wouldn't do to leave you round here," he said.
"You act like you drunk." 
"Go where?" I said.
"Where? Hell, man. Everywhere. We git to moving, no telling whe re 
we might go -- Hey, Dupre!" he called.
"Say, man -- Goddam! Don't be calling my name so loud," a voice
answered. "Here, I am over here, gitting me some work shirts." 
"Git some for me, Du," he said.
"All right, but don't think I'm your papa," the answer came.
I looked at the thin man, feeling a surge of friendship. He didn' t 
know me, his help was disinterested . . .
"Hey, Du," he called, "we go'n do it?" 
"Hell yes, soon as I git me these shirts." 
The crowd was working in and out of the stores like ants around 
spilled sugar. From time to time there came the crash of glass, sho ts; fire 
trucks in distant streets.
"How you feel?" the man said.
"Still fuzzy," I said, "and weak." 
"Le's see if it's stopped bleeding. Yeah, you'll be all right. " 
I saw him vaguely though his voice came clear.
"Sure," I said.
"Man, you lucky you ain't dead. These sonsabitches is really s hooting 
now," he said. "Over on Lenox they was aiming up in the air. If I c ould find 
me a rifle, I'd show 'em! Here, take you a drink of this good Scotch ," he 
said, taking a quart bottle from a hip pocket. "I got me a whole ca se stashed 
what I got from a liquor store over there. Over there all you got to d o is 
breathe, and you drunk, man. Drunk! Hundred proof bonded whiskey f lowing 
all in the gutters." 
I took a drink, shuddering as the whiskey went down but thankful
for the shock it gave me. There was a bursting, tearing movement o f people 
around me, dark figures in a blue glow.
"Look at them take it away," he said, looking into the dark acti on of
the crowd. "Me, I'm tired. Was you over on Lenox?" 
"No," I said, seeing a woman moving slowly past with a row of abo ut 
a dozen dressed chickens suspended by their necks from the hand le of a new 
straw broom . . .
"Hell, you ought to see it, man. Everything is tore up. By now th e 
womens is picking it clean. I saw one ole woman with a whole sid e of a cow 
on her back. Man, she was 'bout bent bowlegged trying to make i t home -- 
Here come Dupre now," he said, breaking off.
I saw a little hard man come out of the crowd carrying several
boxes. He wore three hats upon his head, and several pairs of suspe nders 
flopped about his shoulders, and now as he came toward us I saw th at he 
wore a pair of gleaming new rubber hip boots. His pockets bulged and over 
his shoulder he carried a cloth sack that swung heavily behind h im.
"Damn, Dupre," my friend said, pointing to his head, "you got on e of
them for me? What kind is they?" 
Dupre stopped and looked at him. "With all them hats in there and
I'm going to come out with anything but a Dobbs? Man, are you mad ? All
them new, pretty-colored Dobbs? Come on, let's get going before the cops git 
back. Damn, look at that thing blaze!" 
I looked toward the curtain of blue fire, through which vague figu res 
toiled. Dupre called out and several men left the crowd and joine d us in the 
street. We moved off, my friend (Scofield, the others called him ) leading me 
along. My head throbbed, still bled.
"Looks like you got you some loot too," he said, pointing to my brief
case.
"Not much," I said, thinking, loot? Loot? And suddenly I knew why 
it was heavy, remembering Mary's broken bank and the coins; and n ow I 
found myself opening the brief case and dropping all my papers -- my 
Brotherhood identification, the anonymous letter, along with Clifton's doll -- 
into it.
"Fill it up, man. Don't you be bashful. You wait till we tackle one of
these pawnshops. That Du's got him a cotton-picking sack ful la stuff. He 
could go into business." 
"Well, I'll be damn," a man on the other side of me said. "I thou ght 
that was a cotton sack. Where'd he get that thing?" 
"He brought it with him when he come North," Scofield said. "Du 
swears that when he goes back he'll have it full of ten-dollar b ills. Hell, after 
tonight he'll need him a warehouse for all the stuff he's got. Y ou fill that 
brief case, buddy. Get yourself something!" 
"No," I said, "I've enough in it already." And now I remembered ve ry 
clearly where I'd started out for but could not leave them.
"Maybe you right," Scofield said. "How I know, you might have i t full
of diamonds or something. A man oughtn't to be greedy. Though i t's time 
something like this happened." 
We moved along. Should I leave, get on to the district? Where were
they, at the birthday celebration? 
"How did all this get started?" I said.
Scofield seemed surprised. "Damn if I know, man. A cop shot a 
woman or something." 
Another man moved close to us as somewhere a piece of heavy stee l
rang down.
"Hell, that wasn't what started it," he said. "It was that fell ow, what's 
his name . . . ?" 
"Who?" I said. "What's his name?" 
"That young guy!" 
"You know, everybody's mad about it . . ." 
Clifton, I thought. It's for Clifton. A night for Clifton.
"Aw man, don't tell me," Scofield said. "Didn't I see it with m y own 
eyes? About eight o'clock down on Lenox and 123rd this paddy sl apped a kid 
for grabbing a Baby Ruth and the kid's mama took it up and then th e paddy 
slapped her and that's when hell broke loose." 
"You were there?" I said.
"Same's I'm here. Some fellow said the kid made the paddy mad by
grabbing a candy named after a white woman." 
"Damn if that's the way I heard it," another man said. "When I co me 
up they said a white woman set it oft by trying to take a black ga l's man." 
"Damn who started it," Dupre said. "All I want is for it to last a 
while." 
"It was a white gal, all right, but that wasn't the way it was. Sh e was 
drunk --" another voice said.
But it couldn't have been Sybil, I thought; it had already start ed.
"You wahn know who started it?" a man holding a pair of binocula rs 
called from the window of a pawnshop. "You wahn really to know?"
"Sure," I said.
"Well, you don't need to go no further. It was started by that great
leader, Ras the Destroyer!" 
"That monkey-chaser?" someone said.
"Listen, bahstard!" 
"Don't nobody know how it started," Dupre said.
"Somebody has to know," I said.
Scofield held his whiskey toward me. I refused it.
"Hell, man, it just exploded. These is dog days," he said.
"Dog days?" 
"Sho, this hot weather." 
"I tell you they mad over what happen to that young fellow,
what's-his-name . . ." 
We were passing a building now and I heard a voice calling 
frantically, "Colored store! Colored store!" 
"Then put up a sign, motherfouler," a voice said. "You probably 
rotten as the others." 
"Listen at the bastard. For one time in his life he's glad to be 
colored," Scofield said.
"Colored store," the voice went on automatically.
"Hey! You sho you ain't got some white blood?" 
"No, sir!" the voice said.
"Should I bust him, man?" 
"For what? He ain't got a damn thing. Let the motherfouler alon e." 
A few doors away we came to a hardware store. "This is the first 
stop, men," Dupre said.
"What happens now?" I said.
"Who you?" he said, cocking his thrice-hatted head.
"Nobody, just one of the boys --" I began.
"You sho you ain't somebody I know?" 
"I'm pretty sure," I said.
"He's all right, Du," said Scofield. "Them cops shot him." 
Dupre looked at me and kicked something -- a pound of butter,
sending it smearing across the hot street. "We fixing to do somet hing what 
needs to be done," he said. "First we gets a flashlight for ever ybody . . . And 
let's have some organization, y'all. Don't everybody be runni ng over everybody 
else. Come on!" 
"Come on in, buddy," Scofield said.
I felt no need to lead or leave them; was glad to follow; was grip ped 
by a need to see where and to what they would lead. And all the tim e the 
thought that I should go to the district was with me. We went ins ide the 
store, into the dark glinting with metal. They moved carefully, and I could 
hear them searching, sweeping objects to the floor. The cash reg ister rang.
"Here some flashlights over here," someone called.
"How many?" Dupre said.
"Plenty, man." 
"Okay, pass out one to everybody. They got batteries?" 
"Naw, but there's plenty them too, 'bout a dozen boxes." 
"Okay, give me one with batteries so I can find the buckets. The n 
every man get him a light." 
"Here some buckets over here," Scofield said.
"Then all we got to find is where he keeps the oil." 
"Oil?" I said.
"Coal oil, man. And hey, y'all," he called, '"don't nobody be smoking 
in here." 
I stood beside Scofield listening to the noise as he took a sta ck of
zinc buckets and passed them out. Now the store leaped alive wi th flashing 
lights and flickering shadows.
"Keep them lights down on the floor," Dupre called. "No use lett ing 
folks see who we are. Now when you get your buckets line up and le t me fill
'em." 
"Listen to ole Du lay it down -- he's a bitch, ain't he, buddy? H e 
always liked to lead things. And always leading me into troubl e." 
"What are we getting ready to do?" I said.
"You'll see," Dupre said. "Hey, you over there. Come on from behi nd 
that counter and take this bucket. Don't you see ain't nothin g in that cash 
register, that if it was I'd have it myself?" 
Suddenly the banging of buckets ceased. We moved into the bac k 
room. By the light of a flash I could see a row of fuel drums mounted on 
racks. Dupre stood before them in his new hip boots and filled eac h bucket 
with oil. We moved in slow order. Our buckets filled, we filed ou t into the 
street. I stood there in the dark feeling a rising excitement as th eir voices 
played around me. What was the meaning of it all? What should I t hink of
it, do about it? 
"With this stuff," Dupre said, "we better walk in the middle of the 
street. It's just down around the corner." 
Then as we moved off a group of boys ran among us and the men 
started using their lights, revealing darting figures in blonde wigs, the tails of
their stolen dress coats flying. Behind them in hot pursuit cam e a gang 
armed with dummy rifles taken from an Army & Navy Store. I laughed wi th 
the others, thinking: A holy holiday for Clifton.
"Put out them lights!" Dupre commanded.
Behind us came the sound of screams, laughter; ahead the footfa lls of
the running boys, distant fire trucks, shooting, and in the quie t intervals, the 
steady filtering of shattered glass. I could smell the kerosene as it sloshed 
from the buckets and slapped against the street.
Suddenly Scofield grabbed my arm. "Good God, look-a-yonder!" 
And I saw a crowd of men running up pulling a Borden's milk 
wagon, on top of which, surrounded by a row of railroad flares, a huge
woman in a gingham pinafore sat drinking beer from a barrel which sa t 
before her. The men would run furiously a few paces and stop, restin g 
between the shafts, run a few paces and rest, shouting and laugh ing and 
drinking from a jug, as she on top threw back her head and shouted 
passionately in a full-throated voice of blues singer's timbre :
If it hadn't been for the referee,
Joe Louis woulda killed 
Jim Jefferie 
Free beer!!
-- sloshing the dipper of beer around.
We stepped aside, amazed, as she bowed graciously from side to s ide 
like a tipsy fat lady in a circus parade, the dipper like a gravy sp oon in her 
enormous hand. Then she laughed and drank deeply while reaching over 
nonchalantly with her free hand to send quart after quart ot milk crashing 
into the street. And all the time the men running with the wagon o ver the 
debris. Around me there were shouts of laughter and disapproval.
"Somebody better stop them fools," Scofield said in outrage. "That's 
what I call taking things too far. Goddam, how the hell they goi ng to get her 
down from there after she gits fulla beer? Somebody answer me tha t. How 
they going to get her down? 'Round here throwing away all that go od milk!" 
The big woman left me unnerved. Milk and beer -- I felt sad,
watching the wagon careen dangerously as they went around a corne r. We 
went on, avoiding the broken bottles as now the spilling kerose ne splashed 
into the pale spilt milk. How much has happened? Why was I torn? We 
moved around a corner. My head still ached.
Scofield touched my arm. "Here we is," he said.
We had come to a huge tenement building.
"Where are we?" I said.
"This the place where most of us live," he said. "Come on." 
So that was it, the meaning of the kerosene. I couldn't believe it,
couldn't believe they had the nerve. All the windows seemed e mpty. They'd 
blacked it out themselves. I saw now only by flash or flame.
"Where will you live?" I said, looking up, up.
"You call this living?" Scofield said. "It's the only way to g it rid of it,
man . . ." 
I looked for hesitation in their vague forms. They stood looki ng at 
the building rising above us, the liquid dark of the oil simmerin g dully in the 
stray flecks of light that struck their pails, bent forward, the ir shoulders 
bowed. None said "no," by word or stance. And in the dark windows and on 
the roofs above I could now discern the forms of women and children .
Dupre moved toward the building.
"Now look ahere, y'all," he said, his triple-hatted head showi ng 
grotesquely atop the stoop. "I wants all the women and chillun and the old 
and the sick folks brought out. And when you takes your buckets up the 
stairs I wants you to go clean to the top. I mean the top! And when you git 
there I want you to start using your flashlights in every room to m ake sure 
nobody gits left behind, then when you git 'em out start splash ing coal oil.
Then when you git it splashed I'm going to holler, and when I hol ler three 
times I want you to light them matches and git. After that it's every tub on 
its own black bottom!" 
It didn't occur to me to interfere, or to question . . . They had a 
plan. Already I could see the women and children coming down the steps. A 
child was crying. And suddenly everyone paused, turning, loo king off into the 
dark. Somewhere nearby an incongruous sound shook the dark, an ai r 
hammer pounding like a machine gun. They paused with the sens itivity of
grazing deer, then returned to their work, the women and children on ce more 
moving.
"That's right, y'all. You ladies move on up the street to the fol ks you 
going to stay with," Dupre said. "And keep holt them kids!" 
Someone pounded my back and I swung around, seeing a woman 
push past me and climb up to catch Dupre's arm, their two figures s eeming 
to blend as her voice arose, thin, vibrant and desperate.
"Please, Dupre," she said, "please. You know my time's almost here .
. . you know it is. If you do it now, where am I going to go?" 
Dupre pulled away and rose to a higher step. He looked down at 
her, shaking his thrice-hatted head. "Now git on out the way, Lo ttie," he said 
patiently. "Why you have to start this now? We done been all ove r it and 
you know I ain't go'n change. And lissen here, the resta y'all," he said,
reaching into the top of his hip boot and producing a nickel-pla ted revolver 
and waving it around, "don't think they's going to be any mind- changing 
either. And I don't aim for no arguments neither." 
"You goddam right, Dupre. We wid you!" 
"My kid died from the t-bees in that deathtrap, but I bet a man ain 't 
no more go'n be born in there," he said. "So now, Lottie, you go on u p the 
street and let us mens git going." 
She stood back, crying. I looked at her, in house shoes, her brea sts 
turgid, her belly heavy and high. In the crowd, women's hands to ok her away,
her large liquid eyes turned for a second toward the man in the rubb er 
boots.
What type of man is he, what would Jack say of him? Jack. Jack!
And where was he in this? 
"Let's go, buddy," Scofield said, nudging me. I followed him , filled 
with a sense of Jack's outrageous unreality. We went in, up the s tairs,
flashing our lights. Ahead I saw Dupre moving. He was a type of m an 
nothing in my life had taught me to see, to understand, or respec t, a man 
outside the scheme till now. We entered rooms littered with the s igns of swift 
emptying. It was hot, close.
"This here's my own apartment," Scofield said. "And ain't the b edbugs 
going to get a surprise!" 
We slopped the kerosene about, upon an old mattress, along the 
floor; then moved into the hall, using the flashlights. From al l through the 
building came the sounds of footsteps, of splashing oil, the occasional
prayerful protest of some old one being forced to leave. The men wo rked in 
silence now, like moles deep in the earth. Time seemed to hold. No one 
laughed. Then from below came Dupre's' voice.
"Okay, mens. We got everybody out. Now starting with the top fl oor 
I want you to start striking matches. Be careful and don't set you rself on fire 
. . ." 
There was still some kerosene left in Scofield's bucket and I sa w him 
pick up a rag and drop it in; then came the sputtering of a match and I saw 
the room leap to flame. The heat flared up and I backed away. He st ood 
there silhouetted against the red flare, looking into the flame s, shouting.
"Goddam you rotten sonsabitches. You didn't think I'd do it bu t there 
it is. You wouldn't fix it up. Now see how you like it." 
"Let's go," I said.
Below us, men shot downstairs five and six steps at a time, movi ng 
in the weird light of flash and flame in long, dream-bounds. On e ach floor as 
I passed, smoke and flame arose. And now I was seized with a fierc e sense 
of exaltation. They've done it, I thought. They organized it a nd carried it 
through alone; the decision their own and their own action. Ca pable of their 
own action . . .
There came a thunder of footfalls above me, someone calling, " Keep 
going man, it's hell upstairs. Somebody done opened the door t o the roof and 
them flames is leaping." 
"Come on," Scofield said.
I moved, feeling something slip and was halfway down the next flight 
before realizing that my brief case was gone. For a second I hesit ated, but I'd 
had it too long to leave it now.
"Come on, buddy," Scofield called, "we caint be fooling aroun d." 
"In a second," I said.
Men were shooting past. I bent over, holding on to the handrail an d 
shouldered my way back up the stairs, using my flash along each s tep, back 
slowly, finding it, an oily footstep embedded with crushed pi eces of plaster 
showing upon its leather side; getting it now and turning to bo und down 
again. The oil won't come off easily, I thought with a pang. Bu t this was it,
what I had known was coming around the dark corner of my mind, had 
known and tried to tell the committee and which they had ignored . I plunged 
down, shaking with fierce excitement.
At the landing I saw a bucket half full of kerosene and seized it ,
flinging it impulsively into a burning room. A huge puff of smok e-fringed 
flame filled the doorway, licking outward toward me. I ran, chok ing and 
coughing as I plunged. They did it themselves, I thought, hol ding my breath 
-- planned it, organized it, applied the flame.
I burst into the air and the exploding sounds of the night, and I did 
not know if the voice was that of a man, woman or child, but for a moment 
I stood on the stoop with the red doorway behind me and heard the v oice 
call me by my Brotherhood name.
It was as though I had been aroused from sleep and for an instant I
stood there looking, listening to the voice almost lost in the clamour of
shouts, screams, burglar alarms and sirens.
"Brother, ain't it wonderful," it called. "You said you would le ad us,
you really said it . . ." 
I went down into the street, going slowly but filled with a feve rish 
inner need to be away from that voice. Where had Scofield gone? 
Most of their eyes, white in the flame-flushed dark, looked to ward 
the building.
But now I heard someone say, "Woman, who you say that is?" And 
she proudly repeated my name.
"Where he go? Get him, mahn, Ras wahnt him!" 
I went into the crowd, walking slowly, smoothly into the dark cro wd,
the whole surface of my skin alert, my back chilled, looking, li stening to 
those moving with a heaving and sweating and a burr of talk aroun d me and 
aware that now that I wanted to see them, needed to see them, I co uld not;
feeling them, a dark mass in motion on a dark night, a black river ri pping 
through a black land; and Ras or Tarp could move beside me and I wo uldn't 
know. I was one with the mass, moving down the littered street ov er the 
puddles of oil and milk, my personality blasted. Then I was in t he next block,
dodging in and out, hearing them somewhere in the crowd behind me ;
moving on through the sound of sirens and burglar alarms to be swep t into a 
swifter crowd and pushed along, half-running, half-walking, trying to see 
behind me and wondering where the others had gone. There was shoot ing 
back there now, and on either side of me they were throwing garbag e cans,
bricks and pieces of metal into plate glass windows. I moved, f eeling as 
though a huge force was on the point of bursting. Shouldering my w ay to the 
side I stood in a doorway and watched them move, feeling a certa in 
vindication as now I thought of the message that had brought me here. Who 
had called, one of the district members or someone from Jack's bi rthday 
celebration? Who wanted me at the district after it was too late ? Very well,
I'd go there now. I'd see what the master minds thought now. Whe re were 
they anyway, and what profound conclusions were they drawing? W hat ex 
post facto lessons of history? And that crash over the telepho ne, had that 
been the beginning, or had Jack simply dropped his eye? I laugh ed 
drunkenly, the eruption paining my head.
Suddenly the shooting ceased and in the silence there was the s ound 
of voices, footfalls, labor.
"Hey, buddy," somebody said beside me, "where you going?" It w as 
Scofield.
"It's either run or get knocked down," I said. "I thought you we re 
still back there." 
"I cut out, man. A building two doors away started to burn and they
had to git the fire department . . . Damn! wasn't for this noise I' d swear 
those bullets was mosquitoes." 
"Watch out!" I warned, pulling him away from where a man lay 
propped against a post, tightening a tourniquet around his gash ed arm.
Scofield flashed his light and for a second I saw the black man , his 
face gray with shock, watching the jetting pulsing of his bloo d spurting into 
the street. Then, compelled, I reached down and twisted the tou rniquet,
feeling the blood warm upon my hand, seeing the pulsing cease.
"You done stopped it," a young man said, looking down.
"Here," I said, "you take it, hold it tight. Get him to a doctor."
"Ain't you a doctor?" 
"Me?" I said. "Me? Are you crazy? If you want him to live, get him 
away from here." 
"Albert done gone for one," the boy said. "But I thought you was
one. You --" 
"No," I said, looking at my bloody hands, "no, not me. You hold it 
tight until the doctor comes. I couldn't cure a headache." 
I stood wiping my hands against the brief case, looking down at the 
big man, his back resting against the post with his eyes closed , the boy 
holding desperately to the tourniquet made of what had been a bri ght new 
tie.
"Come on," I said.
"Say," Scofield said when we were past, "wasn't that you that w oman 
was calling brother back yonder?" 
"Brother? No, it must have been some other guy." 
"You know, man, I think I seen you before somewhere. You ever was
in Memphis . . . ? Say, look what's coming," he said, pointing, and I looked 
through the dark to see a squad of white-helmeted policemen cha rge forward 
and break for shelter as a rain of bricks showered down from the buil ding 
tops. Some of the white helmets, racing for the doorways, turne d to fire, and 
I heard Scofield grunt and go down and I dropped beside him, seein g the red 
burst of fire and hearing the shrill scream, like an arching dive, cu rving from 
above to end in a crunching thud in the street. It was as though it landed in 
my stomach, sickening me, and I crouched, looking down past Sc ofield, who 
lay just ahead of me, to see the dark crushed form from the roof; and f arther 
away, the body of a cop, his helmet making a small white lumino us mound 
in the dark.
I moved now to see whether Scofield was hit, just as he squirmed
around and cursed at the cops who were trying to rescue the one who w as 
down, his voice furious, as he stretched full length firing away with a 
nickel-plated pistol like that Dupre had waved.
"Git the hell down, man," he yelled over his shoulder. "I been 
wanting to blast 'em a long time." 
"No, not with that thing," I said. "Let's get out of here." 
"Hell, man, I can shoot this thing," he said.
I rolled behind a pile of baskets filled with rotting chickens n ow, and 
to my left, upon the littered curb, a woman and man crouched behi nd an 
upturned delivery cart.
"Dehart," she said, "let's get up on the hill, Dehart. Up with th e 
respectable people!" 
"Hill, hell! We stay right here," the man said. "This thing's ju st 
starting. If it becomes a sho 'nough race riot I want to be here where there'll
be some fighting back." 
The words struck like bullets fired close range, blasting my 
satisfaction to earth. It was as though the uttered word had give n meaning to 
the night, almost as though it had created it, brought it into be ing in the 
instant his breath vibrated small against the loud, riotous air. And in 
defining, in giving organization to the fury, it seemed to spi n me around, and 
in my mind I was looking backward over the days since Clifton's death . . .
Could this be the answer, could this be what the committee had p lanned, the 
answer to why they'd surrendered our influence to Ras? Suddenly I heard the 
hoarse explosion of a shotgun, and looked past Scofield's gli nting pistol to the 
huddled form from the roof. It was suicide, without guns it was su icide, and 
not even the pawnshops here had guns for sale; and yet I knew wit h a 
shattering dread that the uproar which for the moment marked prima rily the 
crash of men against things -- against stores, markets -- could s wiftly become 
the crash of men against men and with most of the guns and numbers on 
the other side. I could see it now, see it clearly and in growing m agnitude. It 
was not suicide, but murder. The committee had planned it. And I had 
helped, had been a tool. A tool just at the very moment I had tho ught myself
free. By pretending to agree I had indeed agreed, had made myself
responsible for that huddled form lighted by flame and gunfire i n the street,
and all the others whom now the night was making ripe for death.
The brief case swung heavy against my leg as I ran, going away,
leaving Scofield cursing his lack of bullets behind me, runnin g wildly and 
swinging the brief case hard against the head of a dog that leape d at me out 
of the crowd, sending him yelping away. To my right lay a quiet res idential
street with trees, and I entered it, going toward Seventh Avenue, toward the 
district, filled now with horror and hatred. They'll pay, they'l l pay, I thought.
They'll pay!
The street lay dead quiet in the light of the lately risen moon, t he 
gunfire thin and for a moment, distant. The rioting seemed in an other world.
For a moment I paused beneath a low, thickly leaved tree, looki ng down the 
well-kept doily-shadowed walks past the silent houses. It w as as though the 
tenants had vanished, leaving the houses silent with all win dows shaded,
refugees from a rising flood. Then I heard the single footfalls co ming 
doggedly toward me in the night, an eerie slapping sound follow ed by a 
precise and hallucinated cry -- 
"Time's flying 
Souls dying 
The coming of the Lord 
Draweth niiiiigh!" 
-- as though he had run for days, for years. He trotted past where I s tood 
beneath the tree, his bare feet slapping the walk in the silence , going for a 
few feet and then the high, hallucinated cry beginning again .
I ran into the avenue where in the light of a flaming liquor store I
saw three old women scurrying toward me with raised skirts loaded w ith 
canned goods.
"I can't stop it just yet, but have mercy, Lord," one of them said .
"Do, Jesus, do, sweet Jesus . . ." 
I moved ahead, the fumes of alcohol and burning tar in my nostril s.
Down the avenue to my left a single street lamp still glowed whe re the long 
block was intersected on my right by a street, and I could see a crow d 
rushing a store that faced the intersection, moving in, and a fus illade of
canned goods, salami, liverwurst, hogsheads and chitterling s belching out to 
those outside and a bag of flour bursting white upon them; as no w out of
the dark of the intersecting street two mounted policemen came a t a gallop,
heaving huge and heavy-hooved, charging straight into the swa rming mass.
And I could see the great forward lunge of the horses and the crowd 
breaking and rolling back like a wave, back, and screaming and cu rsing, and 
some laughing -- back and around and out into the avenue, stumb ling and 
pushing, as the horses, heads high and bits froth-flecked, wen t over the curb 
to land stiff-legged and slide over the cleared walk as upon ic e skates and 
past, carried by the force of the charge, sideways now, legs stiff , sparks flying,
to where another crowd looted another store. And my heart tighten ed as the 
first crowd swung imperturbably back to their looting with deris ive cries, like 
sandpipers swinging around to glean the shore after a furious wav e's 
recession.
Cursing Jack and the Brotherhood I moved around a steel grill torn 
from the front of a pawnshop, seeing the troopers galloping back a nd the 
riders lifting the horses to charge again, grim and skillful in whi te steel
helmets, and the charge beginning. This time a man went down an d I saw a 
woman swinging a gleaming frying pan hard against the horse's ru mp and the 
horse neighing and beginning to plunge. They'll pay, I though t, they'll pay.
They came toward me as I ran, a crowd of men and women carrying cases of
beer, cheese, chains of linked sausage, watermelons, sacks of sugar, hams,
cornmeal, fuel lamps. If only it could stop right here, here; here b efore the 
others came with their guns. I ran.
There was no firing. But when, I thought, how long before it starts ? 
"Git a side of bacon, Joe," a woman called. "Git a side of bacon , Joe,
git Wilson's." 
"Lord, Lord, Lord," a dark voice called from the dark.
I went on, plunged in a sense of painful isolation as I reached 1 25th 
Street and started east. A squad of mounted police galloped pas t. Men with 
sub-machine guns were guarding a bank and a large jewelry store. I moved 
out to the center of the street, running down the trolley rails.
The moon was high now and before me the shattered glass glittered
in the street like the water of a flooded river upon the surface of which I ran 
as in a dream, avoiding by fate alone the distorted objects wash ed away by 
the flood. Then suddenly I seemed to sink, sucked under: Ahead of me the 
body hung, white, naked, and horribly feminine from a lamppost. I felt myself
spin around with horror and it was as though I had turned some night marish 
somersault. I whirled, still moving by reflex, back-tracking an d stopped and 
now there was another and another, seven-all hanging before a gu tted 
storefront. I stumbled, hearing the cracking of bones underfoot a nd saw a 
physician's skeleton shattered on the street, the skull rollin g away from the 
backbone, as I steadied long enough to notice the unnatural st iffness of those 
hanging above me. They were mannequins -- "Dummies!" I said al oud.
Hairless, bald and sterilely feminine. And I recalled the boys i n the blonde 
wigs, expecting the relief of laughter, but suddenly was more de vastated by 
the humor than by the horror. But are they unreal, I thought; are they ? What 
if one, even one is real -- is . . . Sybil? I hugged my brief case, ba cking 
away, and ran . . .
THEY moved in a tight-knit order, carrying sticks and clubs, sho tguns 
and rifles, led by Ras the Exhorter become Ras the Destroyer upon a great 
black horse. A new Ras of a haughty, vulgar dignity, dressed in t he costume 
of an Abyssinian chieftain; a fur cap upon his head, his arm bea ring a shield,
a cape made of the skin of some wild animal around his shoulders. A figure 
more out of a dream than out of Harlem, than out of even this Harlem 
night, yet real, alive, alarming.
"Come away from that stupid looting," he called to a group before a 
store. "Come jine with us to burst in the armory and get guns and 
ammunition!" 
And hearing his voice I opened my brief case and searched for my 
dark glasses, my Rineharts, drawing them out only to see the crush ed lenses 
fall to the street. Rinehart, I thought, Rinehart! I turned. The p olice were 
back there behind me; if shooting started I'd be caught in the cro ssfire. I felt 
in my brief case, feeling papers, shattered iron, coins, my finge rs closing over 
Tarp's leg chain, and I slipped it over my knuckles, trying to t hink. I closed 
the flap, locking it. A new mood was settling over me as they ca me on, a 
larger crowd than Ras had ever drawn. I went calmly forward, holdi ng the 
heavy case but moving with a certain new sense of self, and with it a feeling 
almost of relief, almost of a sigh. I knew suddenly what I had to do, knew it 
even before it shaped itself completely in my mind.
Someone called, "Look!" and Ras bent down from the horse, saw me
and flung, of all things, a spear, and I fell forward at the movem ent of his 
arm, catching myself upon my hands as a tumbler would, and heard the 
shock of it piercing one of the hanging dummies. I stood, my brie f case 
coming with me.
"Betrayer!" Ras shouted.
"It's the brother," someone said. They moved up around the horse 
excited and not quite decided, and I faced him, knowing I was n o worse than 
he, nor any better, and that all the months of illusion and the n ight of chaos 
required but a few simple words, a mild, even a meek, muted action to clear 
the air. To awaken them and me.
"I am no longer their brother," I shouted. "They want a race riot an d 
I am against it. The more of us who are killed, the better they lik e --" 
"Ignore his lying tongue," Ras shouted. "Hang him up to teach t he 
black people a lesson, and theer be no more traitors. No more Uncle Toms.
Hang him up theer with them blahsted dummies!" 
"But anyone can see it," I shouted. "It's true, I was betrayed by those 
who I thought were our friends -- but they counted on this man, to o. They 
needed this destroyer to do their work. They deserted you so that in your 
despair you'd follow this man to your destruction. Can't you s ee it? They 
want you guilty of your own murder, your own sacrifice!" 
"Grab him!" Ras shouted.
Three men stepped forward and I reached up without thinking,
actually a desperate oratorical gesture of disagreement and defi ance, as I 
shouted, "No!" But my hand struck the spear and I wrenched it free , gripping 
it mid-shaft, point forward. "They want this to happen," I sai d. "They planned 
it. They want the mobs to come uptown with machine guns and rifl es. They 
want the streets to flow with blood; your blood, black blood an d white blood,
so that they can turn your death and sorrow and defeat into propaga nda. It's 
simple, you've known it a long time. It goes, 'Use a nigger to c atch a nigger.'
Well, they used me to catch you and now they're using Ras to do aw ay with 
me and to prepare your sacrifice. Don't you see it? Isn't it clear . . . ?" 
"Hang the lying traitor," Ras shouted. "What are you waiting for? " 
I saw a group of men start forward.
"Wait," I said. "Then kill me for myself, for my own mistake, t hen 
leave it there. Don't kill me for those who are downtown laughin g at the trick 
they played --" 
But even as I spoke I knew it was no good. I had no words and no 
eloquence, and when Ras thundered, "Hang him!" I stood there fa cing them,
and it seemed unreal. I faced them knowing that the madman in a f oreign 
costume was real and yet unreal, knowing that he wanted my life, that he 
held me responsible for all the nights and days and all the suff ering and for 
all that which I was incapable of controlling, and I no hero, but short and 
dark with only a certain eloquence and a bottomless capacity fo r being a fool
to mark me from the rest; saw them, recognized them at last as those whom 
I had failed and of whom I was now, just now, a leader, though lea ding 
them, running ahead of them, only in the stripping away of my ill usionment.
I looked at Ras on his horse and at their handful of guns and 
recognized the absurdity of the whole night and of the simple ye t 
confoundingly complex arrangement of hope and desire, fear and hate, that 
had brought me here still running, and knowing now who I was and wh ere I 
was and knowing too that I had no longer to run for or from the Jack s and 
the Emersons and the Bledsoes and Nortons, but only from their co nfusion,
impatience, and refusal to recognize the beautiful absurdity o f their American 
identity and mine. I stood there, knowing that by dying, that b y being hanged 
by Ras on this street in this destructive night I would perhaps mo ve them 
one fraction of a bloody step closer to a definition of who they were and of
what I was and had been. But the definition would have been too narrow; I 
was invisible, and hanging would not bring me to visibility, e ven to their 
eyes, since they wanted my death not for myself alone but for t he chase I'd 
been on all my life; because of the way I'd run, been run, chased, operated,
purged -- although to a great extent I could have done nothing el se, given 
their blindness (didn't they tolerate both Rinehart and Bleds oe?) and my 
invisibility. And that I, a little black man with an assumed n ame should die 
because a big black man in his hatred and confusion over the nat ure of a 
reality that seemed controlled solely by white men whom I knew t o be as 
blind as he, was just too much, too outrageously absurd. And I kn ew that it 
was better to live out one's own absurdity than to die for that o f others,
whether for Ras's or Jack's.
So when Ras yelled, "Hang him!" I let fly the spear and it was as
though for a moment I had surrendered my life and begun to live aga in,
watching it catch him as he turned his head to shout, ripping thro ugh both 
cheeks, and saw the surprised pause of the crowd as Ras wrestled wi th the 
spear that locked his jaws. Some of the men raised their guns, b ut they were 
too close to shoot and I hit the first with Tarp's leg chain and th e other in 
the middle with my brief case, then ran through a looted store, hea ring the 
blanging of the burglar alarm as I scrambled over scattered shoes , upturned 
showcases, chairs -- back to where I saw the moonlight through th e rear door 
ahead. They came behind me like a draft of flames and I led them t hrough 
and around to the avenue, and if they'd fired they could have had me, but it 
was important to them that they hang me, lynch me even, since th at was the 
way they ran, had been taught to run. I should die by hanging alon e, as 
though only hanging would settle things, even the score. So I ra n expecting 
death between the shoulder blades or through the back of my hea d, and as I 
ran I was trying to get to Mary's. It was not a decision of though t but 
something I realized suddenly while running over puddles of mi lk in the black 
street, stopping to swing the heavy brief case and the leg chain , slipping and 
sliding out of their hands.
If only I could turn around and drop my arms and say, "Look, men,
give me a break, we're all black folks together . . . Nobody cares. " Though 
now I knew we cared, they at last cared enough to act -- so I though t. If
only I could say, "Look, they've played a trick on us, the same o ld trick with 
new variations -- let's stop running and respect and love one ano ther . . ." If
only -- I thought, running into another crowd now and thinking I 'd gotten 
away, only to catch a punch on my jaw as one closed in shouting, and 
feeling the leg chain bounce as I caught his head and spurted fo rward,
turning out of the avenue only to be struck by a spray of water that seemed 
to descend from above. It was a main that had burst, throwing a fie rce 
curtain of spray into the night. I was going for Mary's but I was m oving 
downtown through the dripping street rather than up, and, as I sta rted 
through, a mounted policeman charged through the spray, the horse black 
and dripping, charging through and looming huge and unreal, neig hing and 
clopping across the pavement upon me now as I slipped to my knee s and 
saw the huge pulsing bulk floating down upon and over me, the s ound of
hooves and screams and a rush of water coming through distantly a s though 
I sat remote in a padded room, then over, almost past, the hair of t he tail a 
fiery lash across my eyes. I stumbled about in circles, blindly swinging the 
brief case, the image of a fiery comet's tail burning my smarting lids; turning 
and swinging blindly with brief case and leg chain and hearing t he gallop 
begin as I floundered helplessly; and now moving straight into the full, naked 
force of the water, feeling its power like a blow, wet and thuddi ng and cold,
then through it and able partly to see just as another horse dashe d up and 
through, a hunter taking a barrier, the rider slanting backward, th e horse 
rising, then hit and swallowed by the rising spray. I stumbled do wn the 
street, the comet tail in my eyes, seeing a little better now an d looking back 
to see the water spraying like a mad geyser in the moonlight. To Mary, I 
thought, to Mary.
THERE were rows of iron fences backed by low hedges before the 
houses and I stumbled behind them and lay panting to rest from th e 
crushing force of the water. But hardly had I settled down, the dry , dog-day 
smell of the hedge in my nose, when they stopped before the hous e, leaning 
upon the fence. They were passing a bottle around and their voic es sounded 
spent of strong emotion.
"This is some night," one of them said. "Ain't this some night ?" 
"It's 'bout like the rest." 
"Why you say that?" 
" 'Cause it's fulla fucking and fighting and drinking and lyin g -- 
gimme that bottle." 
"Yeah, but tonight I seen some things I never seen before." 
"You think you seen something? Hell, you ought to been over on
Lenox about two hours ago. You know that stud Ras the Destroyer? W ell,
man, he was spitting blood." 
"That crazy guy?" 
"Hell, yes, man, he had him a big black hoss and a fur cap and 
some kind of old lion skin or something over his shoulders and h e was 
raising hell. Goddam if he wasn't a sight, riding up and down on t his ole 
hoss, you know, one of the kind that pulls vegetable wagons, a nd he got him 
a cowboy saddle and some big spurs." 
"Aw naw, man!" 
"Hell, yes! Riding up and down the block yelling, 'Destroy 'em ! Drive 
'em out! Burn 'em out! I, Ras, commands you.' You get that, man, " he said, " 
'I, Ras, commands you -- to destroy them to the last piece of rott en fish!'
And 'bout that time some joker with a big ole Georgia voice stic ks his head 
out the window and yells, 'Ride 'em, cowboy. Give 'em hell and bananas.' And 
man, that crazy sonofabitch up there on that hoss looking like d eath eating a 
sandwich, he reaches down and comes up with a forty-five and sta rts blazing 
up at that window -- And man, talk about cutting out! In a secon d wasn't 
nobody left but ole Ras up there on that hoss with that lion skin stretched 
straight out behind him. Crazy, man. Everybody else trying to g it some loot 
and him and his boys out for blood!" 
I lay like a man rescued from drowning, listening, still not sure I
was alive.
"I was over there," another voice said. "You see him when the 
mounted police got after his ass?" 
"Hell, naw . . . Here, take a li'l taste." 
"Well that's when you shoulda seen him. When he seen them cops
riding up he reached back of his saddle and come up with some kind of old 
shield." 
"A shield?" 
"Hell, yes! One with a spike in the middle of it. And that ain't all;
when he sees the cops he calls to one of his goddam henchmens to hand 
him up a spear, and a little short guy run out into the street and giv e him 
one. You know, one of the kind you see them African guys carrying in the 
moving pictures . . ." 
"Where the hell was you, man?" 
"Me? I'm over on the side where some stud done broke in a store 
and is selling cold beer out the window -- Done gone into busin ess, man," 
the voice laughed. "I was drinking me some Budweiser and diggi ng the doings 
-- when here comes the cops up the street, riding like cowboys, ma n; and 
when ole Ras-the-what's-his-name sees 'em he lets out a roar l ike a lion and 
rears way back and starts shooting spurs into that boss's ass fast as nickels 
falling in the subway at going-home time -- and gaawd-dam! th at's when you 
ought to seen him! Say, gimme a taste there, fella.
"Thanks. Here he comes bookety-bookety with that spear stuck out in 
front of him and that shield on his arm, charging, man. And he's ye lling 
something in African or West Indian or something and he's got h is head 
down low like he knew about that shit too, man; riding like Earle Sande in 
the fifth at Jamaica. That ole black hoss let out a whinny and g ot his head 
down -- I don't know where he got that sonofabitch -- but, gentl emens, I 
swear! When he felt that steel in his high behind he came on like Man o'
War going to get his ashes hauled! Before the cops knowed what h it 'em Ras 
is right in the middle of 'em and one cop grabbed for that spear, an d ole 
Ras swung 'round and bust him across the head and the cop goes dow n and 
his hoss rears up, and ole Ras tries his and tries to spear him anoth er cop,
and the other hosses is plunging around and ole Ras tries to spea r him still
another cop, only he's too close and the hoss is pooling and sn orting and 
pissing and shitting, and they swings around and the cop is swi nging his 
pistol and every time he swings ole Ras throws up his shield wit h one arm 
and chops at him with the spear with the other, and man, you coul d hear 
that gun striking that ole shield like somebody dropping tire iro ns out a 
twelve-story window. And you know what, when ole Ras saw he wa s too close 
to spear him a cop he wheeled that hoss around and rode off a bit an d did 
him a quick round-about face and charged 'em again -- out for blo od, man!
Only this time the cops got tired of that bullshit and one of 'em started 
shooting. And that was the lick! Ole Ras didn't have time to gi t his gun so 
he let fly with that spear and you could hear him grunt and say so mething 
'bout that cop's kin-folks and then him and that hoss shot up t he street 
leaping like Heigho, the goddam Silver!" 
"Man, where'd you come from?" 
"It's the truth, man, here's my right hand." 
They were laughing outside the hedge and leaving and I lay in a 
cramp, wanting to laugh and yet knowing that Ras was not funny, or not 
only funny, but dangerous as well, wrong but justified, crazy an d yet coldly 
sane . . . Why did they make it seem funny, only funny? I thought . And yet 
knowing that it was. It was funny and dangerous and sad. Jack ha d seen it,
or had stumbled upon it and used it to prepare a sacrifice. And I ha d been 
used as a tool. My grandfather had been wrong about yessing them to death 
and destruction or else things had changed too much since his d ay.
There was only one way to destroy them. I got up from behind the 
hedge in the waning moon, wet and shaken in the hot air and start ed out 
looking for Jack, still turned around in my direction. I moved in to the street,
listening to the distant sounds of the riot and seeing in my min d the image 
of two eyes in the bottom of a shattered glass.
I kept to the darker side of streets and to the silent areas, think ing 
that if he wished really to hide his strategy he'd appear in the d istrict, with a 
sound truck perhaps, playing the friendly adviser with Wrestrum a nd Tobitt 
beside him.
They were in civilian clothes, and I thought, Cops -- until I sa w the 
baseball bat and started to turn, hearing, "Hey, you!" 
I hesitated.
"What's in that brief case?" they said, and if they'd asked me 
anything else I might have stood still. But at the question a w ave of shame 
and outrage shook me and I ran, still heading for Jack. But I was i n strange 
territory now and someone, for some reason, had removed the manho le cover 
and I felt myself plunge down, down; a long drop that ended upon a load of
coal that sent up a cloud of dust, and I lay in the black dark upon the black 
coal no longer running, hiding or concerned, hearing the shifti ng of the coal,
as from somewhere above their voices came floating down.
"You see the way he went down, zoom! I was just fixing to slug th e 
bastard." 
"You hit him?" 
"I don't know." 
"Say, Joe, you think the bastard's dead?" 
"Maybe. He sure is in the dark though. You can't even see his eyes ." 
"Nigger in the coal pile, eh, Joe?" 
Someone hollered down the hole, "Hey, black boy. Come on out. W e 
want to see what's in that brief case." 
"Come down and get me," I said.
"What's in that brief case?" 
"You," I said, suddenly laughing. "What do you think of that? " 
"Me?" 
"All of you," I said.
"You're crazy," he said.
"But I still have you in this brief case!" 
"What'd you steal?" 
"Can't you see?" I said. "Light a match." 
"What the hell's he talking about, Joe?" 
"Strike a match, the boogy's nuts." 
High above I saw the small flame sputter into light. They stoo d 
heads down, as in prayer, unable to see me back in the coal.
"Come on down," I said. "Hal Ha! I've had you in my brief case all
the time and you didn't know me then and can't see me now." 
"You sonofabitch!" one of them called, outraged. Then the mat ch 
went out and I heard something fall softly upon the coal near by . They were 
talking above.
"You goddam black nigger sonofabitch," someone called, "se e how you 
like this," and I heard the cover settle over the manhole with a dull clang.
Fine bits of dirt showered down as they stamped upon the lid and f or a 
moment I sent coal sliding in wild surprise, looking up, up throu gh black 
space to where for a second the dim light of a match sank through a circle 
of holes in the steel. Then I thought, This is the way it's alwa ys been, only 
now I know it -- and rested back, calm now, placing the brief case beneath 
my head. I could open it in the morning, push off the lid. Now I wa s tired,
too tired; my mind retreating, the image of the two glass eyes runn ing 
together like blobs of melting lead. Here it was as though the ri ot was gone 
and I felt the tug of sleep, seemed to move out upon black water.
It's a kind of death without hanging, I thought, a death alive . In the 
morning I'll remove the lid . . . Mary, I should have gone to Mary' s. I would 
go now to Mary's in the only way that I could . . . I moved off over the 
black water, floating, sighing . . . sleeping invisibly.
BUT I was never to reach Mary's, and I was over-optimistic about
removing the steel cap in the morning. Great invisible waves of t ime flowed 
over me, but that morning never came. There was no morning nor lig ht of
any kind to awaken me and I slept on and on until finally I was aro used by 
hunger. Then I was up in the dark and blundering around, feeling rou gh 
walls and the coal giving way beneath each step like treacherou s sand. I tried 
to reach above me but found only space, unbroken and impenetrabl e. Then I 
tried to find the usual ladder that leads out of such holes, but there was 
none. I had to have a light, and now on hands and knees, holding tight to 
my brief case, I searched the coal until I found the folder of mat ches the 
men had dropped -- how long ago had that been? -- but there were onl y 
three and to save them I started searching for paper to make a torch , feeling 
about slowly over the coal pile. I needed just one piece of pap er to light my 
way out of the hole, but there was nothing. Next I searched my poc kets,
finding not even a bill, or an advertising folder, or a Brotherhoo d leaflet. Why 
had I destroyed Rinehart's throwaway? Well, there was only one th ing to do 
if I was to make a torch. I'd have to open my brief case. In it were th e only 
papers I had.
I started with my high-school diploma, applying one precious m atch 
with a feeling of remote irony, even smiling as I saw the swift bu t feeble 
light push back the gloom. I was in a deep basement, full of sha peless 
objects that extended farther than I could see, and I realized t hat to light my 
way out I would have to burn every paper in the brief case. I moved slowly 
off, toward the darker blackness, lighting my way by these feeb le torches. The 
next to go was Clifton's doll, but it burned so stubbornly that I reached 
inside the case for something else. Then by the light of the sm oke-sputtering 
doll I opened a folded page. It was the anonymous letter, which burned so 
quickly that as it flamed I hurriedly unfolded another: It was th at slip upon 
which Jack had written my Brotherhood name. I could still smell E mma's 
perfume even in the dampness of the cellar. And now seeing the ha ndwriting 
of the two in the consuming flames I burned my hand and slipped t o my 
knees, staring. The handwriting was the same. I knelt there, stu nned,
watching the flames consume them. That he, or anyone at that l ate date,
could have named me and set me running with one and the same strok e of
the pen was too much. Suddenly I began to scream, getting up in t he 
darkness and plunging wildly about, bumping against walls, s cattering coal,
and in my anger extinguishing my feeble light.
But still whirling on in the blackness, knocking against the ro ugh 
walls of a narrow passage, banging my head and cursing, I stumble d down 
and plunged against some kind of partition and sailed headlon g, coughing and 
sneezing, into another dimensionless room, where I continued to roll about 
the floor in my outrage. How long this kept up, I do not know. It m ight 
have been days, weeks; I lost all sense of time. And everytime I paused to 
rest, the outrage revived and I went off again. Then, finally, wh en I could 
barely move, something seemed to say, "That's enough, don't k ill yourself.
You've run enough, you're through with them at last," and I colla psed, face 
forward and lay there beyond the point of exhaustion, too tired t o close my 
eyes. It was a state neither of dreaming nor of waking, but some where in 
between, in which I was caught like Trueblood's jaybird that ye llow jackets 
had paralyzed in every part but his eyes.
But somehow the floor had now turned to sand and the darkness to 
light, and I lay the prisoner of a group consisting of Jack and ol d Emerson 
and Bledsoe and Norton and Ras and the school superintendent an d a 
number of others whom I failed to recognize, but all of whom had ru n me,
who now pressed around me as I lay beside a river of black water, nea r 
where an armored bridge arched sharply away to where I could not see. A nd 
I was protesting their holding me and they were demanding that I return to 
them and were annoyed with my refusal.
"No," I said. "I'm through with all your illusions and lies, I' m 
through running." 
"Not quite," Jack said above the others' angry demands, "but y ou 
soon will be, unless you return. Refuse and we'll free you of your illusions all
right." 
"No, thank you; I'll free myself," I said, struggling to rise from the 
cutting sand.
But now they came forward with a knife, holding me; and I felt th e 
bright red pain and they took the two bloody blobs and cast them o ver the 
bridge, and out of my anguish I saw them curve up and catch benea th the 
apex of the curving arch of the bridge, to hang there, dripping dow n 
through the sunlight into the dark red water. And while the others l aughed,
before my pain-sharpened eyes the whole world was slowly turning red.
"Now you're free of illusions," Jack said, pointing to my seed w asting 
upon the air. "How does it feel to be free of one's illusions?" 
And I looked up through a pain so intense now that the air seemed
to roar with the clanging of metal, hearing, HOW DOES IT FEEL TO B E 
FREE OF ILLUSION . . .
And now I answered, "Painful and empty," as I saw a glittering 
butterfly circle three times around my blood-red parts, up there ben eath the 
bridge's high arch. "But look," I said pointing. And they looke d and laughed,
and suddenly seeing their satisfied faces and understanding , I gave a Bledsoe 
laugh, startling them. And Jack came forward, curious.
"Why do you laugh?" he said.
"Because at a price I now see that which I couldn't see," I said.
"What does he think he sees?" they said.
And Jack came closer, threatening, and I laughed. "I'm not afrai d 
now," I said. "But if you'll look, you'll see . . . It's not invi sible . . ." 
"See what?" they said.
"That there hang not only my generations wasting upon the water --" 
And now the pain welled up and I could no longer see them.
"But what? Go on," they said.
"But your sun . . ." 
"Yes?" 
"And your moon . . ." 
"He's crazy!" 
"Your world . . ." 
"I knew he was a mystic idealist!" Tobitt said.
"Still," I said, "there's your universe, and that drip-drop upon the 
water you hear is all the history you've made, all you're going to make. Now 
laugh, you scientists. Let's hear you laugh!" 
And high above me now the bridge seemed to move off to where I 
could not see, striding like a robot, an iron man, whose iron legs c langed 
doomfully as it moved. And then I struggled up, full of sorrow and pain,
shouting, "No, no, we must stop him!" 
And I awoke in the blackness.
Fully awake now, I simply lay there as though paralyzed. I could
think of nothing else to do. Later I would try to find my way out , but now I 
could only lie on the floor, reliving the dream. All their faces w ere so vivid 
that they seemed to stand before me beneath a spotlight. They w ere all up 
there somewhere, making a mess of the world. Well, let them. I was through 
and, in spite of the dream, I was whole.
And now I realized that I couldn't return to Mary's, or to any part o f
my old life. I could approach it only from the outside, and I had b een as 
invisible to Mary as I had been to the Brotherhood. No, I couldn' t return to 
Mary's, or to the campus, or to the Brotherhood, or home. I could only move 
ahead or stay here, underground. So I would stay here until I was ch ased 
out. Here, at least, I could try to think things out in peace, or, if not in 
peace, in quiet. I would take up residence underground. The end w as in the 
beginning.
Epilogue 
So there you have all of it that's important. Or at least you almo st 
have it. I'm an invisible man and it placed me in a hole -- or sho wed me the 
hole I was in, if you will -- and I reluctantly accepted the fact . What else 
could I have done? Once you get used to it, reality is as irresisti ble as a club,
and I was clubbed into the cellar before I caught the hint. Perha ps that's the 
way it had to be; I don't know. Nor do I know whether accepting t he lesson 
has placed me in the rear or in the avant-garde. That, perhaps, is a lesson 
for history, and I'll leave such decisions to Jack and his ilk while I try 
belatedly to study the lesson of my own life.
Let me be honest with you -- a feat which, by the way, I find of th e 
utmost difficulty. When one is invisible he finds such proble ms as good and 
evil, honesty and dishonesty, of such shifting shapes that h e confuses one 
with the other, depending upon who happens to be looking throug h him at 
the time. Well, now I've been trying to look through myself, an d there's a 
risk in it. I was never more hated than when I tried to be honest. Or when,
even as just now I've tried to articulate exactly what I felt to b e the truth.
No one was satisfied -- not even I. On the other hand, I've neve r been more 
loved and appreciated than when I tried to "justify" and affirm s omeone's 
mistaken beliefs; or when I've tried to give my friends the inco rrect, absurd 
answers they wished to hear. In my presence they could talk and ag ree with 
themselves, the world was nailed down, and they loved it. They received a 
feeling of security. But here was the rub: Too often, in order to ju stify them,
I had to take myself by the throat and choke myself until my eyes bulged 
and my tongue hung out and wagged like the door of an empty hous e in a 
high wind. Oh, yes, it made them happy and it made me sick. So I b ecame 
ill of affirmation, of saying "yes" against the nay-saying of my stomach -- not 
to mention my brain.
There is, by the way, an area in which a man's feelings are more 
rational than his mind, and it is precisely in that area that his w ill is pulled 
in several directions at the same time. You might sneer at this, but I know 
now. I was pulled this way and that for longer than I can remembe r. And 
my problem was that I always tried to go in everyone's way but my o wn. I 
have also been called one thing and then another while no one re ally wished 
to hear what I called myself. So after years of trying to adopt t he opinions of
others I finally rebelled. I am an invisible man. Thus I have com e a long way 
and returned and boomeranged a long way from the point in society t oward 
which I originally aspired.
So I took to the cellar; I hibernated. I got away from it all. But th at 
wasn't enough. I couldn't be still even in hibernation. Becau se, damn it,
there's the mind, the mind. It wouldn't let me rest. Gin, jazz an d dreams 
were not enough. Books were not enough. My belated appreciation of the 
crude joke that had kept me running, was not enough. And my mind 
revolved again and again back to my grandfather. And, despite th e farce that 
ended my attempt to say "yes" to the Brotherhood, I'm still plag ued by his 
deathbed advice . . . Perhaps he hid his meaning deeper than I th ought,
perhaps his anger threw me off -- I can't decide. Could he have me ant -- 
hell, he must have meant the principle, that we were to affirm the principle 
on which the country was built and not the men, or at least not t he men 
who did the violence. Did he mean say "yes" because he knew tha t the 
principle was greater than the men, greater than the numbers and t he vicious 
power and all the methods used to corrupt its name? Did he mean to affirm 
the principle, which they themselves had dreamed into being ou t of the chaos 
and darkness of the feudal past, and which they had violated an d 
compromised to the point of absurdity even in their own corrupt mi nds? Or 
did he mean that we had to take the responsibility for all of it, for the men 
as well as the principle, because we were the heirs who must use th e 
principle because no other fitted our needs? Not for the power or for 
vindication, but because we, with the given circumstance of o ur origin, could 
only thus find transcendence? Was it that we of all, we, most of all, had to 
affirm the principle, the plan in whose name we had been brutaliz ed and 
sacrificed -- not because we would always be weak nor because w e were 
afraid or opportunistic, but because we were older than they, in the sense of
what it took to live in the world with others and because they had exhausted 
in us, some -- not much, but some -- of the human greed and smalln ess, yes,
and the fear and superstition that had kept them running. (Oh, y es, they're 
running too, running all over themselves.) Or was it, did he mea n that we 
should affirm the principle because we, through no fault of our o wn, were 
linked to all the others in the loud, clamoring semi-visible wo rld, that world 
seen only as a fertile field for exploitation by Jack and his ki nd, and with 
condescension by Norton and his, who were tired of being the mere p awns in 
the futile game of "making history"? Had he seen that for thes e too we had 
to say "yes" to the principle, lest they turn upon us to destroy bo th it and 
us? 
"Agree 'em to death and destruction," grandfather had advised. Hell,
weren't they their own death and their own destruction except a s the 
principle lived in them and in us? And here's the cream of the joke : Weren't 
we part of them as well as apart from them and subject to die when th ey 
died? I can't figure it out; it escapes me. But what do I really wa nt, I've 
asked myself. Certainly not the freedom of a Rinehart or the powe r of a Jack,
nor simply the freedom not to run. No, but the next step I couldn' t make, so 
I've remained in the hole.
I'm not blaming anyone for this state of affairs, mind you; nor
merely crying mea culpa. The fact is that you carry part of your si ckness 
within you, at least I do as an invisible man. I carried my sickne ss and 
though for a long time I tried to place it in the outside world, th e attempt to 
write it down shows me that at least half of it lay within me. It c ame upon 
me slowly, like that strange disease that affects those black men whom you 
see turning slowly from black to albino, their pigment disappe aring as under 
the radiation of some cruel, invisible ray. You go along for years knowing 
something is wrong, then suddenly you discover that you're as t ransparent as 
air. At first you tell yourself that it's all a dirty joke, or that i t's due to the 
"political situation." But deep down you come to suspect tha t you're yourself
to blame, and you stand naked and shivering before the millions of eyes who 
look through you unseeingly. That is the real soul-sickness, t he spear in the 
side, the drag by the neck through the mob-angry town, the Grand 
Inquisition, the embrace of the Maiden, the rip in the belly wit h the guts 
spilling out, the trip to the chamber with the deadly gas that e nds in the 
oven so hygienically clean -- only it's worse because you cont inue stupidly to 
live. But live you must, and you can either make passive love t o your 
sickness or burn it out and go on to the next conflicting phase.
Yes, but what is the next phase? How often have I tried to find it !
Over and over again I've gone up above to seek it out. For, like a lmost 
everyone else in our country, I started out with my share of opti mism. I 
believed in hard work and progress and action, but now, after first being 
"for" society and then "against" it, I assign myself no rank or a ny limit, and 
such an attitude is very much against the trend of the times. Bu t my world 
has become one of infinite possibilities. What a phrase -- sti ll it's a good 
phrase and a good view of life, and a man shouldn't accept any ot her; that 
much I've learned underground. Until some gang succeeds in putt ing the 
world in a strait jacket, its definition is possibility. Step o utside the narrow 
borders of what men call reality and you step into chaos -- ask Rin ehart, he's 
a master of it -- or imagination. That too I've learned in the ce llar, and not 
by deadening my sense of perception; I'm invisible, not blind .
No indeed, the world is just as concrete, ornery, vile and sublim ely 
wonderful as before, only now I better understand my relation to i t and it to 
me. I've come a long way from those days when, full of illusion, I lived a 
public life and attempted to function under the assumption t hat the world 
was solid and all the relationships therein. Now I know men are di fferent and 
that all life is divided and that only in division is there true h ealth. Hence 
again I have stayed in my hole, because up above there's an incre asing 
passion to make men conform to a pattern. Just as in my nightmare, Jack 
and the boys are waiting with their knives, looking for the sli ghtest excuse to 
. . . well, to "ball the jack," and I do not refer to the old dance s tep,
although what they're doing is making the old eagle rock dangero usly.
Whence all this passion toward conformity anyway? -- diversity is the 
word. Let man keep his many parts and you'll have no tyrant states . Why, if
they follow this conformity business they'll end up by forcing me, an invisible 
man, to become white, which is not a color but the lack of one. M ust I strive 
toward colorlessness? But seriously, and without snobbery, th ink of what the 
world would lose if that should happen. America is woven of many strands; I 
would recognize them and let it so remain. It's "winner take not hing" that is 
the great truth of our country or of any country. Life is to be liv ed, not 
controlled; and humanity is won by continuing to play in face o f certain 
defeat. Our fate is to become one, and yet many -- This is not pro phecy, but 
description. Thus one of the greatest jokes in the world is the sp ectacle of
the whites busy escaping blackness and becoming blacker eve ry day, and the 
blacks striving toward whiteness, becoming quite dull and gray . None of us 
seems to know who he is or where he's going.
Which reminds me of something that occurred the other day in the 
subway. At first I saw only an old gentleman who for the moment w as lost. I 
knew he was lost, for as I looked down the platform I saw him appro ach 
several people and turn away without speaking. He's lost, I tho ught, and he'll
keep coming until he sees me, then he'll ask his direction. May be there's an 
embarrassment in it if he admits he's lost to a strange white man. Perhaps to 
lose a sense of where you are implies the danger of losing a sense of who 
you are. That must be it, I thought -- to lose your direction is to lose your 
face. So here he comes to ask his direction from the lost, the invi sible. Very 
well, I've learned to live without direction. Let him ask.
But then he was only a few feet away and I recognized him; it was 
Mr. Norton. The old gentleman was thinner and wrinkled now but as dapper 
as ever. And seeing him made all the old life live in me for an ins tant, and I 
smiled with tear-stinging eyes. Then it was over, dead, and whe n he asked 
me how to get to Centre Street, I regarded him with mixed feelings.
"Don't you know me?" I said.
"Should I?" he said.
"You see me?" I said, watching him tensely.
"Why, of course -- Sir, do you know the way to Centre Street?" 
"So. Last time it was the Golden Day, now it's Centre Street. You 've 
retrenched, sir. But don't you know who I am?" 
"Young man, I'm in a hurry," he said, cupping a hand to his ear.
"Why should I know you?" 
"Because I'm your destiny." 
"My destiny, did you say?" He gave me a puzzled stare, backing 
away. "Young man, are you well? Which train did you say I should t ake?" 
"I didn't say," I said, shaking my head. "Now, aren't you asham ed?" 
"Ashamed? ASHAMED!" he said indignantly.
I laughed, suddenly taken by the idea. "Because, Mr. Norton, if you 
don't know where you are, you probably don't know who you are. So yo u 
came to me out of shame. You are ashamed, now aren't you?" 
"Young man, I've lived too long in this world to be ashamed of
anything. Are you light-headed from hunger? How do you know my na me?" 
"But I'm your destiny, I made you. Why shouldn't I know you?" I
said, walking closer and seeing him back against a pillar. He l ooked around 
like a cornered animal. He thought I was mad.
"Don't be afraid, Mr. Norton," I said. "There's a guard down the 
platform there. You're safe. Take any train; they all go to the Gol den D --" 
But now an express had rolled up and the old man was disappearing 
quite spryly inside one of its doors. I stood there laughing hys terically. I 
laughed all the way back to my hole.
But after I had laughed I was thrown back on my thoughts -- how 
had it all happened? And I asked myself if it were only a joke and I couldn't 
answer. Since then I've sometimes been overcome with a passion to return 
into that "heart of darkness" across the Mason-Dixon line, but t hen I remind 
myself that the true darkness lies within my own mind, and the id ea loses 
itself in the gloom. Still the passion persists. Sometimes I f eel the need to 
reaffirm all of it, the whole unhappy territory and all the things loved and 
unlovable in it, for all of it is part of me. Till now, however, th is is as far as 
I've ever gotten, for all life seen from the hole of invisibili ty is absurd.
So why do I write, torturing myself to put it down? Because in spit e 
of myself I've learned some things. Without the possibility o f action, all
knowledge comes to one labeled "file and forget," and I can nei ther file nor 
forget. Nor will certain ideas forget me; they keep filing away a t my lethargy,
my complacency. Why should I be the one to dream this nightmare? Why 
should I be dedicated and set aside -- yes, if not to at least te ll a few people 
about it? There seems to be no escape. Here I've set out to throw my anger 
into the world's face, but now that I've tried to put it all down t he old 
fascination with playing a role returns, and I'm drawn upward agai n. So that 
even before I finish I've failed (maybe my anger is too heavy; p erhaps, being 
a talker, I've used too many words). But I've failed. The very ac t of trying to 
put it all down has confused me and negated some of the anger an d some of
the bitterness. So it is that now I denounce and defend, or feel prepared to 
defend. I condemn and affirm, say no and say yes, say yes and say no. I 
denounce because though implicated and partially responsibl e, I have been 
hurt to the point of abysmal pain, hurt to the point of invisibil ity. And I 
defend because in spite of all I find that I love. In order to get some of it 
down I have to love. I sell you no phony forgiveness, I'm a despe rate man -- 
but too much of your life will be lost, its meaning lost, unles s you approach 
it as much through love as through hate. So I approach it through di vision.
So I denounce and I defend and I hate and I love.
Perhaps that makes me a little bit as human as my grandfather.
Once I thought my grandfather incapable of thoughts about hum anity, but I 
was wrong. Why should an old slave use such a phrase as, "This and this or 
this has made me more human," as I did in my arena speech? Hell, he never 
had any doubts about his humanity -- that was left to his "free" offspring. He 
accepted his humanity just as he accepted the principle. It wa s his, and the 
principle lives on in all its human and absurd diversity. So now h aving tried 
to put it down I have disarmed myself in the process. You won't be lieve in 
my invisibility and you'll fail to see how any principle that a pplies to you 
could apply to me. You'll fail to see it even though death wait s for both of us 
if you don't. Nevertheless, the very disarmament has brought me to a 
decision. The hibernation is over. I must shake off the old skin and come up 
for breath. There's a stench in the air, which, from this distance underground,
might be the smell either of death or of spring -- I hope of spring . But don't 
let me trick you, there is a death in the smell of spring and in the s mell of
thee as in the smell of me. And if nothing more, invisibility ha s taught my 
nose to classify the stenches of death.
In going underground, I whipped it all except the mind, the mind .
And the mind that has conceived a plan of living must never los e sight of
the chaos against which that pattern was conceived. That goes for societies as 
well as for individuals. Thus, having tried to give pattern to t he chaos which 
lives within the pattern of your certainties, I must come out, I must emerge.
And there's still a conflict within me: With Louis Armstrong one half of me 
says, "Open the window and let the foul air out," while the oth er says, "It 
was good green corn before the harvest." Of course Louis was kiddi ng, he 
wouldn't have thrown old Bad Air out, because it would have brok en up the 
music and the dance, when it was the good music that came from th e bell of
old Bad Air's horn that counted. Old Bad Air is still around with h is music 
and his dancing and his diversity, and I'll be up and around with mine. And,
as I said before, a decision has been made. I'm shaking off the o ld skin and 
I'll leave it here in the hole. I'm coming out, no less invisibl e without it, but 
coming out nevertheless. And I suppose it's damn well time. Ev en 
hibernations can be overdone, come to think of it. Perhaps that' s my greatest 
social crime, I've overstayed my hibernation, since there's a po ssibility that 
even an invisible man has a socially responsible role to play.
"Ah," I can hear you say, "so it was all a build-up to bore us with
his buggy jiving. He only wanted us to listen to him rave!" But o nly partially 
true: Being invisible and without substance, a disembodied v oice, as it were,
what else could I do? What else but try to tell you what was reall y 
happening when your eyes were looking through? And it is this wh ich 
frightens me:
Who knows but that, on the lower frequencies, I speak for you? 
Scan Notes, v3.0: Proofed carefully against DT, italics and sp ecial characters 
intact. Because of the print quality in my copy of the book, man y of the f's 
OCR'd as t's. I think I found them all...
