
LOR D  O F  THE F LI E S
a  n o v e l
b y  W I L L I A M  G O L D I N G
Illustration by Skottie Y oung http://skottieyoung.deviantart.com/
Contents
     
1.         The Sound of the Shell
2.         Fire on the Mountain
3.         Huts on the Beach
4.         Painted Faces and Long Hair
5.         Beast from W ater
6.         Beast from Air
7.         Shadows and T all T rees
8.         Gift for the Darkness
9.         A V iew to a Death
10.       The Shell and the Glasses
1 1.       Castle Rock
12.       Cry of the Hunters
For my mother and father
     
     
CHAPTER ONE
     
The Sound of the Shell
     
The boy  with fair hair lowered himself down the last few feet of rock and
began to pick his way toward the lagoon. Though he had taken of f his
school s weater and trailed it now  from one hand, his grey shirt s tuck to him
and his hair was plastered to h is forehead. All round him the long scar
smashed into the jungle was a bath of heat. He was clamber ing heavily
among the creepers and broken trunks when a bird, a vision of red and
yellow , flashed upwards with a witch-like cry; and this cry was echoed by
another .
"Hi!" it said. "W ait a minute!"
The under growth at the side of  the scar was shaken and a multitude of
raindrops fell pattering.
"W ait a minute," the voice said. "I got caught up."
The fair  boy stopped and jerked his stockings with an automatic gesture
that made the jungle seem for a moment like the Home Counties.
The voice spoke again.
"I can't hardly move with all these creeper things."
The ow ner of the voice came backing out of the under growth so that
twigs scratched on a greasy wi nd-breaker . The naked crooks of his knees
were plu mp, caught and scratched by thorns. He bent down, removed the
thorns c arefully , and turned around. He was shorter than the fair boy and
very fat. He came forward, searching out safe lodgments for his feet, and
then looked up through thick spectacles.
"Where's the man with the megaphone?"
The fair boy shook his head.
"This is an island. At least I think it's an island. That's a reef out in the
sea. Perhaps there aren't any grownups anywhere."
The fat boy looked startled.
"There w as that pilot. But he wa sn't in the passenger cabin, he was up in
front."
The fair boy was peering at the reef through screwed-up eyes.
"All them other kids," the fat boy went on. "Some of them must have got
out. They must have, mustn't they?"
The fair  boy began to pick his way as casually as possible to ward the
water . H e tried to be of fhand and not too obviously uninterested, but the fat
boy hurried after him.
"Aren't there any grownups at all?"
"I don't think so."
The fair boy s aid this solemnly; but then the delight of a  realized
ambition overcame him. In the m iddle of the scar he stood on h is head and
grinned at the reversed fat boy .
"No grownups!"
The fat boy thought for a moment.
"That pilot."
The fair boy allowed his feet to come down and sat on the steamy earth.
"He must have flown of f after he dropped us. He couldn't land here. Not
in a place with wheels."
"W e was attacked!"
"He'll be back all right."
The fat boy shook his head.
"When w e was coming down I looked through one of them w indows. I
saw the other part of the plane. There were flames coming out of it."
He looked up and down the scar .
"And this is what the cabin done."
The fair boy reached out and touched the jagged end of a trunk. For a
moment he looked interested.
"What happened to it?" he asked. "Where's it got to now?"
"That st orm dra gged it out to sea. It wasn't half dangerous with all them
tree trunks falling. There must have been some kids still in it."
He hesitated for a moment, then spoke again.
"What's your name?"
"Ralph."
The fat boy waited to be asked his name in turn but this prof fer of
acquaintance wa s not made; the fair boy called Ralph smiled vaguely , stood
up, and began to make his way  once more toward the lagoon. The fat boy
hung steadily at his shoulder .
"I expec t there's a lot more of u s scattered about. Y ou haven't seen any
others, have you?"
Ralph sh ook his  head and incre ased his speed. Then he trippe d over a
branch and came down with a crash.
The fat boy stood by him, breathing hard.
"My auntie told me not to run," he explained, "on account of my asthma."
"Ass-mar?"
"That's right. Can't catch my b reath. I was the only boy in o ur school
what had asthma," said the fat boy with a touch of pride. "An d I've been
wearing specs since I was three."
He t ook of f his glasses and held them out to Ralph, blinking and smiling,
and the n started to wipe the m against his grubby wind-breaker . An
expression of pain and inward concentration altered the pale contours of his
face. He smeared the sweat f rom his cheeks and quickly a djusted the
spectacles on his nose.
"Them fruit."
He glanced round the scar .
"Them fruit," he said, "I expect―"
He put on his glasses, waded away from Ralph, and crouch ed down
among the tangled foliage.
"I'll be out again in just a minute―"
Ralph disentangled himself cautiously and stole away through the
branches. In a fe w seconds the fat boy's grunts were behind him and he was
hurrying toward  the screen that  still lay between him and the lagoon. He
climbed over a broken trunk and was out of the jungle.
The sho re was fledged with palm trees. These stood or leaned o r reclined
against the light and their green feathers were a hundred feet up in the air .
The ground beneath them was a bank covered with coarse grass, torn
everywhere by the upheavals of fallen trees, scattered with decaying
coconuts and palm saplings. B ehind this was the darkness of the forest
proper a nd the open space of the  scar . Ralph stood, one hand against a grey
trunk, and screwed up his eyes  against the shimmering water . Out there,
perhaps a mile away , the white surf flinked on a coral reef, and beyond that
the o pen sea was dark blue. W ithin the irregular arc of coral the  lagoon was
still as a mountain lake―blue of all shades and shadowy green and purple.
The bea ch between the palm ter race and the water was a thin st ick, endless
apparently , for to Ralph's left the perspectives of palm and beach and water
drew to a point at infinity; and always, almost visible, was the heat.
He jumped down from the terrace. The sand was thick over his black
shoes and the he at hit him. He became conscious of the weigh t of clothes,
kicked h is shoe s of f fiercely an d ripped of f each stocking wit h its elastic
garter in a singl e movement. Then he leapt back on the terrace, pulled of f
his s hirt, and stood there among  the skull-like coconuts with gre en shadows
from the  palms and the forest sliding over his skin. He undid the snake-
clasp of  his belt, lugged of f his shorts and pants, and stood t here naked,
looking at the dazzling beach and the water .
He was old enough, twelve ye ars and a few months, to have lost the
prominent tummy of childhood and not yet old enough for adolescence to
have made him awkward. Y ou could see now that he might make a boxer ,
as far as width and heaviness of shoulders went, but there was a mildness
about his mouth and eyes that proclaimed no devil. He patted the palm
trunk so ftly , and , forced at last to believe in the reality of the isl and laughed
delightedly agai n and stood on his head. He turned neatly on to his feet,
jumped down to the beach, kne lt and swept a double armful of sand into a
pile agai nst his chest. Then he s at back and looked at the water with bright,
excited eyes.
"Ralph―"
The fat boy lowered himself over the terrace and sat down carefully ,
using the edge as a seat.
"I'm sorry I been such a time. Them fruit―"
He wipe d his glasses and adjusted them on his button nose. T he frame
had made a dee p, pink "V" on the bridge. He looked critically  at Ralph's
golden body and then down at his own clothes. He laid a hand on the end of
a zipper that extended down his chest.
"My auntie―"
Then he opened the zipper wi th decision and pulled the whole wind-
breaker over his head.
"There!"
Ralph looked at him sidelong and said nothing.
"I expect we'll w ant to know all their names," said the fat boy , " and make
a list. W e ought to have a meeting."
Ralph did not take the hint so the fat boy was forced to continue.
"I do n't care wh at they call me, " he said confidentially , "so long as they
don't call me what they used to call me at school."
Ralph was faintly interested.
"What was that?"
The fat boy glanced over his shoulder , then leaned toward Ralph.
He whispered.
"They used to call me 'Piggy .'"
Ralph shrieked with laughter . He jumped up.
"Piggy! Piggy!"
"Ralph―please!"
Piggy clasped his hands in apprehension.
"I said I didn't want―"
"Piggy! Piggy!"
Ralph danced out into the hot air of the beach and then returned as a
fighter -plane, with wings swept back, and machine-gunned Piggy .
"Sche-aa-ow!"
He dived in the sand at Piggy's feet and lay there laughing.
"Piggy!"
Piggy g rinned reluctantly , pleased despite himself at even this much
recognition.
"So long as you don't tell the others―"
Ralph giggled into the sand. The expression of pain and concentration
returned to Piggy's face.
"Half a sec'."
He hastened back into the forest . Ralph stood up and trotted along to the
right.
Here th e beach was interrupted abruptly by the square motif of the
landscape; a great platform of  pink granite thrust up uncom promisingly
through forest and terrace and sand and lagoon to make a raise d jetty four
feet high . The top of this was c overed with a thin layer of soil and coarse
grass and shaded with young palm trees. There was not enough soil for
them to grow to any height and when they reached perhaps twen ty feet they
fell and dried, forming a criss-cross pattern of trunks, very convenient to sit
on. T he palms that still stood made a green roof, covered on the underside
with a quivering tangle of reflections from the lagoon. Ralph hauled himself
onto this platform, noted the coolness and shade, shut one eye, and decided
that the shadow s on his body were really green. He picked his  way to the
seaward edge of the platform and stood looking down into the water . It was
clear to the bottom and bright w ith the ef florescence of tropical weed and
coral. A  school of tiny , glittering fish flicked hither and thither . R alph spoke
to himself, sounding the bass strings of delight.
"Whizzoh!"
Beyond the platform there was more enchantment. Some act of God―a
typhoon perhaps, or the storm t hat had accompanied his own arrival―had
banked sand inside the lagoon so that there was a long, deep pool in the
beach with a high ledge of pink granite at the further end. Ralph had been
deceived before  now by the specious appearance of depth in a beach pool
and he approach ed this one prep aring to be disappointed. But th e island ran
true to form and  the incredible pool, which clearly was only inv aded by the
sea at high tide, was so deep at one end as to be dark green. Ralph inspected
the whole thirty yards carefully and then plunged in. The water was warmer
than his blood and he might have been swimming in a huge bath.
Piggy appeared again, sat on the rocky ledge, and watched Ralph's green
and white body enviously .
"Y ou can't half swim."
"Piggy ."
Piggy took of f his shoes and socks, ranged them carefully on the ledge,
and tested the water with one toe.
"It's hot!"
"What did you expect?"
"I didn't expect nothing. My auntie―"
"Sucks to your auntie!"
Ralph did a surface dive and swam under water with his eyes open; the
sandy edge of the pool loomed up like a hillside. He turned over , holding
his n ose, and a golden light danced and shattered just over his  face. Piggy
was look ing det ermined and began to take of f his shorts. Presently he was
palely and fatly naked. He tiptoed down the sandy side of the pool, and sat
there up to his neck in water smiling proudly at Ralph.
"Aren't you going to swim?"
Piggy shook his head.
"I can't swim. I wasn't allowed. My asthma―"
"Sucks to your ass-mar!"
Piggy b ore this  with a sort of humble patience. "Y ou can't half swim
well."
Ralph paddled backwards down  the slope, immersed his mouth and blew
a jet of water into the air . Then he lifted his chin and spoke.
"I co uld swim w hen I was five.  Daddy taught me. He's a commander in
the Navy . When he gets leave he'll come and rescue us. W hat's your
father?"
Piggy flushed suddenly .
"My dad's dead," he said quickly , "and my mum―"
He took  of f his glasses and loo ked vainly for something with which to
clean them.
"I used to live with my auntie. She kept a candy store. I used to get ever
so many candies. As many as I liked. When'll your dad rescue us?"
"Soon as he can."
Piggy ro se dripp ing from the wa ter and stood naked, cleaning his glasses
with a sock. The only sound tha t reached them now through the  heat of the
morning was the long, grinding roar of the breakers on the reef.
"How does he know we're here?"
Ralph lolled in the water . Sleep enveloped him like the swathing  mirages
that were wrestling with the brilliance of the lagoon.
"How does he know we're here?"
Because, thoug ht Ralph, because, because. The roar from the reef
became very distant.
"They'd tell him at the airport."
Piggy sh ook his  head, put on his flashing glasses and looked  down at
Ralph.
"Not them. Didn't you hear what the pilot said? About the atom bomb?
They're all dead."
Ralph pulled himself out of the water , stood facing Piggy , and c onsidered
this unusual problem.
Piggy persisted.
"This an island, isn't it?"
"I climbed a rock," said Ralph slowly , "and I think this is an island."
"They're all dead," said Piggy , "an' this is an island. Nobody do n't know
we're here. Y our dad don't know , nobody don't know―"
His lips quivered and the spectacles were dimmed with mist.
"W e may stay here till we die."
W ith tha t word the heat seemed to increase till it became a threatening
weight and the lagoon attacked them with a blinding ef fulgence.
"Get my clothes," muttered Ralph. "Along there."
He trott ed through the sand, enduring the sun's enmity , crossed the
platform and found his scattered  clothes. T o put on a grey shirt once more
was strangely pleasing. Then he  climbed the edge of the platform and sat in
the green shade on a convenient trunk. Piggy hauled himself up, carrying
most of his clothes under his arms. Then he sat carefully on a fallen trunk
near the little c lif f that fronted the lagoon; and the tangled  reflections
quivered over him.
Presently he spoke.
"W e got to find the others. W e got to do something."
Ralph said nothing. Here was a coral island. Protected from  the sun,
ignoring Piggy's ill-omened talk, he dreamed pleasantly .
Piggy insisted.
"How many of us are there?"
Ralph came forward and stood by Piggy .
"I don't know ."
Here and there, little breezes crept over the polished waters beneath the
haze of heat. When these breezes reached the platform the palm fronds
would w hisper , so that spots of  blurred sunlight slid over the ir bodies or
moved like bright, winged things in the shade.
Piggy looked up at Ralph. All the shadows on Ralph's face were
reversed; green above, bright be low from the lagoon. A blur of s unlight was
crawling across his hair .
"W e got to do something."
Ralph lo oked th rough him. Here at last was the imagined but n ever fully
realized place leaping into real life. Ralph's lips parted in a deli ghted smile
and Piggy , taking this smile to himself as a mark of recognition, laughed
with pleasure.
"If it really is an island―"
"What's that?"
Ralph h ad stopped smiling and was pointing into the lagoon. Something
creamy lay among the ferny weeds.
"A stone."
"No. A shell."
Suddenly Piggy was a-bubble with decorous excitement.
"S'right. It's a sh ell! I seen one like that before. On someone's b ack wall.
A conch he called it. He used to blow it and then his mum would come. It's
ever so valuable―"
Near to Ralph's elbow a palm sa pling leaned out over the lagoon . Indeed,
the w eight was already pulling a  lump from the poor soil and so on it would
fall. He tore out the stem and began to poke about in the wate r , while the
brilliant fish flicked away on this side and that. Piggy leaned dangerously .
"Careful! Y ou'll break it―"
"Shut up."
Ralph spoke absently . The shell was interesting and pretty and a worthy
plaything; but the vivid phantoms of his day-dream still interposed between
him and Piggy , who in this context was an irrelevance. The palm sapling,
bending, pushed  the shell acro ss the weeds. Ralph used one  hand as a
fulcrum and pressed down with  the other till the shell rose, dr ipping, and
Piggy could make a grab.
Now the  shell was no longer a thing seen but not to be touched, Ralph
too became excited. Piggy babbled:
"―a con ch; ever so expensive. I  bet if you wanted to buy one, you'd have
to pay pounds and pounds and pounds―he had it on his garde n wall, and
my auntie―"
Ralph took the s hell from Piggy and a little water ran down his arm. In
color the shell was deep cream, touched here and there with fading pink.
Between the point, worn away into a little hole, and the pink  lips of the
mouth, l ay eigh teen inches of s hell with a slight spiral twist and covered
with a delicate, embossed pattern. Ralph shook sand out of the deep tube.
"―mooed like a cow ," he said. "He had some white stones too, an' a bird
cage with a green parrot. He didn't blow the white stones, of co urse, an' he
said―"
Piggy paused for breath and stroked the glistening thing that lay in
Ralph's hands.
"Ralph!"
      Ralph looked up.
"W e can use this to call the oth ers. Have a meeting. They'll come when
they hear us―"
He beamed at Ralph.
"That was what you meant, didn't you? That's why you got the conch out
of the water?"
Ralph pushed back his fair hair .
"How did your friend blow the conch?"
"He kind of spat," said Piggy . "My auntie wouldn't let me blow on
account of my asthma. He said  you blew from down here." Piggy laid a
hand on his jutting abdomen. "Y ou try , Ralph. Y ou'll call the others."
Doubtfully , Ralp h laid the smal l end of the shell against his m outh and
blew . Th ere cam e a rushing sou nd from its mouth but nothing more. Ralph
wiped th e salt water of f his lip s and tried again, but the shell remained
silent.
"He kind of spat."
Ralph pu rsed his lips and squirted air into the shell, which emit ted a low ,
farting n oise. Th is amused both boys so much that Ralph went on squirting
for some minutes, between bouts of laughter .
"He blew from down here."
Ralph g rasped t he idea and hit  the shell with air from his di aphragm.
Immediately the thing sounded . A deep, harsh note boomed under the
palms, spread through the intricacies of the forest and echoed back from the
pink granite of the mountain. Clouds of birds rose from the treetops, and
something squealed and ran in the under growth.
Ralph took the shell away from his lips.
"Gosh!"
His ordi nary vo ice sounded like a whisper after the harsh note of the
conch. He laid t he conch against his lips, took a deep breath and blew once
more. The note boomed again: and then at his firmer pressure, the note,
fluking u p an octave, became a strident blare more penetrating than before.
Piggy w as shouting something,  his face pleased, his glasses flashing. The
birds cri ed, small animals scuttered. Ralph's breath failed; the note dropped
the octave, became a low wubber , was a rush of air .
The conch was silent, a gleam ing tusk; Ralph's face was d ark with
breathlessness and the air over the island was full of bird-clamor and echoes
ringing.
"I bet you can hear that for miles."
Ralph found his breath and blew a series of short blasts.
Piggy exclaimed: "There's one!"
A child had appeared among the palms, about a hundred yards along the
beach. He was a  boy of perhaps  six years, sturdy and fair , his clothes torn,
his face covered with a sticky m ess of fruit. His trousers had been lowered
for a n ob vious p urpose and had only been pulled back half-way . He jumped
of f the palm terrace into the sand and his trousers fell about his ankles; he
stepped out of them and trotted to the platform. Piggy helped him up.
Meanwhile Ralph continued to blow till voices shouted in the forest. The
small boy squatted in front of Ralph, looking up brightly and vertically . As
he received the reassurance of something purposeful being done he began to
look satisfied, and his only clean digit, a pink thumb, slid into his mouth.
Piggy leaned down to him.
"What's yer name?"
"Johnny ."
Piggy muttered the name to himself and then shouted it to Ralph, who
was not interested because he w as still blowing. His face was dark with the
violent p leasure of making this s tupendous noise, and his heart was making
the stretched shirt shake. The shouting in the forest was nearer .
Signs of  life were visible now o n the beach. The sand, tremblin g beneath
the heat  haze, concealed many  figures in its miles of length; boys were
making their way toward the platform through the hot, dumb sand. Three
small ch ildren, no older than J ohnny , appeared from startlingly close at
hand, where they had been gor ging fruit in the forest. A dark little boy , not
much younger than Piggy , parted a tangle of under growth, walked on to the
platform, and smiled cheerfull y at everybody . More and mo re of them
came. T aking th eir cue from th e innocent Johnny , they sat d own on the
fallen palm trunks and waited. Ralph continued to blow short, penetrating
blasts. Piggy moved among th e crowd, asking names and f rowning to
remember them . The children gave him the same simple obe dience that
they had given to the men with megaphones. Some were naked and carrying
their clothes; others half-naked, or more or less dressed, in scho ol uniforms,
grey , blue, fawn, jacketed, or jerseyed. There were badges, mottoes even,
stripes of color in stockings and  pullovers. Their heads clustered above the
trunks in  the green shade; heads brown, fair , black, chestnut, sandy , mouse-
colored; heads muttering, whisp ering, heads full of eyes that watched Ralph
and speculated. Something was being done.
The chi ldren w ho came along the beach, singly or in twos, leapt into
visibility when they crossed the line from heat haze to nearer sand. Here,
the e ye was firs t attracted to a black, bat-like creature that da nced on the
sand, and only later perceived the body above it. The bat was the child's
shadow , shrunk by the vertical sun to a patch between the hurrying feet.
Even wh ile he blew , Ralph noti ced the last pair of bodies that reached the
platform above a fluttering patch of black. The two boys, bullet-headed and
with hai r like tow , flung themselves down and lay grinning and panting at
Ralph lik e dogs.  They were twin s, and the eye was shocked and incredulous
at such cheery duplication. The y breathed together , they grinned together ,
they wer e chunky and vital. The y raised wet lips at Ralph, for t hey seemed
provided with not quite enough skin, so that their profiles were blurred and
their mouths pulled open. Piggy bent his flashing glasses to them and could
be heard between the blasts, repeating their names.
"Sam, Eric, Sam, Eric."
Then he  got muddled; the twins shook their heads and pointed at each
other and the crowd laughed.
At last Ralph ceased to blow an d sat there, the conch trailing from one
hand, his head bowed on his knees. As the echoes died away so did the
laughter , and there was silence.
W ithin the diamond haze of th e beach something dark was fumbling
along. R alph saw  it first, and watched till the intentness of his gaze drew all
eyes tha t way . Then the creature  stepped from mirage on to clear sand, and
they saw  that the darkness was not all shadow but mostly cl othing. The
creature was a p arty of boys, ma rching approximately in step in two parallel
lines and dressed in strangely eccentric clothing. Shorts, shirts, and dif ferent
garments they carried in their hands; but each boy wore a square black cap
with a silver bad ge on it. Their bodies, from throat to ankle, wer e hidden by
black clo aks wh ich bore a long silver cross on the left breast and each neck
was finished of f with a hambone frill. The heat of the tropics, the descent,
the search for food, and now this sweaty march along the blazin g beach had
given them the complexions of newly washed plums. The  boy who
controlled them  was dressed in  the same way though his cap badge was
golden. When his party was about ten yards from the platform he shouted
an o rder and the y halted, gasping, sweating, swaying in the fierce light. The
boy him self cam e forward, vaulted on to the platform with his c loak flying,
and peered into what to him was almost complete darkness.
"Where's the man with the trumpet?"
Ralph, sensing his sun-blindness, answered him.
"There's no man with a trumpet. Only me."
The boy came close and peered  down at Ralph, screwing up his face as
he d id s o. What  he saw of the f air -haired boy with the creamy shell on his
knees did not s eem to satisfy him. He turned quickly , his black cloak
circling.
"Isn't there a ship, then?"
Inside the floating cloak he was tall, thin, and bony; and his hair was red
beneath the black cap. His fa ce was crumpled and freckled, and ugly
without silliness . Out of this face stared two light blue eyes, fru strated now ,
and turning, or ready to turn, to anger .
"Isn't there a man here?"
Ralph spoke to his back.
"No. W e're having a meeting. Come and join in."
The grou p of cloaked boys bega n to scatter from close line. The tall boy
shouted at them.
"Choir! Stand still!"
W earily obedien t, the choir huddled into line and stood there swaying in
the sun. None the less, some began to protest faintly .
"But, Merridew . Please, Merridew ... can't we?"
Then one of the  boys flopped o n his face in the sand and the line broke
up. They heaved the fallen boy to the platform and let him lie. Merridew ,
his eyes staring, made the best of a bad job.
"All right then. Sit down. Let him alone."
"But Merridew ."
"He's always throwing a faint," said Merridew . "He did in Gib.; and
Addis; and at matins over the precentor ."
This last  piece of shop brought s niggers from the choir , who per ched like
black birds on the criss-cross trunks and examined Ralph with interest.
Piggy as ked no names. He was  intimidated by this uniformed superiority
and the of fhand  authority in Me rridew's voice. He shrank to th e other side
of Ralph and busied himself with his glasses.
Merridew turned to Ralph.
"Aren't there any grownups?"
"No."
Merridew sat down on a trunk and looked round the circle.
"Then we'll have to look after ourselves."
Secure on the other side of Ralph, Piggy spoke timidly .
"That's why Ralph made a meeting. So as we can decide what to do.
W e've h eard names. That's Johnny . Those two―they're twins, Sam 'n Eric.
Which is Eric―? Y ou? No―you're Sam―"
"I'm Sam―"
"'n I'm Eric."
"W e'd better all have names," said Ralph, "so I'm Ralph."
"W e got most names," said Piggy . "Got 'em just now ."
"Kids' names," said Merridew . "Why should I be Jack? I'm Merridew ."
Ralph turned to him quickly . T his was the voice of one who knew his
own mind.
"Then," went on Piggy , "that boy―I for get―"
"Y ou're talking too much," said Jack Merridew . "Shut up, Fatty ."
Laughter arose.
"He's not Fatty ," cried Ralph, "his real name's Piggy!"
"Piggy!"
"Piggy!"
"Oh, Piggy!"
A storm  of laughter arose and even the tiniest child joined in. For the
moment the boys were a closed circuit of sympathy with Piggy outside: he
went very pink, bowed his head and cleaned his glasses again.
Finally the laughter died away and the naming continued. There was
Maurice, next in size among the  choir boys to Jack, but broad a nd grinning
all the time. There was a slight, furtive boy whom no one knew , who kept to
himself with an inner intensity of avoidance and secrecy . He muttered that
his n ame was R oger and was si lent again. Bill, Robert, Harold, Henry; the
choir bo y who had fainted sat up against a palm trunk, smiled  pallidly at
Ralph and said that his name was Simon.
Jack spoke.
"W e've got to decide about being rescued."
There was a buzz. One of the s mall boys, Henry , said that he wanted to
go home.
"Shut up ," said Ralph absently .  He lifted the conch. "Seems to me we
ought to have a chief to decide things."
"A chief! A chief!"
"I o ught to be chief," said Jack with simple arrogance, "bec ause I'm
chapter chorister and head boy . I can sing C sharp."
Another buzz.
"W ell then," said Jack, "I―"
He hesitated. The dark boy , Roger , stirred at last and spoke up.
"Let's have a vote."
"Y es!"
"V ote for chief!"
"Let's vote―"
This toy of voting was almost as pleasing as the conch. Jack started to
protest but the clamor changed from the general wish for a chief to an
election by acclaim of Ralph himself. None of the boys could have found
good reason for this; what inte lligence had been shown was traceable to
Piggy while the most obvious leader was Jack. But there was a stillness
about Ralph as h e sat that marke d him out: there was his size, and attractive
appearance; and most obscurely , yet most powerfully , there was the conch.
The bein g that had blown that,  had sat waiting for them on t he platform
with the delicate thing balanced on his knees, was set apart.
"Him with the shell."
"Ralph! Ralph!"
"Let him be chief with the trumpet-thing."
Ralph raised a hand for silence.
"All right. Who wants Jack for chief?"
W ith dreary obedience the choir raised their hands.
"Who wants me?"
Every hand outside the choir except Piggy's was raised imm ediately .
Then Piggy , too, raised his hand grudgingly into the air .
Ralph counted.
"I'm chief then."
The circ le of boys broke into app lause. Even the choir applauded; and the
freckles on Jack's face disapp eared under a blush of mortif ication. He
started up, then changed his mind and sat down again while the air rang.
Ralph looked at him, eager to of fer something.
"The choir belongs to you, of course."
"They could be the army―"
"Or hunters―"
"They could be―"
The suf fusion drained away from Jack's face. Ralph waved again for
silence.
"Jack's i n char ge of the choir . They can be―what do you want them to
be?"
"Hunters."
Jack and  Ralph smiled at each other with shy liking. The rest  began to
talk eagerly .
Jack stood up.
"All right, choir . T ake of f your togs."
As if released from class, the choir boys stood up, chattered, piled their
black cl oaks on the grass. Jack laid his on the trunk by Ralph. His grey
shorts were sticking to him with  sweat. Ralph glanced at them  admiringly ,
and when Jack saw his glance he explained.
"I tried to get over that hill to see if there was water all round. But your
shell called us."
Ralph smiled and held up the conch for silence.
"Listen, everybo dy . I've got to  have time to think things out. I can't
decide what to do straight of f. If this isn't an island we might  be rescued
straight away . So we've got to decide if this is an island. Everybody must
stay round here and wait and n ot go away . Three of us―if we take more
we'd get all mixed, and lose each other―three of us will go on an
expedition and find out. I'll go, and Jack, and, and..."
He l ooked round the circle of eager faces. There was no lack o f boys to
choose from.
"And Simon."
The boy s round  Simon giggled, and he stood up, laughing a li ttle. Now
that the pallor of his faint was over , he was a skinny , vivid little boy , with a
glance coming up from under a  hut of straight hair that hung d own, black
and coarse.
He nodded at Ralph.
"I'll come."
"And I―"
Jack sna tched from behind him a sizable sheath-knife and clout ed it into
a trunk. The buzz rose and died away .
Piggy stirred.
"I'll come."
Ralph turned to him.
"Y ou're no good on a job like this."
"All the same―"
"W e don't want you," said Jack, flatly . "Three's enough."
Piggy's glasses flashed.
"I w as w ith him when he found the conch. I was with him before anyone
else was."
Jack and the ot hers paid no attention. There was a general dispersal.
Ralph, Jack and Simon jumped of f the platform and walked along the sand
past the bathing pool. Piggy hung bumbling behind them.
"If Simo n walk s in the middle of us," said Ralph, "then we could talk
over his head."
The three of th em fell into ste p. This meant that every now and then
Simon had to do a double shuf fle to catch up with the others. Presently
Ralph stopped and turned back to Piggy .
"Look."
Jack and Simon pretended to notice nothing. They walked on.
"Y ou can't come."
Piggy's glasses were misted again―this time with humiliation.
"Y ou told 'em. After what I said."
His face flushed, his mouth trembled.
"After I said I didn't want―"
"What on earth are you talking about?"
"About being called Piggy . I sai d I didn't care as long as they didn't call
me Piggy; an' I said not to tell and then you went an' said straight out―"
Stillness descen ded on them. Ralph, looking with more understanding at
Piggy , saw that he was hurt a nd crushed. He hovered between the two
courses of apology or further insult.
"Better Piggy than Fatty ," he said at last, with the directness of genuine
leadership, "and anyway , I'm sorry if you feel like that. Now go back,
Piggy , and take names. That's your job. So long."
He turned and raced after the other two. Piggy stood and th e rose of
indignation faded slowly from his cheeks. He went back to the platform.
The three boys walked briskly on the sand. The tide was low and there
was a strip of weed-strewn beach that was almost as firm as a r oad. A kind
of g lamour was spread over them and the scene and they were conscious of
the glamour and made happy by it. They turned to each other , laughing
excitedly , talking , not listening. The air was bright. Ralph, faced by the task
of translating all this into an ex planation, stood on his head an d fell over .
When they had done laughing, Simon stroked Ralph's arm shy ly; and they
had to laugh again.
"Come on," said Jack presently , "we're explorers."
"W e'll go to the end of the island," said Ralph, "and look round the
corner ."
"If it is an island―"
Now , to ward the  end of the afternoon, the mirages were settlin g a little.
They found the end of the islan d, quite distinct, and not magicked out of
shape or sense. There was a jumble of the usual squareness, with one great
block sitting out in the lagoon. Sea birds were nesting there.
"Like icing," said Ralph, "on a pink cake."
"W e sha n't see round this corn er ," said Jack, "because there isn't one.
Only a slow curve―and you can see, the rocks get worse―"
Ralph sh aded h is eyes and foll owed the jagged outline of the  crags up
toward t he mou ntain. This part of the beach was nearer the mo untain than
any other that they had seen.
"W e'll tr y climbi ng the mountain from here," he said. "I should think this
is the easiest way . There's less  of that jungly stuf f; and more pink rock.
Come on."
The three boys began to scr amble up. Some unknown force had
wrenched and shattered these cubes so that they lay askew , often piled
diminishingly on each other . The most usual feature of the rock was a pink
clif f surmounted by a skewed b lock; and that again surmounted, and that
again, till the pi nkness became a stack of balanced rock project ing through
the l ooped fantasy of the forest creepers. Where the pink clif fs rose out of
the ground there were often na rrow tracks winding upwards. They could
edge along them, deep in the plant world, their faces to the rock.
"What made this track?"
Jack paused, wiping the sweat from his face. Ralph stood by him,
breathless.
"Men?"
Jack shook his head.
"Animals."
Ralph p eered into the darkness under the trees. The forest minutely
vibrated.
"Come on."
The dif f iculty w as not the steep  ascent round the shoulders of rock, but
the occasional plunges through  the under growth to get to the next path.
Here the roots a nd stems of cree pers were in such tangles that the boys had
to th read through them like pliant needles. Their only guide, apart from the
brown g round and occasional flashes of light through the folia ge, was the
tendency of slope: whether this hole, laced as it was with the cables of
creeper , stood higher than that.
Somehow , they moved up.
Immured in these tangles, at pe rhaps their most dif ficult moment, Ralph
turned with shining eyes to the others.
"W acco."
"W izard."
"Smashing."
The cau se of their pleasure was not obvious. All three were hot,  dirty and
exhausted. Ralp h was badly scratched. The creepers were as thick as their
thighs a nd left little but tunne ls for further penetration. Ralph shouted
experimentally and they listened to the muted echoes.
"This is real exploring," said Jack. "I bet nobody's been here before."
"W e ought to draw a map," said Ralph, "only we haven't any paper ."
"W e could make scratches on bark," said Simon, "and rub black stuf f in."
Again came the solemn communion of shining eyes in the gloom.
"W acco."
"W izard."
There was no place for stan ding on one's head. This tim e Ralph
expressed the intensity of his em otion by pretending to knock S imon down;
and soon they were a happy , heaving pile in the under -dusk.
When they had fallen apart Ralph spoke first.
"Got to get on."
The pink  granite of the next clif f was further back from the cre epers and
trees so that they could trot up the path. This again led into  more open
forest so  that they had a glimpse of the spread sea. W ith openne ss came the
sun; it dried the sweat that had soaked their clothes in the dark, damp heat.
At last the way to the top look ed like a scramble over pink rock, with no
more plunging through darkness . The boys chose their way through defiles
and over heaps of sharp stone.
"Look! Look!"
High ov er this end of the island , the shattered rocks lifted up their stacks
and chim neys. This one, against which Jack leaned, moved wi th a grating
sound when they pushed.
"Come on―"
But not "Come o n" to the top. The assault on the summit must w ait while
the three  boys accepted this ch allenge. The rock was as lar ge  as a small
motor car .
"Heave!"
Sway back and forth, catch the rhythm.
"Heave!"
Increase the swing of the pendulum, increase, increase, come up  and bear
against that point of furthest balance― increase―increase― "Heave!"
The grea t rock loitered, poised on one toe, decided not to retur n, moved
through the air , fell, struck, turned over , leapt droning through the air and
smashed a deep hole in the canopy of the forest. Echoes and birds flew ,
white and pink dust floated, the forest further down shook as with the
passage of an enraged monster: and then the island was still.
"W acco!"
"Like a bomb!"
"Whee-aa-oo!"
Not for five minutes could they drag themselves away from this  triumph.
But they left at last.
The way to the top was easy after that. As they reached the last stretch
Ralph stopped.
"Golly!"
They were on t he lip of a circular hollow in the side of the m ountain.
This was filled with a blue flower , a rock plant of some so rt, and the
overflow hung down the vent and spilled lavishly among the canopy of the
forest. The air was thick with butterflies, lifting, fluttering, settling.
Beyond the hollow was the square top of the mountain and s oon they
were standing on it.
They had guessed before that th is was an island: clambering among the
pink rocks, with the sea on either side, and the crystal heights of air , they
had know n by some instinct that  the sea lay on every side. But there seemed
something more  fitting in leaving the last word till they stood on the top,
and could see a circular horizon of water .
Ralph turned to the others.
"This belongs to us."
It w as roughly boat-shaped: humped near this end with behind  them the
jumbled descent to the shore. On either side rocks, clif fs, treetops and a
steep slo pe: forw ard there, the le ngth of the boat, a tamer descent, tree-clad,
with hints of pink: and then the jungly flat of the island, dense green, but
drawn at the end  to a pink tail. There, where the island petered out in water ,
was another island; a rock, alm ost detached, standing like a fort, facing
them across the green with one bold, pink bastion.
The boys surveyed all this, then looked out to sea. They were high up and
the afte rnoon had advanced; the view was not robbed of sharpness by
mirage.
"That's a reef. A coral reef. I've seen pictures like that."
The reef enclosed more than on e side of the island, lying perhaps a mile
out and parallel to what they no w thought of as their beach. The coral was
scribbled in the sea as though a giant had bent down to reproduce the shape
of the island in a  flowing chalk line but tired before he had finished. Inside
was peacock water , rocks and weeds showing as in an aquarium; outside
was the dark blue of the sea. The tide was running so that lon g streaks of
foam tai led awa y from the reef and for a moment they felt that the boat was
moving steadily astern.
Jack pointed down.
"That's where we landed."
Beyond falls and clif fs there w as a gash visible in the trees; th ere were
the splintered trunks and then  the drag, leaving only a fringe of palm
between the scar and the sea. T here, too, jutting into the lagoon, was the
platform, with insect-like figures moving near it.
Ralph sk etched a twining line from the bald spot on which th ey stood
down a slope, a  gully , through f lowers, round and down to the rock where
the scar started.
"That's the quickest way back."
Eyes sh ining, mouths open, triumphant, they savored the right of
domination. They were lifted up: were friends.
"There's no village smoke, and n o boats," said Ralph wisely . "W e'll make
sure later; but I think it's uninhabited."
"W e'll get food," cried Jack. "Hunt. Catch things. until they fetch us."
Simon lo oked at  them both, sayi ng nothing but nodding till his black hair
flopped backwards and forwards: his face was glowing.
Ralph looked down the other way where there was no reef.
"Steeper ," said Jack.
Ralph made a cupping gesture.
"That bit of forest down there... the mountain holds it up."
Every p oint of the mountain held up trees―flowers and trees.  Now the
forest st irred, roared, flailed. The nearer acres of rock flowers fluttered and
for half a minute the breeze blew cool on their faces.
Ralph spread his arms.
"All ours."
They laughed and tumbled and shouted on the mountain.
"I'm hungry ."
When Simon mentioned his hunger the others became aware of theirs.
"Come on," said Ralph. "W e've found out what we wanted to know ."
They scrambled  down a rock slope, dropped among flowers a nd made
their wa y under the trees. Here t hey paused and examined the b ushes round
them curiously .
Simon spoke first.
"Like candles. Candle bushes. Candle buds."
The bushes were dark ever gree n and aromatic and the many buds were
waxen g reen an d folded up against the light. Jack slashed at one with his
knife and the scent spilled over them.
"Candle buds."
"Y ou couldn't light them," said Ralph. "They just look like candles."
"Green candles, " said Jack contemptuously . "W e can't eat them. Come
on."
They we re in the beginnings of the thick forest, plonking with w eary feet
on a  track, when they heard the noises―squeakings―and the hard strike of
hoofs on  a path. As they push ed forward the squeaking increased till it
became a frenzy . They found a piglet caught in a curtain o f creepers,
throwing itself at the elastic traces in all the madness of extrem e terror . Its
voice was thin, needle-sharp an d insistent; The three boys rush ed forward
and Jack drew h is knife again with a flourish. He raised his arm  in the air .
There ca me a pause, a hiatus, the pig continued to scream and the creepers
to jerk, and the blade continued to flash at the end of a bony arm. The pause
was onl y long enough for th em to understand what an enormity the
downward stroke would be. Then the piglet tore loose from the creepers and
scurried into the under growth. T hey were left looking at each other and the
place of terror . Jack's face was white under the freckles. He noticed that he
still held  the knife aloft and brought his arm down replacing the blade in the
sheath. T hen the y all three laug hed ashamedly and began to cl imb back to
the track.
"I was choosing a place," said J ack. "I was just waiting for a moment to
decide where to stab him."
"Y ou sh ould stick a pig," said Ralph fiercely . "They always talk about
sticking a pig."
"Y ou cut a pig's throat to let th e blood out," said Jack, "otherwise you
can't eat the meat."
"Why didn't you―?"
They kn ew very well why he hadn't: because of the enormity of  the knife
descending and cutting into living flesh; because of the unbearable blood.
"I was going to," said Jack. He w as ahead of them, and they could not see
his face. "I was choosing a place. Next time―!"
He s natched his knife out of the sheath and slammed it into a tree trunk.
Next tim e there would be no me rcy . He looked round fiercely , daring them
to contr adict. Then they broke out into the sunlight and for a  while they
were bu sy findin g and devouring food as they moved down the scar toward
the platform and the meeting.
CHAPTER TWO
     
Fir e on the Mountain
     
By t he time Ral ph finished blowing the conch the platform w as crowded.
There w ere dif ferences between this meeting and the one held in the
morning. The afternoon sun sla nted in from the other side of t he platform
and mos t of the children, feeling  too late the smart of sunburn, h ad put their
clothes on. The choir , less of a group, had discarded their cloaks.
Ralph sat on a fallen trunk, his left side to the sun. On his right were most
of the choir; on  his left the lar ger boys who had not known  each other
before the evacuation; before him small children squatted in the grass.
Silence now . Ralph lifted the cream and pink shell to his knees and a
sudden b reeze scattered light over the platform. He was uncertain whether
to stand up or remain sitting. He looked sideways to his left, toward the
bathing pool. Piggy was sitting near but giving no help.
Ralph cleared his throat.
"W ell then."
All at once he found he could talk fluently and explain what he had to
say . He passed a hand through his fair hair and spoke.
"W e're on an isl and. W e've been on the mountain top and seen water all
round. W e saw no houses, no smoke, no footprints, no boats, no people.
W e're on an uninhabited island with no other people on it."
Jack broke in.
"All the same you need an army―for hunting. Hunting pigs―"
"Y es. There are pigs on the island."
All three of them tried to convey the sense of the pink live thing
struggling in the creepers.
"W e saw―"
"Squealing―"
"It broke away―"
"Before I could kill it―but―next time!"
Jack slammed his knife into a trunk and looked round challengingly .
The meeting settled down again.
"So you see," sa id Ralph, "W e need hunters to get us meat. An d another
thing."
He lifted the shell on his knees and looked round the sun-slashed faces.
"There aren't any grownups. W e shall have to look after ourselves."
The meeting hummed and was silent.
"And an other thing. W e can't have everybody talking at once. W e'll have
to have 'Hands up' like at school."
He held the conch before his face and glanced round the mouth.
"Then I'll give him the conch."
"Conch?"
"That's what this shell's called. I'll give the conch to the next person to
speak. He can hold it when he's speaking."
"But―"
"Look―"
"And he won't be interrupted: Except by me."
Jack was on his feet.
"W e'll have rules!" he cried excitedly . "Lots of rules! Then when anyone
breaks 'em―"
"Whee―oh!"
"W acco!"
"Bong!"
"Doink!"
Ralph felt the conch lifted fr om his lap. Then Piggy was standing
cradling the great cream shell an d the shouting died down. Jack , left on his
feet, looked uncertainly at Ralph who smiled and patted the log. Jack sat
down. Piggy took of f his glasses and blinked at the assembly while he
wiped them on his shirt.
"Y ou're hindering Ralph. Y ou're  not letting him get to the most important
thing."
He paused ef fectively .
"Who knows we're here? Eh?"
"They knew at the airport."
"The man with a trumpet-thing―"
"My dad."
Piggy put on his glasses.
"Nobody knows  where we are," said Piggy . He was paler than b efore and
breathless. "Perhaps they knew  where we was going to; and perhaps not.
But they don't know where we  are 'cos we never got there." H e gaped at
them for a moment, then swayed and sat down. Ralph took the conch from
his hands.
"That's what I was going to say ," he went on, "when you all, all...." He
gazed at  their intent faces. "The plane was shot down in flam es. Nobody
knows where we are. W e may be here a long time."
The silence was so complete that they could hear the unevenness of
Piggy's b reathing. The sun slanted in and lay golden over half th e platform.
The breezes that on the lagoon had chased their tails like k ittens were
finding t heir wa y across the plat form and into the forest. Ralph pushed back
the tangle of fair hair that hung on his forehead.
"So we may be here a long time."
Nobody said anything. He grinned suddenly .
"But thi s is a go od island. W e―Jack, Simon and me― we cli mbed the
mountain. It's wizard. There's food and drink, and―"
"Rocks―"
"Blue flowers―"
Piggy , partly recovered, pointed  to the conch in Ralph's hands, and Jack
and Simon fell silent. Ralph went on.
"While we're waiting we can have a good time on this island."
He gesticulated widely .
"It's like in a book."
      At once there was a clamor .
"T reasure Island―"
"Swallows and Amazons―"
"Coral Island―"
Ralph waved the conch.
"This is our isla nd. It's a good island. Until the grownups com e to fetch
us we'll have fun."
Jack held out his hand for the conch.
"There's pigs," he said. "There's food; and bathing water in that little
stream along there―and everything. Didn't anyone find anything else?"
He hand ed the conch back to Ra lph and sat down. Apparently no one had
found anything.
The older boys first noticed the child when he resisted. There was a
group of little boys ur ging him forward and he did not want to go. He was a
shrimp of a boy , about six years old, and one side of his face was blotted
out by a mulbe rry-colored birthmark. He stood now , warped  out of the
perpendicular by  the fierce ligh t of publicity , and he bored into the coarse
grass with one toe. He was muttering and about to cry .
The other little boys, whispering but serious, pushed him toward Ralph.
"All right," said Ralph, "come on then."
The small boy looked round in panic.
"Speak up!"
The sma ll boy held out his hands for the conch and the assembly shouted
with laughter; at once he snatched back his hands and started to cry .
"Let him have the conch!" shouted Piggy . "Let him have it!"
At last Ralph induced him to hold the shell but by then the blow of
laughter had taken away the chi ld's voice. Piggy knelt by him, one hand on
the great shell, listening and interpreting to the assembly .
"He wants to know what you're going to do about the snake-thing."
Ralph la ughed, and the other boys laughed with him. The small boy
twisted further into himself.
"T ell us about the snake-thing."
"Now he says it was a beastie."
"Beastie?'
"A snake-thing. Ever so big. He saw it."
"Where?"
"In the woods."
Either th e wand ering breezes or perhaps the decline of the sun a llowed a
little coolness to lie under the trees. The boys felt it and stirred restlessly .
"Y ou co uldn't ha ve a beastie, a snake-thing, on an island this size," Ralph
explained kindly . "Y ou only get them in big countries, like Africa, or India."
Murmur; and the grave nodding of heads.
"He says the beastie came in the dark."
"Then he couldn't see it!"
Laughter and cheers.
"Did you hear that? Says he saw the thing in the dark―"
"He still says he  saw the beastie . It came and went away again an' came
back and wanted to eat him―"
"He was dreaming."
Laughing, Ralph looked for confirmation round the ring of faces. The
older bo ys agreed; but here and  there among the little ones was the doubt
that required more than rational assurance.
"He must have had a nightm are. Stumbling about among all those
creepers."
More grave nodding; they knew  about nightmares. "He says he saw the
beastie, the snake-thing, and will it come back tonight?"
"But there isn't a beastie!"
"He say s in the morning it turned into them things like ropes in  the trees
and hung in the branches. He says will it come back tonight?"
"But there isn't a beastie!"
There w as no laughter at all now  and more grave watching. Ralp h pushed
both han ds through his hair and looked at the little boy in mixed  amusement
and exasperation.
Jack seized the conch.
"Ralph's right of course. There  isn't a snake-thing. But if there was a
snake w e'd hunt it and kill it. W e're going to hunt pigs to g et meat for
everybody . And we'll look for the snake too―"
"But there isn't a snake!"
"W e'll make sure when we go hunting."
Ralph w as anno yed and, for the moment, defeated. He felt hims elf facing
something ungr aspable. The eyes that looked so intently at him were
without humor .
"But there isn't a beast!"
Something he had not known wa s there rose in him and compelled him to
make the point, loudly and again.
"But I tell you there isn't a beast!"
The assembly was silent.
Ralph lifted the conch again and his good humor came back as he
thought of what he had to say next.
"Now w e come  to the most important thing. I've been thinkin g. I was
thinking while we were climbing the mountain." He flashed a conspiratorial
grin at the other  two. "And on the beach just now . This is wha t I thought.
W e want to have fun. And we want to be rescued."
The passionate noise of agreement from the assembly hit him like a wave
and he lost his thread. He thought again.
"W e want to be rescued; and of course we shall be rescued."
V oices babbled.  The simple statement, unbacked by any proof but the
weight of Ralph's new authorit y , brought light and happiness. He had to
wave the conch before he could make them hear him.
"My fath er's in the Navy . He sa id there aren't any unknown isl ands left.
He says the Queen has a big room full of maps and all the islands in the
world are drawn there. So the Queen's got a picture of this island."
Again came the sounds of cheerfulness and better heart.
"And sooner or later a ship wi ll put in here. It might even be Daddy's
ship. So you see, sooner or later , we shall be rescued."
He p aused, with the point made . The assembly was lifted toward safety
by h is words. Th ey liked and now respected him. Spontaneously  they began
to clap and presently the platform was loud with applause. Ralph flushed,
looking sideway s at Piggy's ope n admiration, and then the other  way at Jack
who was smirking and showing that he too knew how to clap.
Ralph waved the conch.
"Shut up! W ait! Listen!"
He went on in the silence, borne on his triumph.
"There's another thing. W e can h elp them to find us. If a ship comes near
the island they may not notice us. So we must make smoke on  top of the
mountain. W e must make a fire."
"A fire! Make a fire!"
At once half the boys were on th eir feet. Jack clamored among them, the
conch for gotten.
"Come on! Follow me!"
The spa ce unde r the palm trees  was full of noise and movement. Ralph
was on his feet too, shouting for quiet, but no one heard him. All at once the
crowd swayed toward the island and was gone―following Jack. Even the
tiny chil dren we nt and did their best among the leaves and broken branches.
Ralph was left, holding the conch, with no one but Piggy .
Piggy's breathing was quite restored.
"Like kids!" he said scornfully . "Acting like a crowd of kids!"
Ralph looked at him doubtfully and laid the conch on the tree trunk.
"I bet it's gone tea-time," said Piggy . "What do they think they're going to
do on that mountain?"
He caressed the shell respectfully , then stopped and looked up.
"Ralph! Hey! Where you going?"
Ralph was already clambering over the first smashed swathes of  the scar .
A long way ahead of him was crashing and laughter .
Piggy watched him in disgust.
"Like a crowd of kids―"
He s ighed, bent, and laced up hi s shoes. The noise of the errant assembly
faded up  the mountain. Then, with the martyred expression of a parent who
has to keep up with the senseless ebullience of the children, he picked up
the conch, turned toward the f orest, and began to pick his way over the
tumbled scar .
Below the other side of the mou ntain top was a platform of forest. Once
more Ralph found himself making the cupping gesture.
"Down there we could get as much wood as we want."
Jack nod ded and pulled at his underlip. Starting perhaps a hundred feet
below them on t he steeper side of the mountain, the patch might have been
designed expres sly for fuel. T ree s, forced by the damp heat, found too little
soil for full growth, fell early and decayed: creepers cradled them, and new
saplings searched a way up.
Jack turned to the choir , who stood ready . Their black caps of
maintenance were slid over one ear like berets.
"W e'll build a pile. Come on."
They found the likeliest path down and began tugging at the dead wood.
And the  small boys who had reached the top came sliding too t ill everyone
but Piggy was b usy . Most of the  wood was so rotten that when they pulled,
it broke up into a shower of fra gments and woodlice and decay; but some
trunks came out in one piece. The twins, Sam 'n Eric, were the first to get a
likely lo g but they could do n othing till Ralph, Jack, Simon, Roger and
Maurice found room for a hand -hold. Then they inched the grotesque dead
thing up the roc k and toppled it over on top. Each party of boys added a
quota, le ss or more, and the pil e grew . At the return Ralph found himself
alone on a limb with Jack and they grinned at each other , sharing this
burden. Once more, amid the breeze, the shouting, the slanting  sunlight on
the high mountain, was shed that glamour , that strange invisi ble light of
friendship, adventure, and content.
"Almost too heavy ."
Jack grinned back.
"Not for the two of us."
T ogether , joined  in an ef fort by the burden, they staggered up the last
steep O f the mountain. T ogether , they chanted One! T wo! Three! and
crashed the log on to the great p ile. Then they stepped back, la ughing with
triumphant pleasure, so that immediately Ralph had to stand o n his head.
Below them, boys were still laboring, though some of the small ones had
lost interest and were searching this new forest for fruit. Now the twins,
with uns uspected intelligence, c ame up the mountain with armfuls of dried
leaves and dumped them agains t the pile. One by one, as they  sensed that
the pile was complete, the boys stopped going back for more and stood,
with the pink, shattered top of the mountain around them. Breath came
evenly by now , and sweat dried.
Ralph and Jack looked at each other while society paused about them.
The shameful knowledge grew in them and they did not know how to begin
confession.
Ralph spoke first, crimson in the face.
"W ill you?"
He cleared his throat and went on.
"W ill you light the fire?"
Now the absurd situation was open, Jack blushed too. He began to mutter
vaguely .
"Y ou rub two sticks. Y ou rub―"
He glanced at Ralph, who blurted out the last confession of
incompetence.
"Has anyone got any matches?"
"Y ou make a bo w and spin the arrow ," said Roger . He rubbed his hands
in mime. "Psss. Psss."
A little air was moving over the  mountain. Piggy came with it, in shorts
and shir t, laboring cautiously out of the forest with the evening sunlight
gleaming from his glasses. He held the conch under his arm.
Ralph shouted at him.
      "Piggy! Have you got any matches?"
The othe r boys took up the cry  till the mountain rang. Piggy shook his
head and came to the pile.
"My! Y ou've made a big heap, haven't you?"
Jack pointed suddenly .
"His specs―use them as burning glasses!"
Piggy was surrounded before he could back away .
"Here―let me go!" His voice rose to a shriek of terror as Jack snatched
the g lasses of f his face. "Mind out! Give 'em back! I can hardly  see! Y ou'll
break the conch!"
Ralph elbowed him to ne side and knelt by the pile.
"Stand out of the light."
There was pushing and pulling and of ficious cries. Ralph moved the
lenses back and forth, this way and that, till a glossy white image of the
declining sun lay on a piece of r otten wood. Almost at once a thin trickle of
smoke rose up and made him cough. Jack knelt too and blew gently , so that
the s moke drifted away , thickening, and a tiny flame appeared.  The flame,
nearly invisible at first in that bright sunlight, enveloped a small twig, grew ,
was enri ched with color and rea ched up to a branch which exploded with a
sharp crack. The flame flapped higher and the boys broke into a cheer .
"My specs!" howled Piggy . "Give me my specs!"
Ralph st ood awa y from the pile  and put the glasses into Piggy's groping
hands. His voice subsided to a mutter .
"Jus' blurs, that's all. Hardly see my hand―"
The boy s were dancing. The pile was so rotten, and now so tinder -dry ,
that whole limbs yielded passi onately to the yellow flames that poured
upwards and shook a great bear d of flame twenty feet in the ai r . For yards
round the fire the heat was like a blow , and the breeze was a river of sparks.
T runks crumbled to white dust.
Ralph shouted.
"More wood! All of you get more wood!"
Life became a ra ce with the fire  and the boys scattered through the upper
forest. T o keep  a clean flag of flame flying on the mountain was the
immediate end and no one look ed further . Even the smallest b oys, unless
fruit clai med them, brought little pieces of wood and threw them in. The air
moved a little faster and became a light wind, so that leeward and windward
side wer e clearl y dif ferentiated. On one side the air was cool, but on the
other the fire th rust out a sava ge arm of heat that crinkled hair on the
instant. Boys who felt the evening wind on their damp faces paused to
enjoy th e freshn ess of it and then found they were exhausted.  They flung
themselves down in the shadows that lay among the shattered  rocks. The
beard of  flame diminished quic kly; then the pile fell inwards with a soft,
cindery sound, and sent a great tree of sparks upwards that leane d away and
drifted downwind. The boys lay , panting like dogs.
Ralph raised his head of f his forearms.
"That was no good."
Roger spat ef ficiently into the hot dust.
"What d'you mean?"
"There wasn't any smoke. Only flame."
Piggy had settled himself in a space between two rocks, and sat with the
conch on his knees.
"W e hav en't ma de a fire," he said, "what's any use. W e couldn't keep a
fire like that going, not if we tried."
"A fat lot you tried," said Jack contemptuously . "Y ou just sat."
"W e used his s pecs," said Simon, smearing a black cheek with his
forearm. "He helped that way ."
"I got the conch," said Piggy indignantly . "Y ou let me speak!"
"The con ch doesn't count on top  of the mountain," said Jack, "so you shut
up."
"I got the conch in my hand."
"Put on green b ranches," said Maurice. "That's the best way  to make
smoke."
"I got the conch―"
Jack turned fiercely .
"Y ou shut up!"
Piggy w ilted. Ra lph took the con ch from him and looked round the circle
of boys.
"W e've got to h ave special people for looking after the fire. Any day
there ma y be a ship out there"― he waved his arm at the taut wire of the
horizon―"and if we have a sign al going they'll come and take us of f. And
another thing. W e ought to hav e more rules. Where the conch is, that's a
meeting. The same up here as down there."
They assented. Piggy opened hi s mouth to speak, caught Jack's eye and
shut it again. Jack held out his hands for the conch and stood up, holding
the delicate thing carefully in his sooty hands.
"I ag ree with R alph. W e've got to have rules and obey them. After all,
we're not savages. W e're English, and the English are best at everything. So
we've got to do the right things."
He turned to Ralph.
"Ralph, I'll split up the choir―my hunters, that is―into groups,  and we'll
be responsible for keeping the fire going―"
This gen erosity brought a spatter of applause from the boys, so that Jack
grinned at them, then waved the conch for silence.
"W e'll let the fire burn out now . Who would see smoke at night-time,
anyway? And we can start the fire again whenever we like. Alt os, you can
keep the fire going this week, and trebles the next―"
The assembly assented gravely .
"And we 'll be responsible for ke eping a lookout too. If we see a  ship out
there"―they fol lowed the direction of his bony arm with their eyes―"we'll
put green branches on. Then there'll be more smoke."
They gazed intently at the dense blue of the horizon, as if a little
silhouette might appear there at any moment.
The sun in the west was a drop of burning gold that slid nearer and nearer
the sill of the world. All at once they were aware of the evening as the end
of light and warmth.
Roger took the conch and looked round at them gloomily .
"I've bee n watching the sea. The re hasn't been the trace of a ship . Perhaps
we'll never be rescued."
A murmur rose and swept away . Ralph took back the conch.
"I said before we'll be rescued sometime. W e've just got to w ait, that's
all."
Daring, indignant, Piggy took the conch.
"That's w hat I said! I said about our meetings and things and then you
said shut up―"
His voic e lifted into the whine of virtuous recrimination. They stirred and
began to shout him down.
"Y ou sa id you wanted a small fire and you been and built a p ile like a
hayrick. If I say  anything," cried Piggy , with bitter realism, "you say shut
up; but if Jack or Maurice or Simon―"
He paus ed in the tumult, stand ing, looking beyond them and down the
unfriendly side of the mountain to the great patch where they had found
dead wo od. The n he laughed so  strangely that they were hushed , looking at
the f lash of his spectacles in astonishment. They followed his gaze to find
the sour joke.
"Y ou got your small fire all right."
Smoke was rising here and there among the creepers that festooned the
dead or dying tr ees. As they wa tched, a flash of fire appeared at the root of
one wisp, and th en the smoke thickened. Small flames stirred at the trunk of
a tre e and craw led away through leaves and brushwood, dividing and
increasing. One patch touched a tree trunk and scrambled up like a bright
squirrel. The smoke increased, sifted, rolled outwards. The squirrel leapt on
the wings of the wind and clung to another standing t ree, eating
downwards. Ben eath the dark ca nopy of leaves and smoke the fire laid hold
on the forest and began to gnaw . Acres of black and yellow smoke rolled
steadily toward the sea. At the sight of the flames and the irresistible course
of the fire, the boys broke into shrill, excited cheering. The flames, as
though t hey were a kind of wild life, crept as a jaguar creeps on its belly
toward a line of birch-like saplin gs that fledged an outcrop of the pink rock.
They flapped at the first of the trees, and the branches grew a b rief foliage
of fi re. T he heart of flame leapt nimbly across the gap between t he trees and
then went swinging and flaring along the whole row of them. Beneath the
capering boys a quarter of a mi le square of forest was savage with smoke
and flame. The separate noises  of the fire mer ged into a dru m-roll that
seemed to shake the mountain.
"Y ou got your small fire all right."
Startled, Ralph realized that the boys were falling still and silent, feeling
the beginnings of awe at the power set free below them. The knowledge and
the awe made him savage.
"Oh, shut up!"
"I got the conch," said Piggy , in a hurt voice. "I got a right to speak."
They looked at him with eyes t hat lacked interest in what they saw , and
cocked e ars at the drum-roll of the fire. Piggy glanced nervously into hell
and cradled the conch.
"W e got to let that burn out now . And that was our firewood."
He licked his lips.
"There ain't nothing we can do. W e ought to be more car eful. I'm
scared―"
Jack dragged his eyes away from the fire.
"Y ou're always scared. Y ah―Fatty!"
"I got the conc h," said Piggy bleakly . He turned to Ralph. "I got the
conch, ain't I Ralph?"
Unwillingly Ralph turned away from the splendid, awful sight.
"What's that?"
"The conch. I got a right to speak."
The twins giggled together .
"W e wanted smoke―"
"Now look―!"
A p all stretched for miles away from the island. All the boy s except
Piggy started to giggle; presently they were shrieking with laughter .
Piggy lost his temper .
"I go t the conch! Just you listen! The first thing we ought to have made
was shelters down there by the beach. It wasn't half cold down there in the
night. B ut the first time Ralph says 'fire' you goes howling and  screaming
up this here mountain. Like a pack of kids!"
By now they were listening to the tirade.
"How ca n you expect to be resc ued if you don't put first things first and
act proper?"
He t ook of f his glasses and made as if to put down the conch; but the
sudden motion toward it of mo st of the older boys changed his mind. He
tucked the shell under his arm, and crouched back on a rock.
"Then when you get here you b uild a bonfire that isn't no use. Now you
been an d set the whole island on fire. W on't we look funny i f the whole
island burns up? Cooked fruit, that's what we'll have to eat, and roast pork.
And tha t's nothing to laugh at! Y ou said Ralph was chief and yo u don't give
him time to think. Then when he says something you rush of f, like, like―"
He paused for breath, and the fire growled at them.
"And that's not all. Them kids. The little 'uns. Who took any notice of
'em? Who knows how many we got?"
Ralph took a sudden step forward.
"I told you to. I told you to get a list of names!"
"How could I," cried Piggy indi gnantly , "all by myself? They waited for
two minutes, then they fell in t he sea; they went into the forest; they just
scattered everywhere. How was I to know which was which?"
Ralph licked pale lips.
"Then you don't know how many of us there ought to be?"
"How co uld I with them little 'un s running round like insects? T hen when
you three came back, as soon as you said make a fire, they all ran away , and
I never had a chance―"
"That's enough!" said Ralph sharply , and snatched back the conch. "If
you didn't you didn't."
"―then you come up here an' pinch my specs―"
Jack turned on him.
"Y ou shut up!"
"―and t hem litt le 'uns was wand ering about down there where t he fire is.
How d'you know they aren't still there?"
Piggy st ood up and pointed to the smoke and flames. A mur mur rose
among the boys and died away . Something strange was happening to Piggy ,
for he was gasping for breath.
"That lit tle 'un― " gasped Piggy―"him with the mark on his face, I don't
see him. Where is he now?"
The crowd was as silent as death.
"Him that talked about the snakes. He was down there―"
A tree exploded in the fire like a bomb. T all swathes of creeper s rose for
a m oment into view , agonized , and went down again. The little boys
screamed at them.
"Snakes! Snakes! Look at the snakes!"
In the west, and  unheeded, the s un lay only an inch or two above the sea.
Their faces were lit redly from beneath. Piggy fell against a rock and
clutched it with both hands.
"That little 'un th at had a mark on his face―where is―he now?  I tell you
I don't see him."
The boys looked at each other fearfully , unbelieving.
"―where is he now?"
Ralph muttered the reply as if in shame. "Perhaps he went back to the,
the―" Beneath them, on the un friendly side of the mountain, the drum-roll
continued.
CHAPTER THREE
     
Huts on the Beach
     
Jack was bent double. He was down like a sprinter , his nose only a few
inches fr om the humid earth. The tree trunks and the creepers th at festooned
them lost themlves in a green du sk thirty feet above him, and all about was
the under growth. There was only the faintest indication of a trail here; a
cracked twig and what might b e the impression of one side of a hoof. He
lowered his chin and stared at t he traces as though he would force them to
speak to  him. Then dog-like, uncomfortably on all fours yet unheeding his
discomfort, he stole forward five yards and stopped. Here was loop of
creeper with a tendril pendant from a node. The tendril was pol ished on the
underside; pigs, passing through the loop, brushed it with their bristly hide.
Jack crouched with his face a few inches away from this clue, th en stared
forward into the semi-darkne ss of the under growth. His sandy hair ,
considerably longer than it had been when they dropped in, was lighter
now; an d his bare back was a m ass of dark freckles and peeling  sunburn. A
sharpened stick about five feet long trailed from his right hand, and except
for a pair of tattered shorts he ld up by his knife-belt he was naked. He
closed h is eyes, raised his head and breathed in gently with fla red nostrils,
assessing the current of warm air for information. The forest and he were
very still.
At length he let  out his breath in a long sigh and opened his ey es. They
were br ight blue, eyes that in this frustration seemed bolting  and nearly
mad. H e passed his tongue across dry lips and scanned the
uncommunicative forest. Then a gain he stole forward and cast this way and
that over the ground.
The sile nce of the forest was more oppressive than the heat, and at this
hour of the day  there was not even the whine of insects. Only  when Jack
himself roused a gaudy bird fro m a primitive nest of sticks was the silence
shattered and echoes set ringing  by a harsh cry that seemed to come out of
the abyss of age s. Jack himself shrank at this cry with a hiss of indrawn
breath, and for a  minute became less a hunter than a furtive thi ng, ape-like
among t he tangl e of trees. Then  the trail, the frustration, claime d him again
and he searched the ground avidly . By the trunk of a vast tree th at grew pale
flowers on its gr ey bark he chec ked, closed his eyes, and once more drew in
the warm  air; and this time his b reath came short, there was eve n a passing
pallor in his fa ce, and then th e sur ge of blood again. He passed like a
shadow under the darkness of the tree and crouched, looking down at the
trodden ground at his feet.
The dro ppings were warm. They lay piled among turned earth. They
were olive green, smooth, and they steamed a little. Jack lifted his head and
stared at the inscrutable masses of creeper that lay across the trail. Then he
raised hi s spear and sneaked forward. Beyond the creeper , the trail joined a
pig-run that was wide enough and trodden enough to be a path. The ground
was hard ened by an accustomed tread and as Jack rose to his full height he
heard so mething moving on it. He swung back his right arm and hurled the
spear wi th all his strength. From  the pig-run came the quick, hard patter of
hoofs, a  castanet sound, seductive, maddening―the promise o f meat. He
rushed out of the under growth and snatched up his spear . The pattering of
pig's trotters died away in the distance.
Jack stood there, streaming with sweat, streaked with brown earth,
stained b y all the vicissitudes of  a day's hunting. Swearing, he turned of f the
trail and pushed his way through until the forest opened a little and instead
of b ald trunks supporting a dark roof there were light grey trunks and
crowns of feathery palm. Beyond these was the glitter of the sea and he
could he ar voice s. Ralph was st anding by a contraption of palm  trunks and
leaves, a  rude shelter that faced  the lagoon and seemed very near to falling
down. He did not notice when Jack spoke.
"Got any water?"
Ralph looked up, frowning, from the complication of leaves. H e did not
notice Jack even when he saw him.
"I sa id h ave you  got any water? I'm thirsty ." Ralph withdrew his attention
from the shelter and realized Jack with a start.
"Oh, hullo. W ater? There by the tree. Ought to be some left."
Jack took up a coconut shell that brimmed with fresh water from among a
group th at was arranged in the shade, and drank. The water sp lashed over
his chin and neck and chest. He breathed noisily when he had finished.
"Needed that."
Simon spoke from inside the shelter .
"Up a bit."
Ralph turned to the shelter and lifted a branch with a whole tiling of
leaves.
The leaves came apart and flutte red down. Simon's contrite face appeared
in the hole.
"Sorry ."
Ralph surveyed the wreck with distaste.
"Never get it done."
He f lung himself down at Jack's feet. Simon remained, looking out of the
hole in the shelter . Once down, Ralph explained.
"Been working for days now . And look!"
T wo shelters were in position, but shaky . This one was a ruin.
"And th ey keep running of f. Y o u remember the meeting? How everyone
was going to work hard until the shelters were finished?"
"Except me and my hunters―"
"Except the hunters. W ell, the littluns are―"
He gesticulated, sought for a word.
"They're hopeless. The older ones aren't much better . D'you see ? All day
I've been  workin g with Simon. No one else. They're of f bathing, or eating,
or playing."
Simon poked his head out carefully .
"Y ou're chief. Y ou tell 'em of f."
Ralph lay flat and looked up at the palm trees and the sky .
"Meetings. Don 't we love meet ings? Every day . T wice a day . W e talk."
He got on one e lbow . "I bet if I blew the conch this minute, t hey'd come
running. Then we'd be, you know , very solemn, and someone would say we
ought to build a  jet, or a submarine, or a TV set. When the m eeting was
over they'd work for five minutes, then wander of f or go hunting."
Jack flushed.
"W e want meat."
"W ell, we haven't got any yet. A nd we want shelters. Besides, t he rest of
your hunters came back hours ago. They've been swimming."
"I went on," said Jack. "I let them go. I had to go on. I―"
He tried to convey the compulsion to track down and kill that was
swallowing him up.
"I went on. I thought, by myself―"
The madness came into his eyes again.
"I thought I might―kill."
"But you didn't."
"I thought I might."
Some hidden passion vibrated in Ralph's voice.
"But you haven't yet."
His invitation might have passed as casual, were it not for the undertone.
"Y ou wouldn't care to help with the shelters, I suppose?"
"W e want meat―"
"And we don't get it."
Now the antagonism was audible.
"But I shall! Next time! I've got  to get a barb on this spear! W e wounded
a pig and the spear fell out. If we could only make barbs―"
"W e need shelters."
Suddenly Jack shouted in rage.
"Are you accusing―?"
"All I'm saying is we've worked dashed hard. That's all."
They were both red in the face and found looking at each other dif ficult.
Ralph rolled on his stomach and began to play with the grass.
"If it rains like w hen we dropped in we'll need shelters all right. And then
another thing. W e need shelters because of the―"
He p aused for a moment and they both pushed their anger away . Then he
went on with the safe, changed subject.
"Y ou've noticed, haven't you?"
Jack put down his spear and squatted.
"Noticed what?"
"W ell. They're frightened."
He rolled over and peered into Jack's fierce, dirty face.
"I mean the way things are. They dream. Y ou can hear 'em. H ave you
been awake at night?"
Jack shook his head.
"They talk and scream. The littluns. Even some of the others. As if―"
"As if it wasn't a good island."
Astonished at the interruption, they looked up at Simon's serious face.
"As if," said Simon, "the beastie, the beastie or the snake-thing, was real.
Remember?"
The two  older boys flinched w hen they heard the shameful syllable.
Snakes were not mentioned now , were not mentionable.
"As if this wasn't a good island," said Ralph slowly . "Y es, that's right."
Jack sat up and stretched out his legs.
"They're batty ."
      "C rackers. Remember whe n we went exploring?" They grinned at
each other , remembering the glamour of the first day . Ralph went on.
"So we need shelters as a sort of―"
"Home."
"That's right."
Jack drew up h is legs, clasped his knees, and frowned in an ef fort to
attain clarity .
"All the  same―in the forest. I mean when you're hunting, not when
you're getting fruit, of course, but when you're on your own―"
He paused for a moment, not sure if Ralph would take him seriously .
"Go on."
"If y ou're hunting sometimes you catch yourself feeling as if―" He
flushed suddenl y . "There's nothing in it of course. Just a feelin g. But you
can feel as if you're not hunting, but―being hunted, as if something's
behind you all the time in the jungle."
They were silent again: Simon  intent, Ralph incredulous and faintly
indignant. He sat up, rubbing one shoulder with a dirty hand.
"W ell, I don't know ."
Jack leapt to his feet and spoke very quickly .
"That's how you can feel in the forest. Of course there's nothing in it.
Only―only―"
He took a few rapid steps toward the beach, then came back.
"Only I know how they feel. See? That's all."
"The best thing we can do is get ourselves rescued."
Jack had  to think for a momen t before he could remember wh at rescue
was.
"Rescue? Y es, of course! All the same, I'd like to catch a pig first―" He
snatched up his spear and dashed it into the ground. The opaque, mad look
came in to his eyes again. Ralph looked at him critically through his tangle
of fair hair .
"So long as your hunters remember the fire―"
"Y ou and your fire!"
The two boys trotted down the beach, and, turning at the water's edge,
looked b ack at the pink mountain. The trickle of smoke sketched a chalky
line up the sol id blue of the sky , wavered high up and fa ded. Ralph
frowned.
"I wonder how far of f you could see that."
"Miles."
"W e don't make enough smoke."
The bot tom part of the trickl e, as though conscious of their gaze,
thickened to a creamy blur which crept up the feeble column.
"They've put on green branches," muttered Ralph. "I wonder!" He
screwed up his eyes and swung round to search the horizon.
"Got it!"
Jack shouted so loudly that Ralph jumped.
"What? Where? Is it a ship?"
But Jack was pointing to the high declivities that led down from the
mountain to the flatter part of the island.
"Of course! They'll lie up there―they must, when the sun's too hot―"
Ralph gazed bewildered at his rapt face.
"―they get up high. High up a nd in the shade, resting during the heat,
like cows at home―"
"I thought you saw a ship!"
"W e co uld steal up on one ―paint our faces so they wouldn't
see―perhaps surround them and then―"
Indignation took away Ralph's control.
"I w as talking a bout smoke! Don't you want to be rescued? All you can
talk about is pig, pig, pig!"
"But we want meat!"
"And I work all day with nothing but Simon and you come back and
don't even notice the huts!"
"I was working too―"
"But you like it!" shouted Ralph. "Y ou want to hunt! While I―"
They faced each other on the bright beach, astonished at the rub of
feeling. Ralph looked away first, pretending interest in a group of littluns on
the s and. From beyond the platform came the shouting of the hu nters in the
swimming pool. On the end of the platform, Piggy was lying flat, looking
down into the brilliant water .
"People don't help much."
He w anted to explain how peo ple were never quite what you  thought
they were.
"Simon. He helps." He pointed at the shelters.
"All the rest rushed of f. He's done as much as I have. Only―"
"Simon's always about."
Ralph stared back to the shelters with Jack by his side.
"Do a bit for you," muttered Jack, "before I have a bathe."
"Don't bother ."
But whe n they reached the shelt ers Simon was not to be seen. R alph put
his head in the hole, withdrew it, and turned to Jack.
"He's buzzed of f."
"Got fed up," said Jack, "and gone for a bathe."
Ralph frowned.
"He's queer . He's funny ."
Jack nod ded, as much for the sake of agreeing as anything, an d by tacit
consent they left the shelter and went toward the bathing pool.
"And th en," said  Jack, "when I've had a bathe and something to eat, I'll
just trek over to the other side of the mountain and see if I can see any
traces. Coming?"
"But the sun's nearly set!"
"I might have time―-"
They wa lked along, two continents of experience and feeling, unable to
communicate.
"If I could only get a pig!"
"I'll come back and go on with the shelter ."
They looked at each other , baf fled, in love and hate. All the warm salt
water of  the bathing pool and th e shouting and splashing and lau ghing were
only just suf ficient to bring them together again.
Simon was not in the bathing pool as they had expected.
When the other two had trotted down the beach to look back at the
mountain he had followed them  for a few yards and then stopped. He had
stood fr owing d own at a pile of sand on the beach where somebody had
been try ing to build a little house or hut. Then he turned his b ack on this
and walked into the forest with  an air of purpose. He was a small, skinny
boy , his chin pointed, and his eyes so bright they had deceived  Ralph into
thinking him delightfully gay a nd wicked. The coarse mop of black hair
was lon g and swung down, almost concealing a low , broad forehead. He
wore the remains of shorts and his feet were bare like Jack's. Always
darkish in color , Simon was burned by the sun to a deep tan that glistened
with sweat.
He p icked his w ay up the scar ,  passed the great rock where Ralph had
climbed on the first morning, th en turned of f to his right among the trees.
He w alked with an accustomed tread through the acres of fruit trees, where
the l east ener getic could find an easy if unsatisfying meal. Flower and fruit
grew tog ether o n the same tree  and everywhere was the scent  of ripeness
and the booming of a million be es at pasture. Here the littluns who had run
after him caught up with him. They talked, cried out unintellig ibly , lugged
him tow ard the trees. Then, ami d the roar of bees in the afternoon sunlight,
Simon found for them the fruit they could not reach, pulled of f the choicest
from up  in the f oliage, passed them back down to the endless, outstretched
hands. When he had satisfied them he paused and looked round. The littluns
watched him inscrutably over double handfuls of ripe fruit.
Simon t urned aw ay from them and went where the just perceptible path
led him . Soon high jungle closed in. T all trunks bore unexpected pale
flowers all the way up to the da rk canopy where life went on clamorously .
The air here was dark too, and  the creepers dropped their ropes like the
rigging of foundered ships. His feet left prints in the soft soil and the
creepers shivered throughout their lengths when he bumped them.
He came at last to a place where more sunshine fell. Since they had not
so far to go for light the creepers had woven a great mat that hung at the
side of an open space in the jungle; for here a patch of rock came close to
the surfa ce and would not allow  more than little plants and ferns to grow .
The who le space  was walled with dark aromatic bushes, and was a bowl of
heat and  light. A great tree, fallen across one corner , leaned against the trees
that still  stood and a rapid clim ber flaunted red and yellow sprays right to
the top.
Simon paused. He looked over his shoulder as Jack had done at the close
ways be hind him  and glanced s wiftly round to confirm that he  was utterly
alone. For a moment his movements were almost furtive. Then he bent
down an d wormed his way into  the center of the mat. The creep ers and the
bushes w ere so close that he left  his sweat on them and they pul led together
behind h im. When he was secure in the middle he was in a little cabin
screened of f from the open spac e by a few leaves. He squatted d own, parted
the leaves and looked out into the clearing. Nothing moved b ut a pair of
gaudy butterflies that danced round each other in the hot air . Holding his
breath he cocked a critical ear at the sounds of the island. Evening was
advancing toward the island; the sounds of the bright fantasti c birds, the
bee-sounds, eve n the crying of the gulls that were returning to their roosts
among the square rocks, were fainter . The deep sea breaking miles away on
the reef made an undertone le ss perceptible than the susurration of the
blood.
Simon dropped the screen of lea ves back into place. The slope of the bars
of honey -colored sunlight decre ased; they slid up the bushes, passed over
the green candle-like buds, moved up toward the canopy , and darkness
thickened under  the trees. W ith  the fading of the light the rio tous colors
died and the heat and ur gency cooled away . The candlebuds stirred. Their
green se pals dr ew back a little and the white tips of the flowers rose
delicately to meet the open air .
Now the sunlight had lifted clear of the open space and withdrawn from
the s ky . Darkness poured out, s ubmer ging the ways between the trees till
they were dim and strange as the bottom of the sea. The candle-buds
opened their wide white flowers glimmering under the light that pricked
down from the first stars. Their scent spilled out into the air and took
possession of the island.
CHAPTER FOUR
     
Painted Faces and Long Hair
     
The first rhythm that they became used to was the slow swing from dawn to
quick dusk. They accepted the pleasures of morning, the brig ht sun, the
whelming sea and sweet air , as a time when play was good and life so full
that hop e was not necessary an d therefore for gotten. T oward noon, as the
floods of light fell more nearly to the perpendicular , the stark c olors of the
morning were smoothed in pearl and opalescence; and the heat―as though
the impe nding sun's height gave it momentum―became a blow that they
ducked, running to the shade and lying there, perhaps even sleeping.
Strange things happened at midday . The glittering sea rose up, moved
apart in planes of blatant impossibility; the coral reef and the few stunted
palms that clung to the more elevated parts would float up i nto the sky ,
would quiver , be plucked apart, run like raindrops on a wire or be repeated
as in an odd succession of mirrors. Sometimes land loomed where there was
no l and and fli cked out like a bubble as the children watc hed. Piggy
discounted all this learnedly as a "mirage"; and since no boy could reach
even the  reef over the stretch o f water where the snapping sha rks waited,
they grew accustomed to these mysteries and ignored them, just as they
ignored the miraculous, throbbing stars. At midday the illusions mer ged
into the sky and there the sun gazed down like an angry eye. T hen, at the
end of the afternoon; the mirage subsided and the horizon became level and
blue and  clipped  as the sun declined. That was another time of c omparative
coolness but menaced by the coming of the dark. When the sun sank,
darkness dropped on the island like an extinguisher and soon the shelters
were full of restlessness, under the remote stars.
Nevertheless, th e northern European tradition of work, play , and food
right thr ough the  day , made it possible for them to adjust themselves wholly
to th is new rhyth m. The littlun P ercival had early crawled into a shelter and
stayed there for two days, talking, singing, and crying, till they thought him
batty an d were faintly amused.  Ever since then he had been p eaked, red-
eyed, and miserable; a littiun who played little and cried often.
The sma ller boy s were known n ow by the generic title of "littluns." The
decrease in size, from Ralph down, was gradual; and though there was a
dubious region inhabited by Sim on and Robert and Maurice, n evertheless
no o ne h ad any dif ficulty in recognizing biguns at one end and li ttluns at the
other . Th e undou bted littluns, those aged about six, led a quite d istinct, and
at th e same time intense, life of their own. They ate most of the day , picking
fruit wh ere they  could reach it and not particular about ripeness and quality .
They were used now to stomach-aches and a sort of chronic diarrhoea. They
suf fered untold terrors in the dark and huddled together for comfort. Apart
from food and sleep, they foun d time for play , aimless and trivial, in the
white sa nd by the bright water . T hey cried for their mothers much less often
than mig ht have been expected; they were very brown, and filthily dirty .
They obeyed the summons of the conch, partly because Ralph blew it, and
he w as b ig enou gh to be a link w ith the adult world of authority ; and partly
because they enjoyed the enter tainment of the assemblies. But otherwise
they seldom bothered with the b iguns and their passionately emotional and
corporate life was their own.
They had built castles in the s and at the bar of the little river . These
castles were about one foot hig h and were decorated with shells, withered
flowers, and interesting stones. Round the castles was a complex of marks,
tracks, w alls, railway lines, that were of significance only if inspected with
the e ye at beach-level. The littluns played here, if not happily a t least with
absorbed attentio n; and often as many as three of them would play the same
game together .
Three were playing here now . Henry was the biggest of them. He was
also a distant re lative of that o ther boy whose mulberry-mark ed face had
not been seen si nce the evening of the great fire; but he was not old enough
to under stand this, and if he had been told that the other boy had  gone home
in an aircraft, he would have accepted the statement without fuss or
disbelief.
Henry was a bit  of a leader this afternoon, because the other two were
Percival and Johnny , the smalle st boys on the island. Percival was mouse-
colored and had not been very attractive even to his mother; Johnny was
well built, with fair hair and a natural belligerence. Just now h e was being
obedient because he was interested; and the three children, kne eling in the
sand, were at peace.
Roger an d Maur ice came out of  the forest. They were relieved from duty
at the fire and had come down for a swim. Roger led the way straight
through the castles, kicking them over , burying the flowers, scattering the
chosen s tones. Maurice followed, laughing, and added to the destruction.
The three littluns paused in their game and looked up. As it happened, the
particular marks  in which they  were interested had not been touched, so
they ma de no protest. Only Percival began to whimper with an eyeful of
sand an d Maurice hurried away . In his other life Maurice had received
chastisement for filling a younger eye with sand. Now , though there was no
parent to  let fall a heavy hand, M aurice still felt the unease of wrongdoing.
At t he back of his mind formed the uncertain outlines of an excuse. He
muttered something about a swim and broke into a trot.
Roger remained, watching the littluns. He was not noticeably darker than
when he had dropped in, but the shock of black hair , down his n ape and low
on h is fo rehead, seemed to suit his gloomy face and made what had seemed
at first an unsociable remoteness into something forbidding. Percival
finished his whimper and went  on playing, for the tears had washed the
sand aw ay . Johnny watched him with china-blue eyes; then be gan to fling
up sand in a shower , and presently Percival was crying again.
When H enry tir ed of his play and wandered of f along the beach, Roger
followed him, keeping beneath the palms and drifting casually in the same
direction. Henry  walked at a distance from the palms and the sh ade because
he was too young to keep himse lf out of the sun. He went down the beach
and busi ed hims elf at the water's edge. The great Pacific tide was coming in
and eve ry few seconds the re latively still water of the lagoon heaved
forwards an inch. There were cr eatures that lived in this last fling of the sea,
tiny tran sparencies that came questing in with the water over the hot, dry
sand. W ith impalpable or gans  of sense they examined this new field.
Perhaps food had appeared whe re at the last incursion there had been none;
bird dro ppings, insects perhaps, any of the strewn detritus of landward life.
Like a myriad of tiny teeth in a saw , the transparencies came scavenging
over the beach.
This was fascinating to Henry . He poked about with a bit of stick, that
itself wa s wave- worn and whitened and a vagrant, and tried to control the
motions of the scavengers. He made little runnels that the tide filled and
tried to crowd them with creatures. He became absorbed beyond mere
happiness as he felt himself exercising control over living things. He talked
to them, ur ging them, ordering them. Driven back by the tide, his footprints
became bays in which they were trapped and gave him the illusion of
mastery . He squatted on his ham s at the water's edge, bowed, with a shock
of h air f alling over his forehead and past his eyes, and the afternoon sun
emptied down invisible arrows.
Roger waited too. At first he had  hidden behind a great palm; but Henry's
absorption with the transparencies was so obvious that at last h e stood out
in full view . He looked along the beach. Percival had gone of f, crying, and
Johnny was left in triumphant possession of the castles, H e sat there,
crooning to himself and throwi ng sand at an imaginary Perciv al. Beyond
him, Ro ger could see the platfo rm and the glints of spray where Ralph and
Simon and Piggy and Maurice were diving in the pool. He listened carefully
but could only just hear them.
A sudden breeze shook the fring e of palm trees, so that the fronds tossed
and flutt ered. Si xty feet above R oger , several nuts, fibrous lumps as big as
rugby ba lls, were loosed from their stems. They fell about him w ith a series
of hard thumps and he was not touched. Roger did not consider his escape,
but looked from the nuts to Henry and back again.
The subs oil bene ath the palm tre es was a raised beach, and generations of
palms had worked loose in thi s the stones that had lain on t he sands of
another shore. Roger stooped, picked up a stone, aimed, and threw it at
Henry― threw it to miss. Th e stone, that token of preposterous time,
bounced five yards to Henry's right and fell in the water . Roge r gathered a
handful of stones and began to  throw them. Y et there was a space round
Henry , p erhaps six yards in dia meter , into which he dare not throw . Here,
invisible yet strong, was the taboo of the old life. Round the squatting child
was the protection of parents and school and policemen and the law . Roger's
arm was  conditioned by a civili zation that knew nothing of him  and was in
ruins.
Henry was surprised by the plopping sounds in the water . He abandoned
the n oiseless transparencies and  pointed at the center of the spreading rings
like a setter . Thi s side and that the stones fell, and Henry turned  obediently
but always too late to see the stones in the air . At last he saw one and
laughed, looking for the friend who was teasing him. But Roger had
whipped behind the palm again, was leaning against it breathing quickly ,
his eyelids fluttering. Then Henry lost interest in stones and wandered of f.
"Roger ."
Jack wa s standing under a tre e about ten yards away . When Roger
opened his eyes and saw hi m, a darker shadow crept beneath the
swarthiness of his skin; but Jack noticed nothing. He was eager , impatient,
beckoning, so that Roger went to him.
There was a sma ll pool at the end of the river , dammed back by  sand and
full of white w ater -lilies and needle-like reeds. Here Sam and  Eric were
waiting, and Bill. Jack, concea led from the sun, knelt by the pool and
opened the two lar ge leaves that he carried. One of them contained white
clay , and the other red. By them lay a stick of charcoal brought down from
the fire.
Jack explained to Roger as he worked.
"They d on't sme ll me. They see  me, I think. Something pink, under the
trees."
He smeared on the clay .
"If only I'd some green!"
He turn ed a half-concealed face up to Roger and answered the
incomprehension of his gaze.
"For hunting. Like in the war . Y ou know―dazzle paint. Like things
trying to look like something else―" He twisted in the ur gency of telling.
"―Like moths on a tree trunk."
Roger u nderstood and nodded gravely . The twins moved toward Jack and
began to protest timidly about something. Jack waved them away .
"Shut up."
He r ubbed the c harcoal stick between the patches of red and white on his
face.
"No. Y ou two come with me."
He peered at h is reflection and disliked it. He bent down, took up a
double handful of lukewarm water and rubbed the mess fro m his face.
Freckles and sandy eyebrows appeared.
Roger smiled, unwillingly .
"Y ou don't half look a mess."
Jack pla nned his  new face. He made one cheek and one eye-socket white,
then he rubbed red over the other half of his face and slashed a black bar of
charcoal across from right ear to left jaw . He looked in the pool for his
reflection, but his breathing troubled the mirror .
"Samneric. Get me a coconut. An empty one."
He k nelt, holding the shell of water . A rounded patch of sunlig ht fell on
his face and a brightness appear ed in the depths of the water . He looked in
astonishment, no  longer at hims elf but at an awesome stranger . He spilt the
water an d leapt to his feet, laug hing excitedly . Beside the pool his sinewy
body held up a mask that drew their eyes and appalled them. He began to
dance and his la ughter became a bloodthirsty snarling. He capered toward
Bill, and the ma sk was a thing on its own, behind which Jack h id, liberated
from shame and self-consciousness. The face of red and white and black
swung th rough t he air and jigge d toward Bill. Bill started up laughing; then
suddenly he fell silent and blundered away through the bushes.
Jack rushed toward the twins.
"The rest are making a line. Come on!"
"But―"
"―we―"
"Come on! I'll creep up and stab―"
The mask compelled them.
Ralph climbed out of the bathing pool and trotted up the beach and sat in
the shade beneath the palms. His fair hair was plastered over his eyebrows
and he pushed it  back. Simon w as floating in the water and kicking with his
feet, and Maurice was practi cing diving. Piggy was mooning about,
aimlessly picking up things and discarding them. The rock-pools which so
fascinated him were covered by the tide, so he was without an interest until
the tide went back. Presently , seeing Ralph under the palms, he came and
sat by him.
Piggy w ore the remainders of a  pair of shorts, his fat body was golden
brown, and the g lasses still flashed when he looked at anything. He was the
only boy  on the island whose hair never seemed to grow . Th e rest were
shockheaded, bu t Piggy's hair still lay in wisps over his head  as though
baldness were his natural state and this imperfect covering would soon go,
like the velvet on a young stag's antlers.
"I've been thinking," he said, "about a clock. W e could make a sundial.
W e could put a stick in the sand, and then―"
The ef fort to exp ress the mathematical processes involved was too great.
He made a few passes instead.
"And an airplane, and a TV set," said Ralph sourly , "and a steam engine."
Piggy shook his head.
"Y ou ha ve to have a lot of metal  things for that," he said, "and we haven't
got no metal. But we got a stick."
Ralph tu rned an d smiled involuntarily . Piggy was a bore; his fat, his ass-
mar and his matter -of-fact ideas were dull, but there was always a little
pleasure to be got out of pulling his leg, even if one did it by accident.
Piggy saw the smile and misi nterpreted it as friendliness. There had
grown u p tacitly  among the big uns the opinion that Piggy was an outsider ,
not only by acce nt, which did no t matter , but by fat, and ass-mar , and specs,
and a certain di sinclination for manual labor . Now , finding that something
he had said made Ralph smile, he rejoiced and pressed his advantage.
"W e got a lot of sticks. W e cou ld have a sundial each. Then we should
know what the time was."
"A fat lot of good that would be."
"Y ou said you wanted things done. So as we could be rescued."
"Oh, shut up."
He leapt to his feet and trotted back to the pool, just as Maurice did a
rather poor dive. Ralph was glad of a chance to change the subject. He
shouted as Maurice came to the surface.
"Belly flop! Belly flop!"
Maurice flashed  a smile at Ralph who slid easily into the water . Of all the
boys, he was th e most at home  there; but today , irked by the mention of
rescue, the useless, footling me ntion of rescue, even the gree n depths of
water and the shattered, golden sun held no balm. Instead of remaining and
playing, he swam with steady strokes under Simon and crawle d out of the
other side of the pool to lie the re, sleek and streaming like a seal. Piggy ,
always c lumsy , stood up and ca me to stand by him, so that Ralp h rolled on
his stomach and pretended not  to see. The mirages had died away and
gloomily he ran his eye along the taut blue line of the horizon.
The next moment he was on his feet and shouting.
"Smoke! Smoke!"
Simon tr ied to sit up in the wate r and got a mouthful. Maurice,  who had
been standing ready to dive, swayed back on his heels, made a bolt for the
platform, then swerved back to the grass under the palms. There he started
to pull on his tattered shorts, to be ready for anything.
Ralph stood, one hand holding back his hair , the other clenche d. Simon
was climbing out of the water . Piggy was rubbing his glasses o n his shorts
and squi nting at  the sea. Maurice had got both legs through on e leg of his
shorts. Of all the boys, only Ralph was still.
"I ca n't see no smoke," said Piggy incredulously . "I can't see n o smoke,
Ralph―where is it?"
Ralph said nothing. Now both h is hands were clenched over his  forehead
so that the fair h air was kept ou t of his eyes. He was leaning forward and
already the salt was whitening his body .
"Ralph―where's the ship?"
Simon stood by , looking from Ralph to the horizon. Maurice's trousers
gave way with a  sigh and he abandoned them as a wreck, rushed  toward the
forest, and then came back again.
The smoke was a tight little knot on the horizon and was uncoiling
slowly . Beneath the smoke was a dot that might be a funnel. Ralph's face
was pale as he spoke to himself.
"They'll see our smoke."
Piggy was looking in the right direction now .
"It don't look much."
He turned round and peered u p at the mountain. Ralph con tinued to
watch th e ship, ravenously . Color was coming back into his face. Simon
stood by him, silent.
"I k now I can' t see very muc h," said Piggy , "but have we got any
smoke?"
Ralph moved impatiently , still watching the ship.
"The smoke on the mountain."
Maurice came running, and stared out to sea. Both Simon and Piggy were
looking up at the mountain. Piggy screwed up his face but Simon cried out
as though he had hurt himself.
"Ralph! Ralph!"
The quality of his speech twisted Ralph on the sand.
"Y ou tell me," said Piggy anxiously . "Is there a signal?"
Ralph looked back at the dispersing smoke in the horizon, then up at the
mountain.
"Ralph―please! Is there a signal?"
Simon put out h is hand, timidly , to touch Ralph; but Ralph started to run,
splashing through the shallow end of the bathing pool, across the hot, white
sand and  under the palms. A moment later he was battling with t he complex
under growth that was already engulfing the scar . Simon ran after him, then
Maurice. Piggy shouted.
"Ralph! Please―Ralph!"
Then he too sta rted to run, stumbling over Maurice's discarded shorts
before h e was across the terrace. Behind the four boys, the sm oke moved
gently along the horizon; and on the beach, Henry and Jo hnny were
throwing sand at Percival who was crying quietly again; and all three were
in complete ignorance of the excitement.
By the time Ralp h had reached t he landward end of the scar he was using
precious breath to swear . He did desperate violence to his naked body
among the rasping creepers so that blood was sliding over him. Just where
the steep ascent of the mountain  began, he stopped. Maurice wa s only a few
yards behind him.
"Piggy's specs!" shouted Ralph. "If the fire's all out, we'll need them―"
He s topped shouting and swayed  on his feet. Piggy was only ju st visible,
bumbling up from the beach. Ralph looked at the horizon, then up to the
mountain. W as it better to fetch Piggy's glasses, or would the ship have
gone? Or if they  climbed on, sup posing the fire was all out, and they had to
watch Piggy crawling nearer and the ship sinking under the horizon?
Balanced on a high peak of need, agonized by indecision, Ralph cried out:
"Oh God, oh God!"
Simon, struggli ng with the bushes, caught his breath. His face was
twisted. Ralph blundered on, savaging himself, as the wisp of smoke moved
on.
The fire was dead. They saw that straight away; saw what they h ad really
known d own on the beach when the smoke of home had beckon ed. The fire
was out, smokeless and dead; th e watchers were gone. A pile of unused fuel
lay ready .
Ralph turned to the sea. The h orizon stretched, impersonal on ce more,
barren o f all but the faintest trace of smoke. Ralph ran stumbling along the
rocks, saved himself on the edge of the pink clif f, and screamed at the ship.
"Come back! Come back!"
He ran backward s and forwards along the clif f, his face always t o the sea,
and his voice rose insanely .
"Come back! Come back!"
Simon a nd Maurice arrived. Ralph looked at them with unwinking eyes.
Simon t urned away , smearing the water from his cheeks. Ralph reached
inside himself for the worst word he knew .
"They let the bloody fire go out."
He look ed down  the unfriendly side of the mountain. Piggy arrived, out
of breat h and whimpering like a littlun. Ralph clenched his fist and went
very red . The intentness of his gaze, the bitterness of his voice, pointed for
him.
"There they are."
A pr ocession had appeared, far down among the pink stones that lay near
the water's edge. Some of the bo ys wore black caps but otherwis e they were
almost n aked. T hey lifted sticks in the air together whenever they came to
an easy patch. T hey were chanting, something to do with the bun dle that the
errant tw ins carr ied so carefully . Ralph picked out Jack easily , even at that
distance, tall, red-haired, and inevitably leading the procession.
Simon looked now , from Ralph to Jack, as he had looked from Ralph to
the horizon, and what he saw seemed to make him afraid. Ralph said
nothing more, but waited while the procession came nearer . Th e chant was
audible but at th at distance still wordless. Behind Jack walked  the twins,
carrying a great stake on their shoulders. The gutted carcass of a pig swung
from the stake, swinging heavily as the twins toiled over the uneven
ground. The pig's head hung down with gaping neck and seemed to search
for something on the ground. At last the words of the chant floated up to
them, across the bowl of blackened wood and ashes.
" Kill the pig. Cut her thr oat. Spill her blood. "
Y et as the words  became audible, the procession reached the ste epest part
of the mountain, and in a minu te or two the chant had died away . Piggy
sniveled and Simon shushed him quickly as though he had spoken too
loudly in church.
Jack, his face smeared with clays, reached the top first and hailed Ralph
excitedly , with lifted spear .
"Look! W e've killed a pig―we stole up on them―we got in a circle―"
V oices broke in from the hunters.
"W e got in a circle―"
"W e crept up―"
"The pig squealed―"
The twins stood with the pig s winging between them, dropp ing black
gouts on the roc k. They seemed to share one wide, ecstatic grin. Jack had
too m any things to tell Ralph at once. Instead, he danced a step or two, then
remembered his  dignity and stood still, grinning. He noticed blood on his
hands and grimaced distastefull y , looked for something on wh ich to clean
them, then wiped them on his shorts and laughed.
Ralph spoke.
"Y ou let the fire go out."
Jack che cked, v aguely irritated by this irrelevance but too happ y to let it
worry him.
"W e can  light the fire again. Y ou should have been with us, R alph. W e
had a smashing time. The twins got knocked over―"
"W e hit the pig―"
"―I fell on top―"
"I cu t the pig's throat," said Jack, proudly , and yet twitched as h e said it.
"Can I borrow yours, Ralph, to make a nick in the hilt?"
The boys chattered and danced. The twins continued to grin.
"There was lashings of blood," said Jack, laughing and shuddering, "you
should have seen it!"
"W e'll go hunting every day―"
Ralph spoke again, hoarsely . He had not moved.
"Y ou let the fire go out."
This rep etition m ade Jack uneasy . He looked at the twins and t hen back
at Ralph.
"W e had  to have them in the hun t," he said, "or there wouldn't have been
enough for a ring."
He flushed, conscious of a fault.
"The fire's only been out an hour or two. W e can light up again―"
He noticed Ralph's scarred nakedness, and the sombre silence of all four
of th em. He sought, charitable in his happiness, to include them in the thing
that had happened. His mind wa s crowded with memories; memories of the
knowledge that had come to them when they closed in on th e struggling
pig, knowledge that they had o utwitted a living thing, imposed their will
upon it, taken away its life like a long satisfying drink.
He spread his arms wide.
"Y ou should have seen the blood!"
The hun ters wer e more silent n ow , but at this they buzzed again. Ralph
flung ba ck his hair . One arm pointed at the empty horizon. His voice was
loud and savage, and struck them into silence.
"There was aship."
Jack, faced at once with too many awful implications, ducked a way from
them. He laid a hand on the pig  and drew his knife. Ralph brought his arm
down, fist clenched, and his voice shook.
"There w as a ship. Out there. Y o u said you'd keep the fire going and you
let it out!" He took a step toward Jack, who turned and faced him.
"They might have seen us. W e might have gone home―"
This was too bitter for Piggy , who for got his timidity in the agony of his
loss. He began to cry out, shrilly:
"Y ou and your b lood, Jack Merridew! Y ou and your hunting! W e might
have gone home―"
Ralph pushed Piggy to one side.
"I w as chief, an d you were going to do what I said. Y ou talk. But you
can't even build huts―then you go of f hunting and let out the fire―"
He turned away , silent for a m oment. Then his voice came ag ain on a
peak of feeling.
"There was a ship―"
One of the smaller hunters began to wail. The dismal truth was filtering
through to everybody . Jack went very red as he hacked and p ulled at the
pig.
"The job was too much. W e needed everyone."
Ralph turned.
"Y ou could have had everyone when the shelters were finished . But you
had to hunt―"
"W e needed meat."
Jack sto od up as he said this, t he bloodied knife in his hand.  The two
boys faced each other . There w as the brilliant world of hunting, tactics,
fierce exhilarati on, skill; and there was the world of longing and baf fled
commonsense. Jack transferred the knife to his left hand an d smudged
blood over his forehead as he pushed down the plastered hair .
Piggy began again.
"Y ou did n't ough t to have let that fire out. Y ou said you'd keep t he smoke
going―"
This from Piggy , and the wails of agreement from some of the hunters,
drove Ja ck to violence. The bolt ing look came into his blue eyes. He took a
step, and able at last to hit someone, stuck his fist into Piggy's stomach.
Piggy sat down with a grunt. Jack stood over him. His voice was vicious
with humiliation.
"Y ou would, would you? Fatty!"
Ralph made a step forward an d Jack smacked Piggy's head. Piggy's
glasses flew of f and tinkled on the rocks. Piggy cried out in terror:
"My specs!"
He went crouching and feeling over the rocks but Simon, who got there
first, fou nd them for him. Passions beat about Simon on the m ountain-top
with awful wings.
"One side's broken."
Piggy grabbed and put on the glasses. He looked malevolently at Jack.
"I got to have them specs. Now I only got one eye. Jus' you wait―"
Jack ma de a move toward Piggy  who scrambled away till a great rock lay
between them. He thrust his he ad over the top and glared at J ack through
his one flashing glass.
"Now I only got one eye. Just you wait―"
Jack mimicked the whine and scramble.
"Jus' you wait―yah!"
Piggy an d the parody were so funny that the hunters began to laugh. Jack
felt encouraged.  He went on scrambling and the laughter rose to a gale of
hysteria. Unwillingly Ralph felt  his lips twitch; he was angry w ith himself
for giving way .
He muttered.
"That was a dirty trick."
Jack bro ke out of his gyration an d stood facing Ralph. His words came in
a shout.
"All right, all right!"
He looked at Piggy , at the hunters, at Ralph.
"I'm sorry . About the fire, I mean. There. I―"
He drew himself up.
"―I apologize."
The buz z from the hunters was one of admiration at this h andsome
behavior . Clearl y they were of the opinion that Jack had done the decent
thing, had put himself in the r ight by his generous apology and Ralph,
obscurely , in the wrong. They waited for an appropriately decent answer .
Y et Ralp h's thro at refused to p ass one. He resented, as an addition to
Jack's m isbehavior , this verbal trick. The fire was dead, the ship was gone.
Could they not see? Anger instead of decency passed his throat.
"That was a dirty trick."
They we re silent on the mountain-top while the opaque look appeared in
Jack's eyes and passed away .
Ralph's final word was an ingracious mutter .
"All right. Light the fire."
W ith some positive action before them, a little of the tension died. Ralph
said no more, di d nothing, stood looking down at the ashes round his feet.
Jack was loud and active. He gave orders, sang, whistled, threw remarks at
the silent Ralph―remarks that did not need an answer , and therefore could
not invit e a snub; and still Ralp h was silent. No one, not even Jack, would
ask him to move and in the end they had to build the fire three yards away
and in a place not really as convenient.
So Ralp h asserted his chieftainship and could not have chosen a better
way if he had thought for days. Against this weapon, so indefinable and so
ef fective, Jack was powerless an d raged without knowing why . By the time
the pile was built, they were on dif ferent sides of a high barrier .
When th ey had dealt with the fir e another crisis arose. Jack had no means
of lighti ng it. Then to his surpris e, Ralph went to Piggy and took the glasses
from him. Not e ven Ralph knew how a link between him and Jack had been
snapped and fastened elsewhere.
"I'll bring 'em back."
"I'll come too."
Piggy stood behind him, islanded in a sea of meaningless color , while
Ralph kn elt and focused the glossy spot. Instantly the fire was a light, Piggy
held out his hands and grabbed the glasses back.
Before these fantastically attract ive flowers of violet and red and yellow ,
unkindness melt ed away . They became a circle of boys round a camp fire
and even Piggy and Ralph were half-drawn in. Soon some of the boys were
rushing down the slope for more wood while Jack hacked the pig. They
tried holding the whole carcass on a stake over the fire, but the stake burnt
more qu ickly than the pig roaste d. In the end they skewered bits of meat on
branches and held them in the flames: and even then almost as much boy
was roasted as meat.
Ralph's mouth watered. He meant to refuse meat, but his past diet of fruit
and nuts, with an odd crab or fish, gave him too little res istance. He
accepted a piece of halfraw meat and gnawed it like a wolf.
Piggy spoke, also dribbling.
"Aren't I having none?"
Jack had  meant to leave him in d oubt, as an assertion of power; but Piggy
by advertising his omission made more cruelty necessary .
"Y ou didn't hunt."
"No mo re did Ralph," said Pi ggy wetly , "nor Simon." He a mplified.
"There isn't more than a ha'porth of meat in a crab."
Ralph stirred uneasily . Simon, si tting between the twins and Pig gy , wiped
his mouth and shoved his piece of meat over the rocks to Piggy , who
grabbed it. The twins giggled and Simon lowered his face in shame.
Then Jac k leapt to his feet, slashed of f a great hunk of meat, an d flung it
down at Simon's feet.
"Eat! Damn you!"
He glared at Simon.
"T ake it!"
He spun on his heel, center of a bewildered circle of boys.
"I got you meat!"
Numberless and inexpressible frustrations combined to make his rage
elemental and awe-inspiring.
"I painted my face―I stole up. Now you eat―all of you―and I―"
Slowly t he silen ce on the moun tain-top deepened till the click o f the fire
and the soft hiss  of roasting meat could be heard clearly . Jack looked round
for understandin g but found onl y respect. Ralph stood among the ashes of
the signal fire, his hands full of meat, saying nothing.
Then at last Maurice broke the silence. He changed the subject to the
only one that could bring the majority of them together .
"Where did you find the pig?"
Roger pointed down the unfriendly side. "They were there―by the sea."
Jack, recovering could not bear to have his story told. He broke in
quickly .
"W e spread round. I crept, on hands and knees. The spears fell out
because they hadn't barbs on. The pig ran away and made an awful noise―"
"It turned back and ran into the circle, bleeding―"
All the boys were talking at once, relieved and excited.
"W e closed in―"
The firs t blow had paralyzed its hind quarters, so then the cir cle could
close in and beat and beat― "I cut the pig's throat―"
The twin s, still sharing their identical grin, jumped up and ran ro und each
other . Then the rest joined in, making pig-dying noises and shouting.
"One for his nob!"
"Give him a fourpenny one!"
Then M aurice p retended to be t he pig and ran squealing into the center ,
and the hunters,  circling still, p retended to beat him. As they danced, they
sang.
" Kill the pig. Cut her thr oat. Bash her in. "
Ralph w atched them, envious and resentful. Not till they flagge d and the
chant died away , did he speak.
"I'm calling an assembly ."
One by one, they halted, and stood watching him.
"W ith the conch. I'm calling a meeting even if we have to go on into the
dark. Down on the platform. When I blow it. Now ."
He turned away and walked of f, down the mountain.
CHAPTER FIVE
     
Beast fr om W ater
     
The tide was co ming in and th ere was only a narrow strip of firm beach
between the water and the wh ite, stumbling stuf f near the palm terrace.
Ralph chose the firm strip as a path because he needed to think, and only
here could he allow his feet to move without having to w atch them.
Suddenly , pacin g by the water , he was overcome with astoni shment. He
found himself understanding th e wearisomeness of this life, where every
path was  an improvisation and a considerable part of one's waking life was
spent w atching one's feet. He s topped, facing the strip; and remembering
that firs t enthusiastic exploration as though it were part of  a brighter
childhood, he smiled jeeringly . He turned then and walked back  toward the
platform with the sun in his fac e. The time had come for the as sembly and
as he  wa lked int o the concealing splendors of the sunlight he we nt carefully
over the points of his speech. There must be no mistake about this
assembly , no chasing imaginary ....
He l ost himself in a maze of thoughts that were rendered vag ue by his
lack of words to express them. Frowning, he tried again.
This meeting must not be fun, but business.
At that he walked faster , aware  all at once of ur gency and the declining
sun and a little wind created by his speed that breathed about his face. This
wind pressed his grey shirt against his chest so that he noticed―in this new
mood of comprehension―how  the folds were stif f like cardboard, and
unpleasant; noti ced too how the  frayed edges of his shorts were making an
uncomfortable, pink area on the front of his thighs. W ith a convu lsion of the
mind, R alph discovered dirt and decay , understood how much he disliked
perpetually flick ing the tangled hair out of his eyes, and at last, when the
sun was gone, r olling noisily to rest among dry leaves. At that he began to
trot.
The bea ch near the bathing pool was dotted with groups of boy s waiting
for the assembly . They made way for him silently , conscious of his grim
mood and the fault at the fire.
The place of assembly in which he stood was roughly a triangle; but
irregular and sketchy , like everything they made. First there was the log on
which h e himse lf sat; a dead tree that must have been quite ex ceptionally
big for the platform. Perhaps one of those legendary storms of the Pacific
had shifted it here. This palm trunk lay parallel to the beach, so that when
Ralph sat he faced the island but to the boys was a darkish figure against the
shimmer of the lagoon. The two  sides of the triangle of which the log was
base were less e venly defined. On the right was a log polished by restless
seats along the top, but not so l ar ge as the chief's and not so c omfortable.
On the left wer e four small log s, one of them―the farthest―lamentably
springy . Assemb ly after assembly had broken up in laughter wh en someone
had leaned too f ar back and the  log had whipped and thrown half a dozen
boys backwards into the grass. Y et now , he saw , no one h ad had the
wit―not himself nor Jack, nor Piggy―to bring a stone and  wedge the
thing. S o they would continue enduring the ill-balanced twister , because,
because.... Again he lost himself in deep waters.
Grass w as worn away in front of each trunk but grew tall and untrodden
in the center of the triangle. Th en, at the apex, the grass was thick again
because no one sat there. All round the place of assembly the grey trunks
rose, stra ight or leaning, and supported the low roof of leaves. O n two sides
was the beach; behind, the lagoon; in front, the darkness of the island.
Ralph turned to the chief's seat.  They had never had an assembly as late
before. That was why the place looked so dif ferent. Normally th e underside
of th e green roof was lit by a tangle of golden reflections, and their faces
were lit upside down―like, thought Ralph, when you hold an electric torch
in your hands. But now the sun was slanting in at one side,  so that the
shadows were where they ought to be.
Again he fell int o that strange m ood of speculation that was so foreign to
him. If faces were dif ferent when lit from above or below―what was a
face? What was anything?
Ralph moved impatiently . The trouble was, if you were a chief you had to
think, you had to  be wise. And then the occasion slipped by so that you had
to grab at a decision. This made you think; because thought was a valuable
thing, that got results....
Only , de cided Ralph as he faced the chief's seat, I can't think.  Not like
Piggy .
Once m ore that evening Ralph had to adjust his values. Piggy could
think. He could go step by step  inside that fat head of his, only Piggy was
no c hief. But P iggy , for all his  ludicrous body , had brains. Ralph was a
specialist in thought now , and could recognize thought in another .
The sun in his eyes reminded him how time was passing, so he took the
conch down from the tree and examined the surface. Exposure to the air had
bleached the yellow and pink to  near -white, and transparency . Ralph felt a
kind of af fection ate reverence for the conch, even though he had fished the
thing out of the lagoon himself. He faced the place of assembly and put the
conch to his lips.
The others were waiting for this and came straight away . Those who were
aware that a ship had passed the island while the fire was out were subdued
by the thought of Ralph's anger; while those, including the littluns who did
not kno w , were  impressed by the general air of solemnity . The place of
assembly filled quickly; Jack, Simon, Maurice, most of the hunters, on
Ralph's right; the rest on the l eft, under the sun. Piggy came and stood
outside the triangle. This indica ted that he wished to listen, but would not
speak; and Piggy intended it as a gesture of disapproval.
"The thing is: we need an assembly ."
No one said an ything but the faces turned to Ralph were in tent. He
flourished the conch. He had learnt as a practical business that fundamental
statements like this had to b e said at least twice, befor e everyone
understood them . One had to sit, attracting all eyes to the conch, and drop
words like heavy round stones  among the little groups that crouched or
squatted. He was searching his mind for simple words so that even the
littluns would understand what the assembly was about. Later perhaps,
practiced debaters―Jack, Maurice, Piggy―would use their whole art to
twist the meeting: but now at th e beginning the subject of the debate must
be laid out clearly .
"W e need an ass embly . Not for fun. Not for laughing and falling of f the
log"―the group of littluns on the twister giggled and look ed at each
other―"not for making jokes, o r for"―he lifted the conch in an ef fort to
find the compelling word―"for  cleverness. Not for these things. But to put
things straight."
He paused for a moment.
"I've bee n alone . By myself I went, thinking what's what. I know what
we need. An assembly to put things straight. And first of all, I'm speaking."
He paus ed for a moment and automatically pushed back his hair . Piggy
tiptoed to the triangle, his inef fectual protest made, and joined the others.
Ralph went on.
"W e have lots of assemblies. Everybody enjoys speaking a nd being
together . W e decide things. But they don't get done. W e were going to have
water br ought fr om the stream and left in those coconut shells under fresh
leaves. S o it was, for a few day s. Now there's no water . The shells are dry .
People drink from the river ."
There was a murmur of assent.
"Not tha t there's  anything wrong with drinking from the river . I mean I'd
sooner h ave wat er from that plac e― you know , the pool where the waterfall
is―than out of an old coconut shell. Only we said we'd have the water
brought. And now not. There were only two full shells there this afternoon."
He licked his lips.
"Then there's huts. Shelters."
The murmur swelled again and died away .
"Y ou mostly sleep in shelters. T onight, except for Samneric u p by the
fire, you'll all sleep there. Who built the shelters?"
Clamor rose at o nce. Everyone had built the shelters. Ralph had to wave
the conch once more.
"W ait a minute! I mean, who built all three? W e all built the first one,
four of us the second one, and me 'n Simon built the last one over there.
That's why it's so tottery . No.
Don't laugh. That shelter might fall down if the rain comes back. W e'll
need those shelters then."
He paused and cleared his throat.
"There's another thing. W e chose those rocks right along beyond the
bathing pool as a lavatory . That  was sensible too. The tide cleans the place
up. Y ou littluns know about that."
There were sniggers here and there and swift glances.
"Now p eople seem to use anywhere. Even near the shelters  and the
platform. Y ou littluns, when you're getting fruit; if you're taken short―"
The assembly roared.
"I said if you're taken short you keep away from the fruit. That's dirty!"
Laughter rose again.
"I said that's dirty!"
He plucked at his stif f, grey shirt.
"That's really dirty . If you're tak en short you go right along the beach to
the rocks. See?"
Piggy h eld out his hands for the conch but Ralph shook his h ead. His
speech was planned, point by point.
"W e've all got t o use the rocks  again. This place is getting dirty ." He
paused. The assembly , sensing a crisis, was tensely expectant. "And then:
about the fire."
Ralph le t out his spare breath w ith a little gasp that was echoed by his
audience. Jack started to chip a piece of wood with his knife and whispered
something to Robert, who looked away .
"The fire is the most important thing on the island. How can we ever be
rescued except by luck, if we don't keep a fire going? Is a fire too much for
us to make?"
He flung out an arm.
"Look at us! How many are we? And yet we can't keep a fire going to
make smoke. Don't you understand? Can't you see we ought to―ought to
die before we let the fire out?"
      There was a  self-conscious giggling among the hunters. Ralph turned
on them passionately .
"Y ou hu nters! Y ou can laugh! But I tell you the smoke is more important
than the pig, however often you kill one. Do all of you see?" H e spread his
arms wide and turned to the whole triangle.
"W e've got to make smoke up there―or die."
He paused, feeling for his next point.
"And another thing."
Someone called out.
"T oo many things."
There came a mutter of agreement. Ralph overrode them.
"And an other thing. W e nearly s et the whole island on fire. And we waste
time, rolling rocks, and making little cooking fires. Now I say this and
make it a rule, b ecause I'm chief. W e won't have a fire anywhere but on the
mountain. Ever ."
There was a ro w immediately . Boys stood up and shouted a nd Ralph
shouted back.
"Because if you want a fire to cook fish or crab, you can jolly well go up
the mountain. That way we'll be certain."
Hands were reaching for the conch in the light of the setting sun. He held
on and leapt on the trunk.
"All this  I meant to say . Now I've said it. Y ou voted me for chief. Now
you do what I say ."
They qu ieted, sl owly , and at last  were seated again. Ralph dropped down
and spoke in his ordinary voice.
"So rem ember . T he rocks for a lavatory . Keep the fire going and smoke
showing as a sig nal. Don't take fire from the mountain. T ake your food up
there."
Jack stood up, scowling in the gloom, and held out his hands.
"I haven't finished yet."
"But you've talked and talked!"
"I've got the conch."
Jack sat down, grumbling.
"Then the last thing. This is what people can talk about."
He waited till the platform was very still.
"Things are breaking up. I don't understand why . W e began well; we
were happy . And then―"
He moved the conch gently , looking beyond them at nothing,
remembering the beastie, the snake, the fire, the talk of fear .
"Then people started getting frightened."
A murmur , almost a moan, rose and passed away . Jack had  stopped
whittling. Ralph went on, abruptly .
"But tha t's littlun s' talk. W e'll get that straight. So the last part, the bit we
can all talk about, is kind of deciding on the fear ."
The hair was creeping into his eyes again.
"W e've got to t alk about this fear and decide there's nothing in it. I'm
frightened myself, sometimes; only that's nonsense! Like bogies. Then,
when we've decided, we can sta rt again and be careful about things like the
fire." A picture of three boys wa lking along the bright beach fli tted through
his mind. "And be happy ."
Ceremonially , Ralph laid the conch on the trunk beside him as a  sign that
the speech was over . What sunlight reached them was level.
Jack stood up and took the conch.
"So this  is a me eting to find out what's what. I'll tell you what's what.
Y ou littluns started all this, with the fear talk. Beasts! Where from? Of
course we're frightened sometim es but we put up with being frightened.
Only Ralph says you scream in the night. What does that mean but
nightmares? An yway , you don't hunt or build or help―you're a lot of cry-
babies and sissies. That's what. And as for the fear―you'll hav e to put up
with that like the rest of us."
Ralph looked at Jack open-mouthed, but Jack took no notice.
"The thi ng is― fear can't hurt y ou any more than a dream. There aren't
any bea sts to be afraid of on this island." He looked along the row of
whispering littluns. "Serve you right if something did get you, you useless
lot of cry-babies! But there is no animal―"
Ralph interrupted him testily .
"What is all this? Who said anything about an animal?"
"Y ou di d, the other day . Y ou s aid they dream and cry out. Now they
talk―not only the littluns, but my hunters sometimes―talk of a thing, a
dark thing, a beast, some sort of animal. I've heard. Y ou thought not, didn't
you? No w listen. Y ou don't get big animals on small islands. Only pigs. Y ou
only get lions and tigers in big countries like Africa and India―"
"And the Zoo―"
"I've got the con ch. I'm not talking about the fear . I'm talking about the
beast. Be frightened if you like. But as for the beast―"
Jack pau sed, cra dling the conch, and turned to his hunters with t heir dirty
black caps.
"Am I a hunter or am I not?"
They nodded, simply . He was a hunter all right. No one doubted that.
"W ell then―I've been all over this island. By myself. If there were a
beast I'd have seen it. Be frightened because you're like that―but there is
no beast in the forest."
Jack ha nded back the conch and sat down. The whole assembly
applauded him with relief. Then Piggy held out his hand.
"I don't agree wi th all Jack said,  but with some. 'Course there isn't a beast
in the forest. How could there be? What would a beast eat?"
"Pig."
"W e eat pig."
"Piggy!"
"I got the conch!" said Piggy i ndignantly . "Ralph― they ought to shut
up, oughtn't they? Y ou shut up, you littluns! What I mean is that I don't
agree ab out this here fear . Of co urse there isn't nothing to be afraid of in the
forest. W hy―I been there myself! Y ou'll be talking about ghosts and such
things next. W e know what goes on and if there's something wrong, there's
someone to put it right."
He t ook of f his glasses and blinked at them. The sun had gone as if the
light had been turned of f.
He proceeded to explain.
"If you get a pain in your stomach, whether it's a little one or a big
one―"
"Y ours is a big one."
"When y ou don e laughing perhaps we can get on with the mee ting. And
if th em littluns climb back on the twister again they'll only fall of f in a sec.
So they might as  well sit on the ground and listen. No. Y ou have  doctors for
everything, even  the inside of your mind. Y ou don't really mean that we got
to be frightened all the time of nothing? Life," said Piggy expansively , "is
scientific, that's what it is. In a year or two when the war's ov er they'll be
traveling to Mars and back. I kn ow there isn't no beast―not with claws and
all that, I mean―but I know there isn't no fear , either ."
Piggy paused.
"Unless―"
Ralph moved restlessly .
"Unless what?"
"Unless we get frightened of people."
A so und, half-laugh, half-jeer , ro se among the seated boys. Pigg y ducked
his head and went on hastily .
"So let's  hear from that littlun who talked about a beast and perhaps we
can show him how silly he is."
The littluns began to jabber among themselves, then one stood forward.
"What's your name?"
"Phil."
For a littlun he was self-confident, holding out his hands, cradling the
conch as  Ralph did, looking round at them to collect their atten tion before
he spoke.
"Last night I had a dream, a horrid dream, fighting with things. I was
outside t he shelt er by myself, fig hting with things, those twisty t hings in the
trees."
He paused, and the other littluns laughed in horrified sympathy .
"Then I was frightened and I w oke up. And I was outside the s helter by
myself in the dark and the twisty things had gone away ."
The vivid horror of this, so possible and so nakedly terrifying, held them
all silent. The child's voice went piping on from behind the white conch.
"And I was frightened and star ted to call out for Ralph and th en I saw
something moving among the trees, something big and horrid."
He p aused, half-frightened by th e recollection yet proud of the sensation
he was creating.
"That was a nightmare," said Ralph. "He was walking in his sleep."
The assembly murmured in subdued agreement.
The littlun shook his head stubbornly .
"I was asleep when the twisty things were fighting and when they went
away I was awake, and I saw  something big and horrid moving in the
trees."
Ralph held out his hands for the conch and the littlun sat down.
"Y ou were asleep. There wasn 't anyone there. How could a nyone be
wandering about in the forest at night? W as anyone? Did anyone go out?"
There w as a long pause while the assembly grinned at the th ought of
anyone going out in the darkness. Then Simon stood up and R alph looked
at him in astonishment.
"Y ou! What were you mucking about in the dark for?"
Simon grabbed the conch convulsively .
"I wanted―to go to a place―a place I know ."
"What place?"
"Just a place I know . A place in the jungle." He hesitated.
Jack set tled the  question for th em with that contempt in his voice that
could sound so funny and so final.
"He was taken short."
W ith a feeling of humiliation o n Simon's behalf, Ralph took back the
conch, looking Simon sternly in the face as he did so.
"W ell, d on't do it again. Understand? Not at night. There's enough silly
talk about beasts, without the littluns seeing you gliding about like a―"
The deri sive laughter that rose had fear in it and condemnation. Simon
opened his mouth to speak but Ralph had the conch, so he backed to his
seat.
When the assembly was silent Ralph turned to Piggy .
"W ell, Piggy?"
"There was another one. Him."
The littluns pushed Percival for ward, then left him by himself. He stood
knee-deep in the central grass, looking at his hidden feet, trying to pretend
he w as i n a tent. Ralph remembered another small boy who ha d stood like
this and  he flinched away from the memory . He had pushed the thought
down an d out of sight, where o nly some positive reminder like this could
bring it to the su rface. There had been no further numberings of  the littluns,
partly because there was no means of insuring that all of them were
accounted for and partly because Ralph knew the answer to at least one
question Piggy had asked on the mountaintop. There were littl e boys, fair ,
dark, fre ckled, and all dirty , but their faces were all dreadfully fr ee of major
blemishes. No one had seen the mulberry-colored birthmark aga in. But that
time Pig gy had coaxed and bul lied. T acitly admitting that he remembered
the unmentionable, Ralph nodded to Piggy .
"Go on. Ask him."
Piggy knelt, holding the conch.
"Now then. What's your name?"
The sma ll boy twisted away i nto his tent. Piggy turned helplessly to
Ralph, who spoke sharply .
"What's your name?"
T ormented by the silence and the refusal the assembly broke into a chant.
"What's your name? What's your name?"
"Quiet!"
Ralph peered at the child in the twilight.
"Now tell us. What's your name?"
      "Percival W emys Madiso n. The V icarage, Harcourt St. Anthony ,
Hants, telephone, telephone, tele―"
As i f this inform ation was rooted far down in the springs of sorrow , the
littlun w ept. Hi s face puckered, the tears leapt from his eyes, his mouth
opened t ill they could see a squa re black hole. At first he was a silent ef figy
of so rrow; but then the lamentation rose out of him, loud and sustained as
the conch.
"Shut up, you! Shut up!"
Percival W emys Madison would  not shut up. A spring had bee n tapped,
far beyo nd the reach of authority or even physical intimidation.  The crying
went on, breath after breath, an d seemed to sustain him upright as if he
were nailed to it.
"Shut up! Shut up!"
For now the littluns were no longer silent. They were reminded of their
personal sorrow s; and perhaps f elt themselves to share in a sorrow that was
universal. They began to cry in sympathy , two of them almost as loud as
Percival.
Maurice saved them. He cried out.
"Look at me!"
He pretended to fall over . He ru bbed his rump and sat on the twister so
that he fell in the grass. He downed badly; but Percival and the others
noticed and snif fed and laughed. Presently they were all laughing so
absurdly that the biguns joined in.
Jack was the fir st to make hims elf heard. He had not got the conch and
thus spoke against the rules; but nobody minded.
"And what about the beast?"
Something strange was happenin g to Percival. He yawned and staggered,
so that Jack seized and shook him.
"Where does the beast live?"
Percival sagged in Jack's grip.
"That's a clever beast," said Piggy , jeering, "if it can hide on this island."
"Jack's been everywhere―"
"Where could a beast live?"
"Beast my foot!"
Percival muttered something and the assembly laughed again. Ralph
leaned forward.
"What does he say?"
Jack lis tened to Percival's answer and then let go of him. Percival,
released, surrounded by the comfortable presence of humans, fell in the
long grass and went to sleep.
Jack cleared his throat, then reported casually .
"He says the beast comes out of the sea."
The last laugh d ied away . Ralph turned involuntarily , a black, humped
figure against the lagoon. The assembly looked with him, considered the
vast stretches of water , the hig h sea beyond, unknown indigo of infinite
possibility , heard silently the sough and whisper from the reef.
Maurice spoke, so loudly that they jumped.
"Daddy said they haven't found all the animals in the sea yet."
Ar gument starte d again. Ralph held out the glimmering conch and
Maurice took it obediently . The meeting subsided.
"I m ean when Jack says you can be frightened because pe ople are
frightened anyw ay that's all right. But when he says there's only pigs on this
island I expect he's right but h e doesn't know , not really , not certainly I
mean―" Maurice took a breath. "My daddy says there's things, what d'you
call'em that make ink―squids― that are hundreds of yards long and eat
whales w hole." He paused again and laughed gaily . "I don't believe in the
beast of course. As Piggy says, life's scientific, but we don't kn ow , do we?
Not certainly , I mean―"
Someone shouted.
"A squid couldn't come up out of the water!"
"Could!"
"Couldn't!"
In a mom ent the  platform was full of ar guing, gesticulating sha dows. T o
Ralph, s eated, this seemed the breaking up of sanity . Fear , beasts, no
general agreeme nt that the fire was all-important: and when one  tried to get
the thing  straight the ar gument sheered of f, bringing up fresh, unpleasant
matter .
He could see a whiteness in the gloom near him so he grabbed it from
Maurice and blew as loudly as he could. The assembly was shocked into
silence. Simon was close to him , laying hands on the conch. Simon felt a
perilous necessit y to speak; but to speak in assembly was a terrible thing to
him.
"Maybe," he said hesitantly , "maybe there is a beast."
The assembly cried out savagely and Ralph stood up in amazement.
"Y ou, Simon? Y ou believe in this?"
"I don't know ," said Simon. His heartbeats were choking him. "But...."
The storm broke.
"Sit down!"
"Shut up!"
"T ake the conch!"
"Sod you!"
"Shut up!"
Ralph shouted.
"Hear him! He's got the conch!"
"What I mean is... maybe it's only us."
"Nuts!"
That was from Piggy , shocked out of decorum. Simon went on.
"W e could be sort of...."
Simon b ecame inarticulate in his ef fort to express mankind's essential
illness. Inspiration came to him.
"What's the dirtiest thing there is?"
As an answer Jack dropped into the uncomprehending sile nce that
followed it the o ne crude expressive syllable. Release was immense. Those
littluns w ho had climbed back o n the twister fell of f again and d id not mind.
The hunters were screaming with delight.
Simon's ef fort fell about him in ruins; the laughter beat him cr uelly and
he shrank away defenseless to his seat.
At last the assembly was silent again. Someone spoke out of turn.
"Maybe he means it's some sort of ghost."
Ralph lifted the conch and peered into the gloom. The lightest thing was
the pale beach. Surely the littluns were nearer? Y es―there w as no doubt
about it, they were huddled into a tight knot of bodies in the central grass. A
flurry of  wind made the palms talk and the noise seemed very lo ud now that
darkness and silence made it so  noticeable. T wo grey trunks r ubbed each
other with an evil speaking that no one had noticed by day .
Piggy took the conch out of his hands. His voice was indignant.
"I don't believe in no ghosts―ever!"
Jack was up too, unaccountably angry .
"Who cares what you believe―Fatty!"
"I got the conch!"
There was the sound of a brief tussle and the conch moved to and fro.
"Y ou gimme the conch back!"
Ralph p ushed b etween them and got a thump on the chest. He  wrestled
the conch from someone and sat down breathlessly .
"There's too much talk about g hosts. W e ought to have left all this for
daylight."
A hushed and anonymous voice broke in.
"Perhaps that's what the beast is―a ghost."
The assembly was shaken as by a wind.
"There's too much talking out of turn," Ralph said, "because  we can't
have proper assemblies if you don't stick to the rules."
He stopped again. The careful plan of this assembly had broken down.
"What d'you want me to say then? I was wrong to call this assembly so
late. W e 'll have a vote on them; on ghosts I mean; and then go to the
shelters because  we're all tired. No―Jack is it?―wait a minute.  I'll say here
and now  that I d on't believe in g hosts. Or I don't think I do. But I don't like
the thought of them. Not now that is, in the dark. But we we re going to
decide what's what."
He raised the conch for a moment.
"V ery w ell then . I suppose wh at's what is whether there are ghosts or
not―"
He thought for a moment, formulating the question.
"Who thinks there may be ghosts?"
For a long time there was silence and no apparent movement. Then Ralph
peered into the gloom and made out the hands. He spoke flatly .
"I see."
The world, that understandable  and lawful world, was slipping away .
Once there was this and that; and now― and the ship had gone.
The conch was snatched from his hands and Piggy's voice shrilled.
"I didn't vote for no ghosts!"
He whirled round on the assembly .
"Remember that, all of you!"
They heard him stamp.
"What a re we? Humans? Or animals? Or savages? What's g rownups
going to think? Going of f―hunting pigs―letting fires out―and now!"
A shadow fronted him tempestuously .
"Y ou shut up, you fat slug!"
There was a mo ment's struggle and the glimmering conch jigge d up and
down. Ralph leapt to his feet.
"Jack! Jack! Y ou haven't got the conch! Let him speak."
Jack's face swam near him.
"And you shut up! Who are yo u, anyway? Sitting there telling people
what to do. Y ou can't hunt, you can't sing―"
"I'm chief. I was chosen."
"Why should choosing make an y dif ference? Just giving orders that don't
make any sense―"
"Piggy's got the conch."
"That's right―favor Piggy as you always do―"
"Jack!"
Jack's voice sounded in bitter mimicry .
"Jack! Jack!"
"The rules!" shouted Ralph. "Y ou're breaking the rules!"
"Who cares?"
Ralph summoned his wits.
"Because the rules are the only thing we've got!"
But Jack was shouting against him.
"Bollocks to the rules! W e're strong―we hunt! If there's a beast, we'll
hunt it down! W e'll close in and beat and beat and beat―!"
He gave  a wild whoop and leapt down to the pale sand. At once the
platform was full of noise and excitement, scramblings, screams and
laughter . The assembly shredded  away and became a discursive and random
scatter from the palms to the water and away along the bea ch, beyond
night-sight. Ralph found his cheek touching the conch and t ook it from
Piggy .
"What's grownups going to say?" cried Piggy again. "Look at 'em!"
The sound of mo ck hunting, hysterical laughter and real terror c ame from
the beach.
"Blow the conch, Ralph."
Piggy was so close that Ralph could see the glint of his one glass.
"There's the fire. Can't they see?"
"Y ou got to be tough now . Make 'em do what you want."
Ralph answered in the cautious voice of one who rehearses a theorem.
"If I blow the conch and they don't come back; then we've had it. W e
shan't keep the fire going. W e'll be like animals. W e'll never be rescued."
"If y ou don't blo w , we'll soon be  animals anyway . I can't see what they're
doing but I can hear ."
The dispersed figures had come together on the sand and were a dense
black mass that revolved. They were chanting something and littluns that
had had enough were staggering away , howling. Ralph raised t he conch to
his lips and then lowered it.
"The trouble is: Are there ghosts, Piggy? Or beasts?"
"Course there aren't."
"Why not?"
"'Cos things wouldn't make sense. Houses an' streets, an'―TV―they
wouldn't work."
The dan cing, chanting boys had worked themselves away till their sound
was nothing but a wordless rhythm.
"But s'pose they don't make sense? Not here, on this island? Supposing
things are watching us and waiting?"
Ralph shuddered violently and moved closer to Piggy , so that they
bumped frighteningly .
"Y ou stop talking like that! W e g ot enough trouble, Ralph, an' I've had as
much as I can stand. If there is ghosts―'
"I ought to give up being chief. Hear 'em."
"Oh lord! Oh no!"
Piggy gripped Ralph's arm.
"If Jack was chief he'd have all hunting and no fire. W e'd be here till we
died."
His voice ran up to a squeak.
"Who's that sitting there?"
"Me. Simon."
"Fat lot of good we are," said Ralph. "Three blind mice. I'll give up."
"If you give up," said Piggy , in an appalled whisper , "what 'ud h appen to
me?"
"Nothing."
"He hate s me. I dunno why . If he could do what he wanted― you're all
right, he respects you. Besides―you'd hit him."
"Y ou were having a nice fight with him just now ."
"I had the conch," said Piggy simply . "I had a right to speak."
Simon stirred in the dark.
"Go on being chief."
"Y ou shut up, young Simon! Why couldn't you say there wasn't a beast?"
"I'm sca red of him," said Piggy , "and that's why I know him.  If you're
scared of someone you hate him but you can't stop thinking about him. Y ou
kid yourself he's all right really , an' then when you see him again; it's like
asthma an' you can't breathe. I tell you what. He hates you too, Ralph―"
"Me? Why me?"
"I dunno. Y ou got him over the fire; an' you're chief an' he isn't."
"But he's, he's, Jack Merridew!"
"I b een in bed so much I done  some thinking. I know about people. I
know about me. And him. He can't hurt you: but if you stand out of the way
he'd hurt the next thing. And that's me."
"Piggy's right, Ralph. There's you and Jack. Go on being chief."
"W e're all drifting and things are going rotten. At home there was always
a grownup. Please, sir , please, miss; and then you got an answer . How I
wish!"
"I wish my auntie was here."
"I wish my father ... Oh, what's the use?"
"Keep the fire going."
The dance was over and the hunters were going back to the shelters.
"Grownups know things," said  Piggy . "They ain't afraid of the dark.
They'd meet and have tea and discuss. Then things 'ud be all right―"
"They wouldn't set fire to the island. Or lose―"
"They'd build a ship―"
The three boys stood in the dar kness, striving unsuccessfully t o convey
the majesty of adult life.
"They wouldn't quarrel―"
"Or break my specs―"
"Or talk about a beast―"
"If only they cou ld get a message to us," cried Ralph desperately . "If only
they could send us something grownup... a sign or something."
A thin wail out of the darkness  chilled them and set them grabbing for
each other . Then the wail rose, remote and unearthly ,' and turned to an
inarticulate gibbering. Percival W emys Madison, of the V icarage, Harcourt
St. A nthony , lying in the long grass, was living through circu mstances in
which the incantation of his address was powerless to help him.
CHAPTER SIX
     
Beast fr om Air
     
There w as no light left save th at of the stars. When they had understood
what made this ghostly noise and Percival was quiet again,  Ralph and
Simon picked him up unhandily and carried him to a shelter . Piggy hung
about near for a ll his brave words, and the three bigger boys w ent together
to the next shelter . They lay re stlessly and noisily among the dry leaves,
watching the patch of stars t hat was the opening toward the lagoon.
Sometimes a littlun cried out fro m the other shelters and once a bigun spoke
in the dark. Then they too fell asleep.
A sliver  of moon rose over the horizon, hardly lar ge enough to make a
path of light even when it sat rig ht down on the water; but there were other
lights in the sky , that moved fast, winked, or went out, though not even a
faint pop ping came down from the battle fought at ten miles' h eight. But a
sign cam e down from the world  of grownups, though at the time there was
no child awake to read it. There was a sudden bright explosion and
corkscrew trail across the sky; then darkness again and stars. There was a
speck above the island, a figur e dropping swiftly beneath a p arachute, a
figure that hung with dangling limbs. The changing winds of various
altitudes took the figure where they would. Then, three miles up, the wind
steadied and bore it in a descen ding curve round the sky and swept it in a
great sla nt acros s the reef and the lagoon toward the mountain . The figure
fell and crumpled among the blue flowers of the mountain-sid e, but now
there was a gen tle breeze at this height too and the parachute flopped and
banged and pulled. So the figure, with feet that dragged behind it, slid up
the mountain. Y ard by yard, puf f by puf f, the breeze hauled the figure
through the blue flowers, ove r the boulders and red stones , till it lay
huddled among the shattered rocks of the mountain-top. Here the breeze
was fitful and allowed the strings of the parachute to tangle and festoon;
and the figure sat, its helmeted head between its knees, held by a
complication of lines. When the  breeze blew , the lines would strain taut and
some accident of this pull lifted the head and chest upright so that the figure
seemed to peer across the brow  of the mountain. Then, each time the wind
dropped, the lines would slacken and the figure bow forward again, sinking
its head between  its knees. So as the stars moved across the sky , the figure
sat on the mountain-top and bowed and sank and bowed again.
In th e da rkness of early morning  there were noises by a rock a little way
down the side o f the mountain. T wo boys rolled out a pile of brushwood
and dead  leaves,  two dim shado ws talking sleepily to each other . They were
the t wins, on duty at the fire. In theory one should have been asl eep and one
on watch. But they could never  manage to do things sensibly if that meant
acting in dependently , and since staying awake all night was impossible,
they had both gone to sleep. Now they approached the darker smudge that
had been the signal fire, yaw ning, rubbing their eyes, treading with
practiced feet. When they reached it they stopped yawning, a nd one ran
quickly back for brushwood and leaves.
The other knelt down.
"I believe it's out."
He fiddled with the sticks that were pushed into his hands.
"No."
He lay down an d put his lips close to the smudge and blew s of fly . His
face appeared, lit redly . He stopped blowing for a moment.
"Sam―give us―"
"―tinder wood."
Eric bent down and blew softly again till the patch was bri ght. Sam
poked the piece of tinder wood into the hot spot, then a branch. The glow
increased and the branch took fire. Sam piled on more branches.
"Don't burn the lot," said Eric, "you're putting on too much."
"Let's warm up."
"W e'll only have to fetch more wood."
"I'm cold."
"So'm I."
"Besides, it's―"
"―dark. All right, then."
Eric squatted back and watched Sam make up the fire. He built a little
tent of dead wood and the fire was safely alight.
"That was near ."
"He'd have been―"
"W axy ."
"Huh."
For a few mom ents the twins watched the fire in silence. T hen Eric
sniggered.
"W asn't he waxy?"
      "About the―"
"Fire and the pig."
"Lucky he went for Jack, 'stead of us."
"Huh. Remember old W axy at school?"
"'Boy―you-are-driving-me-slowly-insane!'"
The twin s share d their identical laughter , then remembered the darkness
and othe r things and glanced round uneasily . The flames, bus y about the
tent, drew their eyes back again. Eric watched the scurrying woodlice that
were so frantically unable to avoid the flames, and thought of the first
fire―just down there, on the steeper side of the mountain, where now was
complete darkne ss. He did not like to remember it, and looked away at the
mountain-top.
W armth radiated  now , and beat pleasantly on them. Sam amuse d himself
by fittin g branches into the fire  as closely as possible. Eric spread out his
hands, s earching for the distance at which the heat was just be arable. Idly
looking beyond the fire, he re settled the scattered rocks from their flat
shadows into daylight contours. Just there was the big rock, an d the three
stones there, that split rock, a nd there beyond was a gap―j ust there―
"Sam."
"Huh?"
"Nothing."
The flam es were  mastering the b ranches, the bark was curling and falling
away , th e wood exploding. The tent fell inwards and flung a w ide circle of
light over the mountain-top.
"Sam―"
"Huh?"
"Sam! Sam!"
Sam looked at Eric irritably . The intensity of Eric's gaze made the
direction in which he looked terrible, for Sam had his back to it. He
scrambled round  the fire, squatt ed by Eric, and looked to see. T hey became
motionless, gripped in each other's arms, four unwinking eyes aimed and
two mouths open.
Far beneath them, the trees of the forest sighed, then roared. The hair on
their foreheads fluttered and flames blew out sideways from the fire. Fifteen
yards away from them came the plopping noise of fabric blown open.
Neither of the b oys screamed but the grip of their arms tight ened and
their mouths grew peaked. For p erhaps ten seconds they crouched like that
while th e flailin g fire sent smok e and sparks and waves of inconstant light
over the top of the mountain.
Then as though they had but one terrified mind between th em they
scrambled away over the rocks and fled.
Ralph w as dreaming. He had fallen asleep after what seemed  hours of
tossing and turning noisily among the dry leaves. Even the sounds of
nightmare from the other shelter s no longer reached him, for he was back to
where he came from, feeding the ponies with sugar over the garden wall.
Then someone was shaking his arm, telling him that it was time for tea.
"Ralph! W ake up!"
The leaves were roaring like the sea.
"Ralph, wake up!"
"What's the matter?"
"W e saw―"
"―the beast―"
"―plain!"
"Who are you? The twins?"
"W e saw the beast―"
"Quiet. Piggy!"
The leaves were roaring still. Piggy bumped into him and a twin grabbed
him as he made for the oblong of paling stars.
"Y ou can't go out―it's horrible!"
"Piggy―where are the spears?"
"I can hear the―"
"Quiet then. Lie still."
They lay  there listening, at firs t with doubt but then with terror to the
description the twins breathed at them between bouts of extreme silence.
Soon the darkness was full of claws, full of the awful unknown and menace.
An i nterminable  dawn faded th e stars out, and at last light, sad and grey ,
filtered into the shelter . They began to stir though still the world outside the
shelter was impossibly dangero us. The maze of the darkness  sorted into
near and  far , and at the high p oint of the sky the cloudlets were warmed
with col or . A single sea bird flapped upwards with a hoarse c ry that was
echoed presently , and somethin g squawked in the forest. Now streaks of
cloud near the horizon began t o glow rosily , and the feathery tops of the
palms were green.
Ralph knelt in t he entrance to the shelter and peered cautious ly round
him.
"Sam 'n Eric. Call them to an assembly . Quietly . Go on."
The twin s, holdi ng tremulously to each other , dared the few yards to the
next she lter and  spread the drea dful news. Ralph stood up and  walked for
the sake  of dignity , though with his back pricking, to the plat form. Piggy
and Simon followed him and the other boys came sneaking after .
Ralph to ok the conch from wher e it lay on the polished seat and held it to
his lips; but then  he hesitated an d did not blow . He held the shell up instead
and showed it to them and they understood.
The rays  of the sun that were fanning upwards from below the horizon
swung downwards to eye-level. Ralph looked for a moment at the growing
slice of gold that lit them from the right hand and seemed to make speech
possible. The circle of boys before him bristled with hunting spears.
He handed the conch to Eric, the nearest of the twins.
"W e've seen the beast with our own eyes. No―we weren't asleep―"
Sam too k up the story . By custom now one conch did for both twins, for
their substantial unity was recognized.
"It was furry . Th ere was something moving behind its head―wings. The
beast moved too―"
"That was awful. It kind of sat up―"
"The fire was bright―"
"W e'd just made it up―"
"―more sticks on―"
"There were eyes―"
"T eeth―"
"Claws―"
"W e ran as fast as we could―"
"Bashed into things―"
"The beast followed us―"
"I saw it slinking behind the trees―"
"Nearly touched me―"
Ralph pointed fearfully at Eric's  face, which was striped with scars where
the bushes had torn him.
"How did you do that?"
Eric felt his face.
"I'm all rough. Am I bleeding?"
The circle of bo ys shrank away in horror . Johnny , yawning s till, burst
into noisy tears and was slapped by Bill till he choked on them. The bright
morning was full of threats and  the circle began to change. It faced out,
rather than in, a nd the spears of sharpened wood were like a fence. Jack
called them back to the center .
"This'll be a real hunt! Who'll come?"
Ralph moved impatiently .
"These spears are made of wood. Don't be silly ."
Jack sneered at him.
"Frightened?"
"'Course I'm frightened. Who wouldn't be?"
He turned to the twins, yearning but hopeless.
"I suppose you aren't pulling our legs?"
The reply was too emphatic for anyone to doubt them.
Piggy took the conch.
"Couldn't we―kind of―stay here? Maybe the beast won't come near us."
But for the se nse of something watching them, Ralph would have
shouted at him.
"Stay here? And be cramped into this bit of the island, always on the
lookout? How should we get our food? And what about the fire?"
"Let's be moving," said Jack relentlessly , "we're wasting time."
"No we're not. What about the littluns?"
"Sucks to the littluns!"
"Someone's got to look after them."
"Nobody has so far ."
"There was no need! Now there is. Piggy'll look after them."
"That's right. Keep Piggy out of danger ."
"Have some sense. What can Piggy do with only one eye?"
The rest of the boys were looking from Jack to Ralph, curiously .
"And another thing. Y ou can't h ave an ordinary hunt because the beast
doesn't leave tracks. If it did you'd have seen them. For all w e know , the
beast may swing through the trees like what's its name."
They nodded.
"So we've got to think."
Piggy took of f his damaged glasses and cleaned the remaining lens.
"How about us, Ralph?"
"Y ou haven't got the conch. Here."
"I m ean―how about us? Suppo se the beast comes when you're all away .
I can't see proper , and if I get scared―"
Jack broke in, contemptuously .
"Y ou're always scared."
"I got the conch―"
"Conch! Conch! " shouted Jack. "W e don't need the conch any m ore. W e
know w ho ough t to say things. What good did Simon do speaking, or Bill,
or W alter? It's time some peopl e knew they've got to keep quiet and leave
deciding things to the rest of us."
Ralph could no longer ignore his speech. The blood was hot in his
cheeks.
"Y ou haven't got the conch," he said. "Sit down."
Jack's fa ce went  so white that the freckles showed as clear , brown flecks.
He licked his lips and remained standing.
"This is a hunter's job."
The res t of the boys watched intently . Piggy , finding himself
uncomfortably e mbroiled, slid the conch to Ralph's knees and sat down.
The silence grew oppressive and Piggy held his breath.
"This is more than a hunter's job," said Ralph at last, "because you can't
track the beast. And don't you want to be rescued?"
He turned to the assembly .
"Don't you all want to be rescued?"
He looked back at Jack.
"I said before, the fire is the main thing. Now the fire must be out―"
The old exasperation saved him and gave him the ener gy to attack.
"Hasn't anyone got any sense? W e've got to relight that fire. Y ou never
thought of that, Jack, did you? Or don't any of you want to be rescued?"
Y es, they wanted to be rescued, there was no doubt about that; and with a
violent swing to Ralph's side, th e crisis passed. Piggy let out his breath with
a gasp, reached for it again an d failed. He lay against a log, his mouth
gaping, blue shadows creeping round his lips. Nobody minded him.
"Now think, Jack. Is there anywhere on the island you haven't been?"
Unwillingly Jack answered.
"There's only―but of course! Y ou remember? The tail-end part, where
the rocks are al l piled up. I've been near there. The rock mak es a sort of
bridge. There's only one way up."
"And the thing might live there."
All the assembly talked at once.
"Quite! All right. That's where we'll look. If the beast isn't there we'll go
up the mountain and look; and light the fire."
"Let's go."
"W e'll eat first. Then go." Ralph paused. "W e'd better take spears."
After they had eaten, Ralph and  the biguns set out along the beach. They
left Piggy propped up on the platform. This day promised, like the others, to
be a sunbath und er a blue dome.  The beach stretched away before them in a
gentle curve till perspective drew  it into one with the forest; for the day was
not a dvanced enough to be obscured by the shifting veils of mi rage. Under
Ralph's directio n, they picked up a careful way along the palm terrace,
rather th an dare  the hot sand down by the water . He let Jack lead the way;
and Jack  trod with theatrical caution though they could have seen an enemy
twenty y ards away . Ralph walked in the rear , thankful to have escaped
responsibility for a time.
Simon, walking in front of Ral ph, felt a flicker of incredulity―a beast
with claws that s cratched, that sat on a mountain-top, that left no tracks and
yet was not fast enough to catch Samneric. However Simon thought of the
beast, there rose before his inward sight the picture of a human at once
heroic and sick.
He sigh ed. Other people could stand up and speak to an assembly ,
apparently , without that dreadful feeling of the pressure of personality;
could say what they would as though they were speaking to only one
person. He stepped aside and looked back. Ralph was coming along,
holding his spear over his shoulder . Dif fidently , Simon allowed his pace to
slacken until he was walking sid e by side with Ralph and looking up at him
through the coarse black hair that now fell to his eyes. Ra lph glanced
sideways, smiled constrainedly as though he had for gotten that  Simon had
made a fool of himself, then looked away again at nothing. For a moment or
two Sim on was  happy to be accepted and then he ceased to think about
himself. When he bashed into a tree Ralph looked sideways impatiently and
Robert sniggered. Simon reeled and a white spot on his forehead turned red
and trickled. Ralph dismissed Si mon and returned to his persona l hell. They
would reach the castle some time; and the chief would have to go forward.
Jack came trotting back. "W e're in sight now ."
"All right. W e'll get as close as we can."
He f ollowed Jack toward the c astle where the ground rose sli ghtly . On
their left was an impenetrable tangle of creepers and trees.
"Why couldn't there be something in that?"
"Because you can see. Nothing goes in or out."
"What about the castle then?"
"Look."
Ralph parted the screen of grass and looked out. There were only a few
more ya rds of stony ground a nd then the two sides of the island came
almost together so that one expected a peak of headland. But instead of this
a na rrow ledge of rock, a fe w yards wide and perhaps f ifteen long,
continued the island out into the sea. There lay another of those pieces of
pink squ areness that underlay the structure of the island. This  side of the
castle, p erhaps a hundred feet hi gh, was the pink bastion they had seen from
the m ountain-top. The rock of the clif f was split and the top littered with
great lumps that seemed to totter .
Behind Ralph the tall grass had filled with silent hunters. Ralph looked at
Jack.
"Y ou're a hunter ."
Jack went red.
"I know . All right."
Something deep in Ralph spoke for him.
"I'm chief. I'll go. Don't ar gue."
He turned to the others.
"Y ou. Hide here. W ait for me."
He foun d his voice tended either  to disappear or to come out too  loud. He
looked at Jack.
"Do you―think?"
Jack muttered.
"I've been all over . It must be here."
"I see."
      Simon mumbled confusedly: "I don't believe in the beast."
Ralph answered him politely , as if agreeing about the weather .
"No. I suppose not."
His mouth was tight and pale. He put back his hair very slowly .
"W ell. So long."
He force d his feet to move until they had carried him out on to  the neck
of land.
He was surrounded on all sides by chasms of empty air . T here was
nowhere to hide, even if one did not have to go on. He paused on the
narrow n eck and  looked down. Soon, in a matter of centuries, the sea would
make an island o f the castle. On  the right hand was the lagoon, troubled by
the open sea; and on the left― Ralph shuddered. The lagoon had protected
them from the Pacific: and for some reason only Jack had gone right down
to th e w ater on the other side. N ow he saw the landsman's view of the swell
and it seemed like the breathing of some stupendous creature. Slowly the
waters s ank among the rocks, revealing pink tables of granite, strange
growths of coral, polyp, and  weed. Down, down, the w aters went,
whispering like the wind among the heads of the forest. There was one flat
rock the re, spread like a table, and the waters sucking down on the four
weedy s ides made them seem like clif fs. Then the sleeping leviathan
breathed out, the waters rose, the weed streamed, and the water boiled over
the table  rock with a roar . There  was no sense of the passage of waves; only
this minute-long fall and rise and fall.
Ralph turned away to the red cl if f. They were waiting behind h im in the
long grass, waiting to see what  he would do. He noticed that t he sweat in
his palm  was cool now; realized  with surprise that he did not really expect
to meet any beast and didn't know what he would do about it if he did.
He saw that he could climb th e clif f but this was not necessary . The
squareness of the rock allowed a sort of plinth round it, so that to the right,
over the lagoon, one could inch along a ledge and turn the corner out of
sight. It was easy going, and soon he was peering round the rock.
Nothing but what you might ex pect: pink, tumbled boulders with guano
layered on them like icing; and a steep slope up to the shattere d rocks that
crowned the bastion.
A sound behind him made him turn. Jack was edging along the ledge.
"Couldn't let you do it on your own."
Ralph sa id nothing. He led the way over the rocks, inspected a sort of
half-cave that held nothing more  terrible than a clutch of rotten eggs, and at
last sat down, looking round him  and tapping the rock with the butt of his
spear .
Jack was excited.
"What a place for a fort!"
A column of spray wetted them.
"No fresh water ."
"What's that then?"
There w as indeed a long green smudge half-way up the rock. They
climbed up and tasted the trickle of water .
"Y ou could keep a coconut shell there, filling all the time."
"Not me. This is a rotten place."
Side by side the y scaled the last height to where the diminishing  pile was
crowned by the last broken rock . Jack struck the near one with h is fist and it
grated slightly .
"Do you remember―?"
      Con sciousness of the bad times in between came to them b oth. Jack
talked quickly .
"Shove a palm trunk under that and if an enemy came― look!"
A hundred feet below them was the narrow causeway , then the stony
ground, then the grass dotted with heads, and behind that the forest.
"One heave," cried Jack, exulting, "and―wheee―!"
He mad e a sweeping movement  with his hand. Ralph looked toward the
mountain.
"What's the matter?"
Ralph turned.
"Why?"
"Y ou were looking―I don't know why ."
"There's no signal now . Nothing to show ."
"Y ou're nuts on the signal."
The taut blue horizon encircled them, broken only by the mountain-top.
"That's all we've got."
He lean ed his spear against the rocking stone and pushed back two
handfuls of hair .
"W e'll h ave to go back and clim b the mountain. That's where they saw
the beast."
"The beast won't be there."
"What else can we do?"
The othe rs, wait ing in the grass,  saw Jack and Ralph unharmed and broke
cover into the sunlight. They  for got the beast in the excitement of
exploration. They swarmed across the bridge and soon were climbing and
shouting. Ralph  stood now , one hand against an enormous red block, a
block la r ge as a mill wheel th at had been split of f and hung, tottering.
Somberly he watched the mountain. He clenched his fist and beat hammer -
wise on the red wall at his righ t. His lips were tightly compressed and his
eyes yearned beneath the fringe of hair .
"Smoke."
He sucked his bruised fist.
"Jack! Come on."
But Jack  was not there. A knot of boys, making a great noise that he had
not noti ced, were heaving and pushing at a rock. As he turne d, the base
cracked and the whole mass top pled into the sea so that a thunderous plume
of spray leapt half-way up the clif f.
"Stop it! Stop it!"
His voice struck a silence among them.
"Smoke."
A strange thing happened in his head. Something flittered ther e in front
of his mind like a bat's wing, obscuring his idea.
"Smoke."
At once the ideas were back, and the anger .
"W e want smoke. And you go wasting your time. Y ou roll rocks."
Roger shouted.
"W e've got plenty of time!"
Ralph shook his head.
"W e'll go to the mountain."
The clamor broke out. Some of the boys wanted to go back to the beach.
Some wanted to roll more rocks . The sun was bright and danger had faded
with the darkness.
"Jack. The beast might be on th e other side. Y ou can lead again. Y ou've
been."
"W e could go by the shore. There's fruit."
Bill came up to Ralph.
"Why can't we stay here for a bit?"
"That's right.'
      "Let's have a fort."
"There's no food here," said R alph, "and no shelter . Not much fresh
water ."
"This would make a wizard fort."
"W e can roll rocks―"
"Right onto the bridge―"
"I say we'll go on!" shouted Ralph furiously . "W e've got to make certain.
W e'll go now ."
"Let's stay here―"
"Back to the shelter―"
"I'm tired―" "No!"
Ralph struck the skin of f his kn uckles. They did not seem to hurt. "I'm
chief. W e've go t to make certai n. Can't you see the mountain?  There's no
signal showing.  There may be  a ship out there. Are you all of f your
rockers?" Mutinously , the boys fell silent or muttering. Jack l ed the way
down the rock and across the bridge.
CHAPTER SEVEN
     
Shadows and T all T r ees
     
The pig-run kept close to the jum ble of rocks that lay down by t he water on
the other side an d Ralph was co ntent to follow Jack along it. If you could
shut your ears to the slow suck d own of the sea and boil of the return, if you
could fo r get how  dun and unvi sited were the ferny coverts on  either side,
then the re was a chance that you  might put the beast out of mind  and dream
for a while. The  sun had swung over the vertical and the afterno on heat was
closing i n on the island. Ralph p assed a message forward to Jack and when
they next came to fruit the whole party stopped and ate.
Sitting, R alph w as aware of the heat for the first time that day . H e pulled
distastefully at his grey shirt and wondered whether he might undertake the
adventure of washing it. Sitting under what seemed an unusual heat, even
for t his island, Ralph planned h is toilet. He would like to have a pair of
scissors and cut this hair―he flung the mass back―cut this filthy hair right
back to half an inch. He would like to have a bath, a proper wallow with
soap. He  passed  his tongue expe rimentally over his teeth and de cided that a
toothbrush would come in handy too. Then there were his nails― Ralph
turned h is hand  over and exam ined them. They were bitten d own to the
quick th ough he  could not reme mber when he had restarted th is habit nor
any time when he indulged it.
"Be sucking my thumb next―"
He l ooked round, furtively . Ap parently no one had heard. Th e hunters
sat, stuf fing themselves with thi s easy meal, trying to convince  themselves
that they  got suf ficient kick out of bananas and that other olive -grey , jelly-
like fruit. W ith t he memory of his sometime clean self as a stan dard, Ralph
looked t hem ov er . They were d irty , not with the spectacular d irt of boys
who have fallen into mud or been brought down hard on a rai ny day . Not
one of them was an obvious subject for a shower , and yet―hai r , much too
long, tangled here and there, knotted round a dead leaf or a twig; faces
cleaned fairly well by the proce ss of eating and sweating but marked in the
less acce ssible a ngles with a kin d of shadow; clothes, worn aw ay , stif f like
his own with sweat, put on, not  for decorum or comfort but out of custom;
the skin of the body , scurfy with brine― He discovered with a little fall of
the heart that th ese were the con ditions he took as normal now and that he
did not mind. He sighed and pushed away the stalk from wh ich he had
stripped the fruit. Already the  hunters were stealing away to do their
business in the woods or down by the rocks. He turned and looked out to
sea.
Here, on the oth er side of the island, the view was utterly dif fe rent. The
filmy enchantments of mirage could not endure the cold ocea n water and
the horizon was hard, clipped blue. Ralph wandered down to  the rocks.
Down here, almost on a level with the sea, you could follow with your eye
the ceaseless, bulging passage of the deep sea waves. They were miles
wide, ap parently not breakers or the banked ridges of shallow water . They
traveled the length of the island with an air of disregarding it and being set
on other  busines s; they were less a progress than a momentous rise and fall
of the whole ocean. Now the se a would suck down, making c ascades and
waterfalls of retreating water , w ould sink past the rocks and plaster down
the seaw eed lik e shining hair: then, pausing, gather and rise with a roar ,
irresistibly swelling over point and outcrop, climbing the little clif f, sending
at last an arm of  surf up a gully to end a yard or so from him in fingers of
spray .
W ave af ter wave , Ralph followed the rise and fall until something of the
remoteness of the sea numbed h is brain. Then gradually the almost infinite
size of this water forced itself on his attention. This was the divider , the
barrier . On the other side of th e island, swathed at midday w ith mirage,
defended by the shield of the qu iet lagoon, one might dream of  rescue; but
here, faced by th e brute obtuseness of the ocean, the miles of d ivision, one
was clamped down, one was helpless, one was condemned, one was―
Simon was speaking almost in  his ear . Ralph found that he had rock
painfully grippe d in both hands , found his body arched, the muscles of his
neck stif f, his mouth strained open.
"Y ou'll get back to where you came from."
Simon n odded a s he spoke. He was kneeling on one knee, looking down
from a higher ro ck which he held with both hands; his other l eg stretched
down to Ralph's level.
Ralph was puzzled and searched Simon's face for a clue.
"It's so big, I mean―"
Simon nodded.
"All the same. Y ou'll get back all right. I think so, anyway ."
Some of  the strain had gone from Ralph's body . He glanced at th e sea and
then smiled bitterly at Simon.
"Got a ship in your pocket?"
Simon grinned and shook his head.
"How do you know , then?"
When Simon was still silent Ralph said curtly , "Y ou're batty ."
Simon s hook his head violently till the coarse black hair flew b ackwards
and forwards across his face.
"No, I'm not. I just think you'll get back all right. "
For a moment nothing more was said. And then they suddenly smiled at
each other .
Roger called from the coverts.
"Come and see!"
The ground was turned over ne ar the pig-run and there were droppings
that steamed. Jack bent down to them as though he loved them.
"Ralph―we need meat even if we are hunting the other thing."
"If you mean going the right way , we'll hunt."
They set of f again, the hunters bunched a little by fear of the m entioned
beast, while Jack quested ahead . They went more slowly than Ralph had
bar gained for; yet in a way he was glad to loiter , cradling his  spear . Jack
came up  against some emer gency of his craft and soon the procession
stopped. Ralph leaned against a tree and at once the daydr eams came
swarming up. Jack was in char g e of the hunt and there would be  time to get
to the mountain ― Once, following his father from Chatham to Devonport,
they had lived in a cottage on the edge of the moors. In the succession of
houses t hat Ralph had known, this one stood out with particular clarity
because after that house he had been sent away to school. Mum my had still
been with them and Daddy had come home every day . W ild ponies came to
the ston e wall at the bottom of the garden, and it had snowed. Just behind
the cotta ge there  was a sort of shed and you could lie up there, watching the
flakes sw irl past . Y ou could see the damp spot where each flake died, then
you could mark the first flake th at lay down without melting and watch, the
whole g round tu rn white. Y ou could go indoors when you were cold and
look out of the window , past the bright copper kettle and the plate with the
little blue men.
When y ou went  to bed there was a bowl of cornflakes with sugar and
cream. And the books―they stood on the shelf by the bed, leaning together
with always two or three laid fla t on top because he had not bothered to put
them back properly . They were dog-eared and scratched. There was the
bright, shining one about T opsy and Mopsy that he never read because it
was about two g irls; there was the one about the magician which you read
with a kind of ti ed-down terror , skipping page twenty-seven wi th the awful
picture of the sp ider; there was a  book about people who had dug things up,
Egyptian things; there was The Boy's Book of T rains , The Boy 's Book  of
Ships . V iv idly they ca me before him; he could have reached up and touched
them, could feel the weight and  slow slide with which The Mammoth Book
for Boys  wo uld come o ut and slither down.... Everything was all rig ht;
everything was good-humored and friendly .
The bus hes crashed ahead of th em. Boys flung themselves wildly from
the pig track an d scrabbled in the creepers, screaming. Ralph saw Jack
nudged aside and fall. Then there was a creature bounding along the pig
track to ward him, with tusks g leaming and an intimidating grunt. Ralph
found he was ab le to measure the distance coldly and take aim. W ith the
boar only five ya rds away , he flung the foolish wooden stick that he carried,
saw it hit the great snout and hang there for a moment. The boar's note
changed to a squeal and it swerved aside into the covert. The pig-run filled
with shouting boys again, Jack came running back, and poked about in the
under growth.
"Through here―"
"But he'd do us!"
"Through here, I said―"
The boar was fl oundering away from them. They found another pig-run
parallel to the first and Jack raced away . Ralph was full of fright and
apprehension and pride.
"I hit him! The spear stuck in―"
Now the y came , unexpectedly , to an open space by the sea. Jack cast
about on the bare rock and looked anxious.
"He's gone."
"I hit him," said Ralph again, "and the spear stuck in a bit."
He felt the need of witnesses.
"Didn't you see me?"
Maurice nodded.
"I saw you. Right bang on his snout―Wheee!"
Ralph talked on, excitedly .
"I hit him all right. The spear stuck in. I wounded him!"
He sunned himself in their new respect and felt that hunting was good
after all.
"I walloped him properly . That was the beast, I think!" Jack came back.
"That wasn't the beast. That was a boar ."
"I hit him."
"Why didn't you grab him? I tried―"
Ralph's voice ran up.
"But a boar!"
Jack flushed suddenly .
"Y ou sa id he'd do us. What did  you want to throw for? Why d idn't you
wait?
He held out his arm.
"Look."
He t urned his le ft forearm for them all to see. On the outside was a rip;
not much, but bloody .
"He did that with his tusks. I couldn't get my spear down in time."
Attention focused on Jack.
"That's a wound," said Simon, "and you ought to suck it. Like
Berengaria."
Jack sucked.
"I hit him," said Ralph indignan tly . "I hit him with my spear , I wounded
him."
He tried for their attention.
"He was coming along the path. I threw , like this―"
Robert snarled at him. Ralph entered into the play and e verybody
laughed. Presently they were all jabbing at Robert who made mock rushes.
Jack shouted.
"Make a ring!"
The circle moved in and round. Robert squealed in mock terror , then in
real pain.
"Ow! Stop it! Y ou're hurting!"
The butt end of a spear fell on his back as he blundered among them.
"Hold him!"
They got his a rms and legs. R alph, carried away by a sudd en thick
excitement, grabbed Eric's spear and jabbed at Robert with it.
"Kill him! Kill him!"
All at once, Ro bert was screaming and struggling with the strength of
frenzy . Jack had him by the hair  and was brandishing his knife. Behind him
was Roger , fighting to get close. The chant rose ritually , as at the last
moment of a dance or a hunt.
" Kill the pig! Cut his thr oat! Kill the pig! Bash him in! "
Ralph to o was fighting to get  near , to get a handful of tha t brown,
vulnerable flesh. The desire to squeeze and hurt was over -mastering.
Jack's arm came down; the hea ving circle cheered and made pig-dying
noises. T hen they lay quiet, pant ing, listening to Robert's frightened snivels.
He wiped his face with a dirty arm, and made an ef fort to retrieve his status.
"Oh, my bum!"
He rubbed his rump ruefully . Jack rolled over .
"That was a good game."
"Just a game," said Ralph uneasily . "I got jolly badly hurt at rugger
once."
"W e ought to have a drum," said Maurice, "then we could do it properly ."
Ralph looked at him.
"How properly?"
"I dunno. Y ou want a fire, I think, and a drum, and you keep time to the
drum.
"Y ou want a pig," said Roger , "like a real hunt."
"Or som eone to pretend," said Jack. "Y ou could get someone to dress up
as a pig and then  he could act― you know , pretend to knock me over and all
that."
"Y ou wa nt a real pig," said Robert, still caressing his rump, "because
you've got to kill him."
"Use a littlun," said Jack, and everybody laughed.
Ralph sat up.
"W ell. W e shan't find what we're looking for at this rate."
One by one they stood up, twitching rags into place.
Ralph looked at Jack.
"Now for the mountain."
"Shouldn't we go back to Piggy ," said Maurice, "before dark?"
The twins nodded like one boy .
"Y es, that's right. Let's go up there in the morning."
Ralph looked out and saw the sea.
"W e've got to start the fire again."
"Y ou haven't got Piggy's specs," said Jack, "so you can't.'
"Then we'll find out if the mountain's clear ."
Maurice spoke, hesitating, not wanting to seem a funk.
"Supposing the beast's up there?"
Jack brandished his spear .
"W e'll kill it."
The sun seemed a little cooler . He slashed with the spear .
"What are we waiting for?"
"I suppose," said Ralph, "if we keep on by the sea this way , we'll come
out below the burnt bit and then we can climb the mountain.
Once more Jack led them along by the suck and heave of the blinding
sea.
Once more Ralph dreamed, letting his skillful feet deal with the
dif ficulties of the path. Y et here his feet seemed less skillful than before.
For mos t of the way they were forced right down to the bare rock by the
water an d had to edge along between that and the dark luxuri ance of the
forest. There were little clif fs to be scaled, some to be used as paths, lengthy
traverses where one used hands  as well as feet. Here and there  they could
clamber over wave-wet rock, leaping across clear pools that the tide had
left. They came to a gully that split the narrow foreshore like a defense.
This seemed to have no bottom and they peered awe-stricken into the
gloomy crack where water gur gled. Then the wave came bac k, the gully
boiled before them and spray dashed up to the very creeper so that the boys
were we t and shrieking. They tried the forest but it was thick  and woven
like a bird's nest. In the end they had to jump one by one, waiting till the
water sa nk; and  even so, some of them got a second drenching. After that
the rock s seeme d to be growing impassable so they sat for a time, letting
their rag s dry and watching the clipped outlines of the rollers th at moved so
slowly past the island. They fou nd fruit in a haunt of bright litt le birds that
hovered like insects. Then Ralph said they were going too slowly . He
himself climbed a tree and parted the canopy , and saw the square head of
the mou ntain se eming still a great way of f. Then they tried to hurry along
the rocks and Ro bert cut his kne e quite badly and they had to recognize that
this path must be taken slowly if they were to be safe. So they proceeded
after tha t as if t hey were climbing a dangerous mountain, until the rocks
became an uncompromising clif f, overhung with impossible jungle and
falling sheer into the sea.
Ralph looked at the sun critically .
"Early evening. After tea-time, at any rate."
"I do n't remember this clif f," said Jack, crestfallen, "so this must be the
bit of the coast I missed."
Ralph nodded.
"Let me think."
By now , Ralph had no self-consciousness in public thinking but would
treat the  day's decisions as though he were playing chess. The o nly trouble
was that  he would never be a very good chess player . He tho ught of the
littluns and Piggy . V ividly he imagined Piggy by himself, huddled in a
shelter that was silent except for the sounds of nightmare.
"W e can't leave the littluns alone with Piggy . Not all night."
The other boys said nothing but stood round, watching him.
"If we went back we should take hours."
Jack cle ared his  throat and spoke in a queer , tight voice. "W e mustn't let
anything happen  to Piggy , must  we?" Ralph tapped his teeth with the dirty
point of Eric's spear .
"If we go across―"
He glanced round him.
"Someone's got to go across the  island and tell Piggy we'll be back after
dark."
Bill spoke, unbelieving.
"Through the forest by himself? Now?"
"W e can't spare more than one."
Simon pushed his way to Ralph's elbow .
"I'll go if you like. I don't mind, honestly ."
Before Ralph had time to reply , he smiled quickly , turned and  climbed
into the forest.
Ralph looked back at Jack, seeing him, infuriatingly , for the first time.
"Jack―that time you went the whole way to the castle rock."
Jack glowered.
"Y es?"
"Y ou came along part of this shore―below the mountain, beyond there."
"Y es."
"And then?"
"I found a pig-run. It went for miles."
"So the pig-run must be somewhere in there."
Ralph nodded. He pointed at the forest.
Everybody agreed, sagely .
"All right then. W e'll smash a way through till we find the pig-run."
He took a step and halted.
"W ait a minute though! Where does the pig-run go to?"
"The mountain," said Jack, "I told you." He sneered. "Don't you want to
go to the mountain?"
Ralph si ghed, sensing the rising antagonism, understanding tha t this was
how Jack felt as soon as he ceased to lead.
"I was thinking of the light. W e'll be stumbling about."
"W e were going to look for the beast."
"There won't be enough light."
"I don't mind going," said Jack hotly . "I'll go when we get there. W on't
you? W ould you rather go back to the shelters and tell Piggy?"
Now it was Ral ph's turn to flush but he spoke despairingly , out of the
new understanding that Piggy had given him.
"Why do you hate me?"
The boy s stirred uneasily , as th ough something indecent had been said.
The silence lengthened.
Ralph, still hot and hurt, turned away first.
"Come on."
He led the way and set himself  as by right to hack at the tangles. Jack
brought up the rear , displaced and brooding.
The pig- track w as a dark tunne l, for the sun was sliding quickly toward
the e dge of the world and in the forest shadows were never far to seek. The
track was broad and beaten and they ran along at a swift trot. Then the roof
of leave s broke up and they ha lted, breathing quickly , looking  at the few
stars that pricked round the head of the mountain.
"There you are."
The boys peered at each other doubtfully . Ralph made a decision.
"W e'll go straight across to the platform and climb tomorrow ."
They murmured agreement; but Jack was standing by his shoulder .
"If you're frightened of course―"
Ralph turned on him.
"Who went first on the castle rock?"
"I went too. And that was daylight."
"All right. Who wants to climb the mountain now?" Silence was the only
answer .
"Samneric? What about you?"
"W e ought to go an' tell Piggy―"
"―yes, tell Piggy that―"
"But Simon went!"
"W e ought to tell Piggy―in case―"
"Robert? Bill?"
They were going straight back to the platform now . Not, of course, that
they were afraid―but tired.
Ralph turned back to Jack.
"Y ou see?"
"I'm goi ng up the mountain." The words came from Jack viciously , as
though they were a curse. He looked at Ralph, his thin body tensed, his
spear held as if he threatened him.
"I'm going up the mountain t o look for the beast―now ." Then the
supreme sting, the casual, bitter word. "Coming?"
At that word the other boys for got their ur ge to be gone and turned back
to sampl e this fresh rub of two spirits in the dark. The word wa s too good,
too bitte r , too successfully dau nting to be repeated. It took Ralph at low
water when his nerve was relaxed for the return to the shelter and the still,
friendly waters of the lagoon.
"I don't mind."
Astonished, he heard his voice  come out, cool and casual, so that the
bitterness of Jack's taunt fell powerless.
"If you don't mind, of course."
"Oh, not at all."
Jack took a step.
"W ell then―"
Side by side, watched by silent boys, the two started up the mountain.
Ralph stopped.
"W e're silly . Why should only tw o go? If we find anything, two won't be
enough."
There came the sound of boys scuttling away . Astonishingly , a dark
figure moved against the tide.
"Roger?"
"Y es."
"That's three, then."
Once more they set out to climb the slope of the mountain. The  darkness
seemed to flow r ound them like a tide. Jack, who had said nothin g, began to
choke and cough, and a gust of  wind set all three spluttering. Ralph's eyes
were blinded with tears.
"Ashes. W e're on the edge of the burnt patch."
Their footsteps and the occasional breeze were stirring up small  devils of
dust. Now that they stopped again, Ralph had time while he coughed to
remember how silly they were. If there was no beast―and almo st certainly
there was no bea st―in that case, well and good; but if there was something
waiting on top of the mounta in― what was the use of three of them,
handicapped by the darkness and carrying only sticks?
"W e're being fools."
Out of the darkness came the answer .
"W indy?"
Irritably Ralph shook himself. This was all Jack's fault.
"'Course I am. But we're still being fools."
"If you don't want to go on," s aid the voice sarcastically , "I'll go up by
myself."
Ralph h eard the  mockery and hated Jack. The sting of ashes in his eyes,
tiredness, fear , enraged him.
"Go on then! W e'll wait here."
There was silence.
"Why don't you go? Are you fri ghtened?" A stain in the darkness, a stain
that was Jack, detached itself and began to draw away .
"All right. So long."
The stain vanished. Another took its place.
Ralph felt his k nee against something hard and rocked a charred trunk
that was edgy to the touch. He felt the sharp cinders that had been bark push
against the back of his knee and knew that Roger had sat down. He felt with
his hands and lo wered himself beside Roger , while the trunk rocked among
invisible ashes. Roger , uncommunicative by nature, said nothing. He
of fered no opinion on the beast nor told Ralph why he had chosen to come
on this mad expedition. He simply sat and rocked the trunk ge ntly . Ralph
noticed a rapid and infuriating tapping noise and realized that Roger was
banging his silly wooden stick against something.
So they sat, the rocking, tapping, impervious Roger and Ralph, fuming;
round them the close sky was loaded with stars, save where the mountain
punched up a hole of blackness.
There w as a slithering noise high above them, the sound of someone
taking g iant and  dangerous strides on rock or ash. Then Jack f ound them,
and was shivering and croaking in a voice they could just recognize as his.
"I saw a thing on top."
They heard him blunder against  the trunk which rocked violentl y . He lay
silent for a moment, then muttered.
"Keep a good lookout. It may be following."
A shower of ash pattered round them. Jack sat up.
"I saw a thing bulge on the mountain."
"Y ou on ly imagined it," said Ralph shakily , "because nothing would
bulge. Not any sort of creature."
Roger spoke; they jumped, for they had for gotten him.
"A frog."
Jack giggled and shuddered.
"Some f rog. The re was a noise too. A kind of 'plop' noise. Then the thing
bulged."
Ralph su rprised himself, not so much by the quality of his voic e, which
was even, but by the bravado of its intention.
"W e'll go and look."
For the first time since he had first known Jack, Ralph could  feel him
hesitate.
"Now―?"
His voice spoke for him.
"Of course."
He g ot of f the trunk and led the  way across the clinking cinder s up into
the dark, and the others followed.
Now that his physical voice was silent the inner voice of reason, and
other vo ices too, made themselves heard. Piggy was calling him a kid.
Another voice told him not to be a fool; and the darkness an d desperate
enterprise gave the night a kind of dentist's chair unreality .
As they came to the last slope, Jack and Roger drew near , chan ged from
the i nk-stains to distinguishable figures. By common consent t hey stopped
and crou ched to gether . Behind them, on the horizon, was a patch of lighter
sky where in a moment the moon would rise. The wind roared once in the
forest and pushed their rags against them.
Ralph stirred.
"Come on."
They crept forward, Roger lagging a little. Jack and Ralph turned the
shoulder of the mountain togeth er . The glittering lengths of the lagoon lay
below them and beyond that a long white smudge that was the  reef. Roger
joined them.
Jack whispered.
"Let's creep forward on hands and knees. Maybe it's asleep."
Roger and Ralph moved on, this time leaving Jack in the rear , for all his
brave words. They came to the  flat top where the rock was ha rd to hands
and knees.
A creature that bulged.
Ralph put his ha nd in the cold, soft ashes of the fire and smothe red a cry .
His hand  and shoulder were twit ching from the unlooked-for contact. Green
lights of nausea appeared for a moment and ate into the darknes s. Roger lay
behind him and Jack's mouth was at his ear .
"Over there, where there used  to be a gap in the rock. A sort of
hump―see?"
Ashes blew into Ralph's face from the dead fire. He could not see the gap
or an ything else, because the gr een lights were opening again and growing,
and the top of the mountain was sliding sideways.
Once more, from a distance, he heard Jack's whisper .
"Scared?"
Not scar ed so much as paralyzed; hung up there immovable on the top of
a dim inishing, moving mountain . Jack slid away from him, Roger bumped,
fumbled with a hiss of breat h, and passed onwards. He heard them
whispering.
"Can you see anything?"
"There―"
In front of them, only three or four yards away , was a rock-l ike hump
where n o rock should be. Ralph could hear a tiny chattering no ise coming
from somewhere― perhaps f rom his own mouth. He bound himself
together with his will, fused his  fear and loathing into a hatred, and stood
up. He took two leaden steps forward.
Behind them the silver of moon had drawn clear of the horizo n. Before
them, so mething like a great ape  was sitting asleep with its head between its
knees. Then the wind roared in the forest, there was confusion in the
darkness and the creature lifted its head, holding toward them t he ruin of a
face.
Ralph found himself taking gia nt strides among the ashes, he ard other
creatures crying  out and leaping  and dared the impossible on the dark slope;
presently the mountain was des erted, save for the three aband oned sticks
and the thing that bowed.
CHAPTER EIGHT
     
Gift for the Darkness
     
Piggy looked up miserably from the dawn-pale beach to the dark mountain.
"Are you sure? Really sure, I mean?"
I told you a dozen times now ," said Ralph, "we saw it."
"D'you think we're safe down here?"
"How the hell should I know?"
Ralph jerked away from him and walked a few paces along the beach.
Jack was kneeling and drawin g a circular pattern in the sand with his
forefinger . Piggy's voice came to them, hushed.
"Are you sure? Really?"
"Go up and see," said Jack contemptuously , "and good riddance."
"No fear ."
"The beast had teeth," said Ralph, "and big black eyes."
He shud dered violently . Piggy took of f his one round of glass and
polished the surface.
"What we going to do?"
Ralph turned toward the platform. The conch glimmered among the trees,
a white blob against the place w here the sun would rise. He pushed back his
mop.
"I don't know ."
He r emembered  the panic flight down the mountainside. "I do n't think
we'd ever fight a thing that size, honestly , you know . W e'd talk but we
wouldn't fight a tiger . W e'd hide. Even Jack 'ud hide."
Jack still looked at the sand.
"What about my hunters?"
Simon came stealing out of the  shadows by the shelters. Ralph ignored
Jack's question. He pointed to the touch of yellow above the sea.
"As lon g as there's light we're brave enough. But then? And now that
thing squats by the fire as though it didn't want us to be rescued―"
He was twisting his hands now , unconsciously . His voice rose.
"So we can't have a signal fire.... W e're beaten."
A point of gold appeared above the sea and at once all the sky lightened.
"What about my hunters?"
"Boys armed with sticks."
Jack got  to his f eet. His face wa s red as he marched away . Piggy put on
his one glass and looked at Ralph.
"Now you done it. Y ou been rude about his hunters."
"Oh shut up!"
The sou nd of the inexpertly blown conch interrupted them. As though he
were serenading the rising sun, Jack went on blowing till the shelters were
astir and the hunters crept to the platform and the littluns whimpered as now
they so frequent ly did. Ralph ro se obediently , and Piggy , and t hey went to
the platform.
"T alk," said Ralph bitterly , "talk, talk, talk."
He took the conch from Jack.
"This meeting―"
Jack interrupted him.
"I called it."
"If you hadn't called it I should have. Y ou just blew the conch."
"W ell, isn't that calling it?"
"Oh, take it! Go on―talk!"
Ralph thrust the conch into Jack's arms and sat down on the trunk.
"I've called an a ssembly ," said Jack, "because of a lot of things. First, you
know now , we've seen the beas t. W e crawled up. W e were only a few feet
away . The beast sat up and looked at us. I don't know what it does. W e don't
even know what it is―"
"The beast comes out of the sea―"
"Out of the dark―"
"T rees―"
"Quiet!" shoute d Jack. "Y ou, listen. The beast is sitting up there,
whatever it is―"
"Perhaps it's waiting―"
"Hunting―"
"Y es, hunting."
"Hunting," said Jack. He remembered his age-old tremors in the forest.
"Y es. The beast is a hunter . Only― shut up! The next thing is that we
couldn't kill it. And the next is that Ralph said my hunters are no good."
"I never said that!"
"I've got  the conch. Ralph thinks you're cowards, running away  from the
boar and the beast. And that's not all."
There w as a kind of sigh on the  platform as if everyone knew what was
coming. Jack's voice went up, tremulous yet determined, pushing against
the uncooperative silence.
"He's like Piggy . He says things like Piggy . He isn't a proper chief."
Jack clutched the conch to him.
"He's a coward himself."
For a moment he paused and then went on.
"On top, when Roger and me went on―he stayed back."
"I went too!"
"After ."
The two boys glared at each other through screens of hair .
"I went on too," said Ralph, "then I ran away . So did you."
"Call me a coward then."
Jack turned to the hunters.
"He's no t a hunter . He'd never ha ve got us meat. He isn't a prefect and we
don't kn ow anyt hing about him. He just gives orders and expects people to
obey for nothing. All this talk―"
"All this talk!" shouted Ralph. "T alk, talk! Who wanted it? W ho called
the meeting?"
Jack turned, red in the face, his chin sunk back. He glowered up under his
eyebrows.
"All right then," he said in tones of deep meaning, and menace, "all
right."
He held the conch against his chest with one hand and stabbe d the air
with his index finger .
"Who thinks Ralph oughtn't to be chief?"
He l ooked expectantly at the bo ys ranged round, who had frozen. Under
the palms there was deadly silence.
"Hands up," said Jack strongly , "whoever wants Ralph not to be chief?"
The sile nce continued, breathle ss and heavy and full of shame. Slowly
the red drained f rom Jack's cheeks, then came back with a pain ful rush. He
licked his lips and turned his head at an angle, so that his gaze avoided the
embarrassment of linking with another's eye.
"How many think―"
His voic e tailed of f. The hands t hat held the conch shook. He cleared his
throat, and spoke loudly .
"All right then."
He laid the conch with great car e in the grass at his feet. The humiliating
tears were running from the corner of each eye.
"I'm not going to play any longer . Not with you."
Most of the boys were looking down now , at the grass or their feet. Jack
cleared his throat again.
"I'm not going to be a part of Ralph's lot―"
He looked along the right-hand logs, numbering the hunters that had been
a choir .
"I'm going of f by myself. He can catch his own pigs. Anyone w ho wants
to hunt when I do can come too."
He blundered out of the triangle toward the drop to the white sand.
"Jack!"
Jack turn ed and looked back at Ralph. For a moment he paused  and then
cried out, high-pitched, enraged.
"―No!"
He leapt down from the platform and ran along the beach, paying no
heed to the steady fall of his tea rs; and until he dived into the forest Ralph
watched him.
Piggy was indignant.
"I been talking, Ralph, and you just stood there like―"
Softly , looking at Piggy and not seeing him, Ralph spoke to himself.
"He'll co me back. When the sun goes down he'll come." He look ed at the
conch in Piggy's hand.
"What?"
"W ell there!"
Piggy gave up the attempt to rebuke Ralph. He polished his glass again
and went back to his subject.
"W e can do without Jack Merr idew . There's others besides him on this
island. B ut now we really got a beast, though I can't hardly beli eve it, we'll
need to stay close to the platf orm; there'll be less need of him and his
hunting. So now we can really decide on what's what."
"There's no help, Piggy . Nothing to be done."
For a while they  sat in depressed silence. Then Simon stood up and took
the conc h from Piggy , who was  so astonished that he remained  on his feet.
Ralph looked up at Simon.
"Simon? What is it this time?"
A half-sound of jeering ran round the circle and Simon shrank from it.
"I thought there might be something to do. Something we-"
Again the pressure of the assembly took his voice away . He sought for
help and  sympa thy and chose P iggy . He turned half toward him, clutching
the conch to his brown chest.
"I think we ought to climb the mountain."
The circ le shive red with dread. S imon broke of f and turned to Piggy who
was looking at him with an expression of derisive incomprehension.
"What's the good of climbing up to this here beast when Ralph and the
other two couldn't do nothing?"
Simon whispered his answer .
"What else is there to do?"
His spee ch made, he allowed P iggy to lift the conch out of h is hands.
Then he retired and sat as far away from the others as possible.
Piggy was speaking now with  more assurance and with what, if the
circumstances had not been so s erious, the others would have re cognized as
pleasure.
"I said we could all do withou t a certain person. Now I say we got to
decide on what can be done. And I think I could tell you what R alph's going
to sa y next. The most importan t thing on the island is the smo ke and you
can't have no smoke without a fire."
Ralph made a restless movement.
"No go, Piggy . W e've got no fire. That thing sits up there―we'll have to
stay here."
Piggy lifted the conch as though to add power to his next words.
"W e got no fire  on the mounta in. But what's wrong with a fire down
here? A  fire could be built on t hem rocks. On the sand, even.  W e'd make
smoke just the same."
"That's right!"
"Smoke!"
"By the bathing pool!"
The boys began to babble. Only Piggy could have the intellectual daring
to suggest moving the fire from the mountain.
"So we' ll have the fire down h ere," said Ralph. He looked ab out him.
"W e can build i t just here betw een the bathing pool and the platform. Of
course―"
He brok e of f, frowning, thinking the thing out, unconsciously tugging at
the stub of a nail with his teeth.
"Of course the smoke won't show so much, not be seen so far away . But
we needn't go near , near the―"
The others nodded in perfect co mprehension. There would be no need to
go near .
"W e'll build the fire now ."
The greatest ideas are the simplest. Now there was something to be done
they worked with passion. Piggy was so full of delight and  expanding
liberty in  Jack's departure, so fu ll of pride in his contribution to the good of
society , that he helped to fetch  wood. The wood he fetched was close at
hand, a fallen tree on the platfo rm that they did not need for th e assembly ,
yet to the others  the sanctity of the platform had protected even what was
useless t here. Then the twins rea lized they would have a fire near them as a
comfort in the night and this set a few littluns dancing and clapping hands.
The wood was not so dry as the fuel they had used on the m ountain.
Much of  it was damply rotten a nd full of insects that scurried;  logs had to
be lifted  from the soil with care or they crumbled into sodden po wder . More
than this , in order to avoid going deep into the forest the boys worked near
at hand on any fallen wood no matter how tangled with new g rowth. The
skirts of the fo rest and the scar were familiar , near the conch and the
shelters and suf ficiently friendl y in daylight. What they might become in
darkness nobody cared to think. They worked therefore with great ener gy
and chee rfulness, though as time crept by there was a suggestion of panic in
the ener gy and hysteria in the cheerfulness. They built a pyramid of leaves
and twig s, branches and logs, on  the bare sand by the platform. For the first
time on the island, Piggy himself removed his one glass, knelt down and
focused the sun on tinder . Soon there was a ceiling of smoke an d a bush of
yellow flame.
The littl uns who had seen few fires since the first catastrophe became
wildly e xcited. They danced and sang and there was a partyish a ir about the
gathering.
At l ast R alph st opped work and stood up, smudging the sweat from his
face with a dirty forearm.
"W e'll have to have a small fire. This one's too big to keep up."
Piggy sat down carefully on the sand and began to polish his glass.
"W e could experiment. W e cou ld find out how to make a smal l hot fire
and then  put green branches on to make smoke. Some of them leaves must
be better for that than the others."
As the fire died down so did the excitement. The littluns stopped singing
and dancing and drifted away toward the sea or the fruit trees or the
shelters.
Ralph dropped down in the sand.
"W e'll have to make a new list of who's to look after the fire."
"If you can find 'em."
He l ooked round. Then for the first time he saw how few biguns there
were and understood why the work had been so hard.
"Where's Maurice?"
Piggy wiped his glass again.
"I expect... no, he wouldn't go into the forest by himself, would he?"
Ralph ju mped u p, ran swiftly ro und the fire and stood by Piggy , holding
up his hair .
"But we've got to have a list! There's you and me and Samneric and―"
He would not look at Piggy but spoke casually .
"Where's Bill and Roger?"
Piggy leaned forward and put a fragment of wood on the fire.
"I expect they've gone. I expect they won't play either ."
Ralph sat down and began to poke little holes in the sand. He was
surprised to see that one had a drop of blood by it. He examined his bitten
nail clos ely and  watched the lit tle globe of blood that gathere d where the
quick was gnawed away .
Piggy went on speaking.
"I se en them ste aling of f when we was gathering wood. They went that
way . The same way as he went himself."
Ralph fi nished h is inspection and looked up into the air . The sk y , as if in
sympathy with the great changes among them, was dif ferent to day and so
misty that in som e places the hot air seemed white. The disc of the sun was
dull silver as though it were nearer and not so hot, yet the air stifled.
"They always been making trouble, haven't they?"
The voice came near his shoulder and sounded anxious. "W e can do
without 'em. W e'll be happier now , won't we?"
Ralph sat. The twins came, dragging a great log and grinning in their
triumph. They dumped the log among the embers so that sparks flew .
"W e can do all right on our own, can't we?"
For a long time while the log dried, caught fire and turned red hot, Ralph
sat in the sand and said nothing. He did not see Piggy go to the twins and
whisper to them, nor how the three boys went together into the forest.
"Here you are."
He cam e to himself with a jolt . Piggy and the other two were by him.
They were laden with fruit.
"I thought perhaps," said Piggy , "we ought to have a feast, kind of."
The thre e boys sat down. They  had a great mass of the fruit with them
and all of it properly ripe. They grinned at Ralph as he took some and began
to eat.
"Thanks," he said. Then with an accent of pleased surprise―"Thanks!"
"Do all right on our own," said Piggy . "It's them that haven't no  common
sense that make trouble on this island. W e'll make a little hot fire―"
Ralph remembered what had been worrying him.
"Where's Simon?"
"I don't know ."
"Y ou don't think he's climbing the mountain?"
Piggy br oke into  noisy laughter and took more fruit. "He might be." He
gulped his mouthful. "He's cracked."
Simon h ad passe d through the area of fruit trees but today the littluns had
been too busy with the fire on the beach and they had not pursued him
there. He went on among the creepers until he reached the gre at mat that
was woven by the open space and crawled inside. Beyond the screen of
leaves the sunlight pelted down  and the butterflies danced in  the middle
their unending dance. He knelt down and the arrow of the sun fell on him.
That oth er time  the air had seemed to vibrate with heat; but now it
threatened. Soon the sweat was running from his long coarse hair . He
shifted restlessl y but there was no avoiding the sun. Presen tly he was
thirsty , and then very thirsty . He continued to sit.
Far of f along the  beach, Jack was standing before a small group of boys.
He was looking brilliantly happy .
"Hunting," he said. He sized the m up. Each of them wore the re mains of
a bl ack cap and ages ago they had stood in two demure row s and their
voices had been the song of angels.
"W e'll hunt. I'm going to be chief."
They nodded, and the crisis passed easily .
"And then―about the beast."
They moved, looked at the forest.
"I say this. W e aren't going to bother about the beast."
He nodded at them.
"W e're going to for get the beast."
"That's right!"
"Y es!"
"For get the beast!"
If Jack was astonished by their fervor he did not show it.
"And an other thing. W e shan't d ream so much down here. This is near the
end of the island."
They ag reed passionately out of the depths of their tormented private
lives.
"Now listen. W e might go later to the castle rock. But now I'm  going to
get more of the biguns away from the conch and all that. W e'll kill a pig and
give a feast." He paused and w ent on more slowly . "And about the beast.
When we kill w e'll leave some of the kill for it. Then it won't bother us,
maybe."
He stood up abruptly .
"W e'll go into the forest now and hunt."
He turned and trotted away a nd after a moment they follo wed him
obediently .
They sp read out , nervously , in t he forest. Almost at once Jack found the
dung and scattered roots that told of pig and soon the track was fresh. Jack
signaled the rest of the hunt to be quiet and went forward by himself. He
was hap py and wore the damp d arkness of the forest like his old clothes. He
crept down a slope to rocks and scattered trees by the sea.
The pigs lay , blo ated bags of fat , sensuously enjoying the shadows under
the t rees. There was no wind an d they were unsuspicious; and p ractice had
made Ja ck silen t as the shadow s. He stole away again and instructed his
hidden hunters. Presently they all began to inch forward sweating in the
silence a nd heat. Under the tree s an ear flapped idly . A little ap art from the
rest, sunk in deep maternal blis s, lay the lar gest sow of the l ot. She was
black an d pink; and the great bla dder of her belly was fringed with a row of
piglets that slept or burrowed and squeaked.
Fifteen yards from the drove J ack stopped, and his arm, strai ghtening,
pointed at the sow . He looked round in inquiry to make sure th at everyone
understood and the other boys nodded at him. The row of right arms slid
back.
"Now!"
The drov e of pigs started up; an d at a range of only ten yards the wooden
spears w ith fire-hardened point s flew toward the chosen pig. One piglet,
with a demented shriek, rushed into the sea trailing Roger's spear behind it.
The sow gave a gasping squeal and staggered up, with two spears sticking
in her fat flank. The boys shouted and rushed forward, the piglets scattered
and the sow burst the advancing line and went crashing away through the
forest.
"After her!"
They raced along the pig-track, but the forest was too dark and t angled so
that Jack , cursin g, stopped them and cast among the trees. Then he said
nothing for a time but breathed fiercely so that they were awed by him and
looked at each other in uneasy admiration. Presently he stabbed down at the
ground with his finger .
"There―"
Before the others could examine the drop of blood, Jack had swerved of f,
judging a trace, touching a bou gh that gave. So he followed, mysteriously
right and assured, and the hunters trod behind him.
He stopped before a covert.
"In there."
They surrounde d the covert bu t the sow got away with the sting of
another spear in her flank. The trailing butts hindered her and the sharp,
cross-cut points were a torment . She blundered into a tree, forcing a spear
still deeper; and after that any of the hunters could follow her easily by the
drops of  vivid blood. The afternoon wore on, hazy and dreadful with damp
heat; the sow sta ggered her way ahead of them, bleeding and mad, and the
hunters followed, wedded to her in lust, excited by the long chase and the
dropped blood. They could see her now , nearly got up with her , but she
spurted with her last strength an d held ahead of them again. They were just
behind her when she staggered into an open space where bright flowers
grew and butterflies danced round each other and the air was hot and still.
Here, struck down by the heat, the sow fell and the hunte rs hurled
themselves at her . This dreadful eruption from an unknown wor ld made her
frantic; she squealed and bucked  and the air was full of sweat and noise and
blood and terror . Roger ran r ound the heap, prodding with his spear
whenever pigfl esh appeared. Jack was on top of the sow , stabbing
downward with his knife. Roge r found a lodgment for his point and began
to push till he w as leaning with his whole weight. The spear mo ved forward
inch by inch and the terrified squealing became a highpitched sc ream. Then
Jack fou nd the throat and the hot blood spouted over his hand s. The sow
collapsed under them and they were heavy and fulfilled upo n her . The
butterflies still danced, preoccupied in the center of the clearing.
At la st t he immediacy of the kill subsided. The boys drew back,  and Jack
stood up, holding out his hands.
"Look."
He g iggled and f licked them while the boys laughed at his reeki ng palms.
Then Jack grabbed Maurice an d rubbed the stuf f over his cheeks. Roger
began to  withdr aw his spear and boys noticed it for the first time. Robert
stabilized the thing in a phrase which was received uproariously .
"Right up her ass!"
"Did you hear?"
"Did you hear what he said?"
"Right up her ass!"
This time Robert and Maurice a cted the two parts; and Mauric e's acting
of the pig's ef forts to avoid the advancing spear was so funny that the boys
cried with laughter .
At length even this palled. Jack  began to clean his bloody hands on the
rock. Th en he started work on the sow and paunched her , lugging out the
hot bags of colored guts, pushi ng them into a pile on the roc k while the
others watched him. He talked as he worked.
"W e'll ta ke the meat along the beach. I'll go back to the plat form and
invite them to a feast. That should give us time."
Roger spoke.
"Chief―"
"Uh―?"
"How can we make a fire?"
Jack squatted back and frowned at the pig.
"W e'll ra id them and take fire. There must be four of you; Henry  and you,
Robert a nd Maurice. W e'll put on paint and sneak up; Roger c an snatch a
branch while I say what I want. The rest of you can get this back to where
we were. W e'll build the fire there. And after that―"
He paused and stood up, looking at the shadows under the trees. His
voice was lower when he spoke again.
"But we'll leave part of the kill for ..."
He knelt down again and was busy with his knife. The boys crowded
round him. He spoke over his shoulder to Roger .
"Sharpen a stick at both ends."
Presently he stood up, holding the dripping sow's head in his hands.
"Where's that stick?"
"Here."
"Ram one end in the earth. Oh―it's rock. Jam it in that crack. There."
Jack held up the head and jammed the soft throat down on th e pointed
end of the stick which pierced through into the mouth. He stoo d back and
the head hung there, a little blood dribbling down the stick.
Instinctively the boys drew back too; and the forest was very still. They
listened, and the loudest noise was the buzzing of flies over the spilled guts.
Jack spoke in a whisper .
"Pick up the pig."
Maurice and Robert skewered the carcass, lifted the dead weight, and
stood re ady . In the silence, and standing over the dry blood, they looked
suddenly furtive.
Jack spoke loudly .
"This head is for the beast. It's a gift."
The silence accepted the gift and awed them. The head remained there,
dim-eyed, grinning faintly , blood blackening between the teeth. All at once
they were running away , as fast as they could, through the forest toward the
open beach.
Simon stayed where he was, a  small brown image, concealed by the
leaves. E ven if he shut his eyes  the sow's head still remained like an after -
image. T he half- shut eyes were dim with the infinite cynicism of adult life.
They assured Simon that everything was a bad business.
"I know that."
Simon discovere d that he had spoken aloud. He opened his eyes quickly
and there was th e head grinning amusedly in the strange daylig ht, ignoring
the f lies, the spilled guts, even ignoring the indignity of being spiked on a
stick.
He looked away , licking his dry lips.
A gift for the beast. Might no t the beast come for it? The head, he
thought, appeare d to agree with  him. Run away , said the head silently , go
back to the othe rs. It was a joke really―why should you bother? Y ou were
just wro ng, that's all. A little headache, something you ate, p erhaps. Go
back, child, said the head silently .
Simon looked up, feeling the weight of his wet hair , and gazed at the sky .
Up t here, for once, were cloud s, great bulging towers that spr outed away
over the island, grey and cream and copper -colored. The clouds were sitting
on the land; th ey squeezed, produced moment by moment this close,
tormenting heat. Even the butterflies deserted the open space where the
obscene thing grinned and dripped. Simon lowered his head, carefully
keeping his eyes shut, then sheltered them with his hand. There were no
shadows under the trees but everywhere a pearly stillness, so that what was
real seem ed illu sive and without definition. The pile of guts was a black
blob of flies tha t buzzed like a saw . After a while these flies fo und Simon.
Gor ged, they alighted by his runnels of sweat and drank. They ti ckled under
his nostrils and played leapfr og on his thighs. They were black and
iridescent green and without number; and in front of Simon, the Lord of the
Flies hun g on his stick and grinned. At last Simon gave up and looked back;
saw the white te eth and dim eye s, the blood―and his gaze was held by that
ancient, inescap able recognition. In Simon's right temple, a pulse began to
beat on the brain.
Ralph and Piggy lay in the sand, gazing at the fire and idly  flicking
pebbles into its smokeless heart.
"That branch is gone."
"Where's Samneric?"
"W e ought to get some more wood. W e're out of green branches."
Ralph sighed and stood up. There were no shadows under the palms on
the p latform; only this strange l ight that seemed to come from everywhere
at once. High up among the bulging clouds thunder went of f like a gun.
"W e're going to get buckets of rain."
"What about the fire?"
Ralph tr otted in to the forest an d returned with a wide spray of green
which he dumped on the fire. The branch crackled, the leaves curled and the
yellow smoke expanded.
Piggy made an aimless little pattern in the sand with his fingers.
"T rouble is, we haven't got enough people for a fire. Y ou go t to treat
Samnenc as one turn. They do everything together―"
"Of course."
"W ell, that isn't fair . Don't you see? They ought to do two turns."
Ralph co nsidered this and understood. He was vexed to find how little he
thought like a gr ownup and sighed again. The island was getting worse and
worse.
Piggy looked at the fire.
"Y ou'll want another green branch soon."
Ralph rolled over .
"Piggy . What are we going to do?"
"Just have to get on without 'em."
"But―the fire."
He f rowned at the black and white mess in which lay the unburn t ends of
branches. He tried to formulate.
"I'm scared."
He saw Piggy look up; and blundered on.
"Not of the be ast. I mean I'm scared of that too. But nob ody else
understands abo ut the fire. If someone threw you a rope when you were
drowning. If a doctor said tak e this because if you don't take it you'll
die―you would, wouldn't you? I mean?"
"'Course I would."
"Can't th ey see? Can't they und erstand? W ithout the smoke signal we'll
die here? Look at that!"
A wave of heat ed air trembled above the ashes but without a trace of
smoke.
"W e can 't keep one fire going. A nd they don't care. And what's  more―"
He looked intensely into Piggy's streaming face.
"What's more, I  don't sometimes. Supposing I got like the others―not
caring. What 'ud become of us?"
Piggy took of f his glasses, deeply troubled.
"I dunno , Ralph . W e just got to go on, that's all. That's what grownups
would do."
Ralph, having begun the business of unburdening himself, continued.
"Piggy , what's wrong?"
Piggy looked at him in astonishment.
"Do you mean the―?"
"No, not it... I mean... what makes things break up like they do?"
Piggy rubbed his glasses slowly and thought. When he understood how
far Ralph had gone toward accepting him he flushed pinkly with pride.
"I dunno, Ralph. I expect it's him."
"Jack?"
"Jack." A taboo was evolving round that word too.
Ralph nodded solemnly .
"Y es," he said, "I suppose it must be."
The fore st near them burst into  uproar . Demoniac figures with faces of
white and red and green rushed out howling, so that the littluns fled
screaming. Out of the corner of his eye, Ralph saw Piggy ru nning. T wo
figures rushed at the fire and he prepared to defend himself but they
grabbed half-bu rnt branches and raced away along the beach. The three
others st ood stil l, watching Ralph; and he saw that the tallest of them, stark
naked save for paint and a belt, was Jack.
Ralph had his breath back and spoke.
"W ell?"
Jack ignored him, lifted his spear and began to shout.
"Listen all of yo u. Me and my hunters, we're living along the b each by a
flat rock. W e hunt and feast and have fun. If you want to join my tribe come
and see us. Perhaps I'll let you join. Perhaps not."
He paused and looked round. He was safe from shame or self-
consciousness behind the mask of his paint and could look at e ach of them
in tu rn. Ralph w as kneeling by the remains of the fire like a sp rinter at his
mark and his f ace was half-hidden by hair and smut. Samn eric peered
together round a palm tree at the edge of the forest. A littlun howled,
creased and crimson, by the bathing pool and Piggy stood on the platform,
the white conch gripped in his hands.
"T onight we're having a feast. W e've killed a pig and we've got m eat. Y ou
can come and eat with us if you like."
Up in the cloud canyons the thunder boomed again. Jack and the two
anonymous savages with him swayed, looking up, and then recovered. The
littlun went on howling. Jack was waiting for something. He whispered
ur gently to the others.
"Go on―now!"
The two savages murmured. Jack spoke sharply .
"Go on!"
The two  savages looked at each other , raised their spears together and
spoke in time.
"The Chief has spoken."
Then the  three of them turned a nd trotted away . Presently Ralph rose to
his f eet, looking at the place where the savages had vanished . Samneric
came, talking in an awed whisper .
"I thought it was―"
"―and I was―"
"―scared."
Piggy stood above them on the platform, still holding the conch.
"That w as Jack and Maurice and Robert," said Ralph. "Aren't they having
fun?"
"I thought I was going to have asthma."
"Sucks to your ass-mar ."
"When I saw Jack I was sure he'd go for the conch. Can't think why ."
The group of b oys looked at t he white shell with af fectionate respect.
Piggy pl aced it in Ralph's hand and the littluns, seeing the fami liar symbol,
started to come back.
"Not here."
He turn ed toward the platform, feeling the need for ritual. First went
Ralph, the white conch cradled, then Piggy very grave, then the twins, then
the littluns and the others.
"Sit down all of you. They raided us for fire. They're having fun. But
the―"
Ralph w as puzz led by the shutt er that flickered in his brain. There was
something he wanted to say; then the shutter had come down.
"But the―"
They we re regarding him gravely , not yet troubled by any doubts about
his s uf ficiency . Ralph pushed the idiot hair out of his eyes an d looked at
Piggy .
"But the... oh... the fire! Of course, the fire!"
He started to laugh, then stopped and became fluent instead.
"The fire 's the most important thing. W ithout the fire we can't be  rescued.
I'd l ike to put on war -paint and be a savage. But we must keep the fire
burning. The fire's the most important thing on the island, because,
because―"
He paused again and the silence became full of doubt and wonder .
Piggy whispered ur gently . "Rescue."
"Oh yes. W ithout the fire we can't be rescued. So we must stay by the fire
and make smoke."
When he stopped no one said anything. After the many brilliant  speeches
that had been m ade on this very  spot Ralph's remarks seemed lame, even to
the littluns.
At last Bill held out his hands for the conch.
"Now we can't h ave the fire up there―because we can't have the fire up
there―we need more people to keep it going. Let's go to this feast and tell
them the  fire's hard on the rest  of us. And the hunting and all  that, being
savages I mean―it must be jolly good fun."
Samneric took the conch.
"That must be fun like Bill says―and as he's invited us―"
"―to a feast―"
"―meat―"
"―crackling―"
"―I could do with some meat―"
Ralph held up his hand. "Why shouldn't we get our own meat?" The
twins lo oked at each other . Bi ll answered. "W e don't want t o go in the
jungle." Ralph grimaced. "He―you know―goes."
"He's a hunter . They're all hunters. That's dif ferent." No one spoke for a
moment, then Piggy muttered to the sand. "Meat―"
The littluns sat, solemnly thinki ng of meat, and dribbling. Ove rhead the
cannon boomed again and the d ry palm fronds clattered in a sudden gust of
hot wind.
"Y ou are a silly  little boy ," said  the Lord of the Flies, "just an ignorant,
silly little boy ."
Simon moved his swollen tongue but said nothing.
"Don't y ou agree?" said the Lord  of the Flies. "Aren't you just a silly little
boy?"
Simon answered him in the same silent voice.
"W ell th en," said the Lord of the Flies, "you'd better run of f and play with
the others. They think you're batty . Y ou don't want Ralph to think you're
batty , do you? Y ou like Ralph a lot, don't you? And Piggy , and Jack?"
Simon's head was tilted slightly  up. His eyes could not break away and
the Lord of the Flies hung in space before him.
"What are you doing out here all alone? Aren't you afraid of me?"
Simon shook.
"There isn't anyone to help you. Only me. And I'm the Beast."
Simon's mouth labored, brought forth audible words.
"Pig's head on a stick."
"Fancy thinking the Beast was s omething you could hunt and k ill!" said
the h ead. For a moment or two t he forest and all the other dimly appreciated
places e choed w ith the parody o f laughter . "Y ou knew , didn't y ou? I'm part
of y ou? Close, close, close! I'm  the reason why it's no go? Wh y things are
what they are?"
The laughter shivered again.
"Come now ," said the Lord of the Flies. "Get back to the others and we'll
for get the whole thing."
Simon's head wobbled. His ey es were half closed as though he were
imitating the obscene thing on the stick. He knew that one of his times was
coming on. The Lord of the Flies was expanding like a balloon.
"This is  ridiculous. Y ou know perfectly well you'll only meet me down
there―so don't try to escape!"
Simon's body was arched and s tif f. The Lord of the Flies spoke in the
voice of a schoolmaster .
"This ha s gone quite far enough. My poor , misguided child, do you think
you know better than I do?"
There was a pause.
"I'm war ning yo u. I'm going to get angry . D'you see? Y ou're not wanted.
Understand? W e  are going to have fun on this island. Understand? W e are
going to have fu n on this island!  So don't try it on, my poor misguided boy ,
or else―"
Simon found he was looking into a vast mouth. There was blackness
within, a blackness that spread.
"―Or e lse," sai d the Lord of the Flies, "we shall do you? See? Jack and
Roger a nd Mau rice and Robert and Bill and Piggy and Ralph. Do you.
See?"
Simon was inside the mouth. He fell down and lost consciousness.
CHAPTER NINE
     
A V iew to a Death
     
Over the  island the build-up of c louds continued. A steady current of heated
air rose all day  from the mountain and was thrust to ten tho usand feet;
revolving masses of gas piled up the static until the air was ready to
explode. By early evening the sun had gone and a brassy glare had taken the
place of  clear daylight. Even the  air that pushed in from the sea was hot and
held no refreshm ent. Colors drained from water and trees and pink surfaces
of ro ck, and the white and brown clouds brooded. Nothing pr ospered but
the f lies who blackened their lo rd and made the spilt guts look like a heap
of gliste ning co al. Even when the vessel broke in Simon's nose and the
blood gushed out they left him alone, preferring the pig's high flavor .
W ith the  runnin g of the blood Simon's fit passed into the weariness of
sleep. He lay in  the mat of creepers while the evening advanced and the
cannon continued to play . At la st he woke and saw dimly the dark earth
close by his che ek. Still he did not move but lay there, his face s ideways on
the earth, his eyes looking dully before him. Then he turned over , drew his
feet under him and laid hold of the creepers to pull himself up. When the
creepers shook the flies explod ed from the guts with a vicious note and
clamped back on again. Simon g ot to his feet. The light was un earthly . The
Lord of the Flies hung on his stick like a black ball.
Simon spoke aloud to the clearing.
"What else is there to do?"
Nothing replied. Simon turned away from the open space and crawled
through the creepers till he was in the dusk of the forest. He walked drearily
between the trunks, his face empty of expression, and the blood was dry
round his mouth and chin. Only  sometimes as he lifted the ropes of creeper
aside and chose his direction from the trend of the land, he mouthed words
that did not reach the air .
Presently the creepers festooned  the trees less frequently and there was a
scatter o f pearly light from the sky down through the trees. T his was the
backbone of the island, the slightly higher land that lay beneath the
mountain where  the forest was no longer deep jungle. Here there were wide
spaces interspersed with thickets and huge trees and the trend of the ground
led h im up as the forest opened. He pushed on, staggering som etimes with
his wear iness but never stopping. The usual brightness was go ne from his
eyes and he walked with a sort of glum determination like an old man.
A buf fet  of wind made him sta gger and he saw that he was o ut in the
open, on  rock, under a brassy sky . He found his legs were w eak and his
tongue g ave him  pain all the time. When the wind reached the m ountain-top
he c ould see som ething happen, a flicker of blue stuf f against br own clouds.
He push ed hims elf forward and the wind came again, stronger now , cuf fing
the fore st heads  till they ducke d and roared. Simon saw a humped thing
suddenly sit up on the top and look down at him. He hid his face, and toiled
on.
The flies had found the figure too. The life-like movement would scare
them of f  for a m oment so that th ey made a dark cloud round the head. Then
as the blue material of the parachute collapsed the corpulent figure would
bow forward, sighing, and the flies settle once more.
Simon f elt his knees smack the rock. He crawled forward and soon he
understood. The  tangle of lines showed him the mechanics of this parody;
he e xamined the white nasal bones, the teeth, the colors of cor ruption. He
saw how pitilessly the layers of rubber and canvas held together the poor
body that should be rotting awa y . Then the wind blew again and the figure
lifted, bo wed, an d breathed foully at him. Simon knelt on all fours and was
sick till his stomach was empty . Then he took the lines in hi s hands; he
freed them from the rocks and the figure from the wind's indignity .
At l ast he turned away and looked down at the beaches. The fi re by the
platform appeare d to be out, or a t least making no smoke. Further along the
beach, beyond the little river and near a great slab of rock, a th in trickle of
smoke w as clim bing into the sk y . Simon, for getful of the flies , shaded his
eyes with both hands and peered  at the smoke. Even at that dis tance it was
possible to see t hat most of the boys―perhaps all of the boys―were there.
So they had shifted camp then, a way from the beast. As Simon thought this,
he turned to the poor broken thing that sat stinking by his side. The beast
was harmless and horrible; and  the news must reach the others as soon as
possible. He started down the mountain and his legs gave beneath him.
Even with great care the best he could do was a stagger .
"Bathing," said Ralph, "that's the only thing to do." Piggy was i nspecting
the looming-sky through his glass. "I don't like them clouds. Remember
how it rained just after we landed?"
"Going to rain again."
Ralph d ived into  the pool. A couple of littluns were playing at the edge,
trying to  extract  comfort from a  wetness warmer than blood. Pig gy took of f
his glass es, stepped primly into t he water and then put them on a gain. Ralph
came to the surface and squirted a jet of water at him.
"Mind my specs," said Piggy . "If I get water on the glass I got to get out
and clean 'em."
Ralph squirted again and missed . He laughed at Piggy , expectin g him to
retire m eekly as  usual and in pained silence. Instead, Piggy be at the water
with his hands.
"Stop it!" he shouted. "D'you hear?"
Furiously he drove the water into Ralph's face.
"All right, all right," said Ralph. "Keep your hair on."
Piggy stopped beating the water .
"I got a pain in my head. I wish the air was cooler ."
"I wish the rain would come."
"I wish we could go home."
Piggy lay back against the sloping sand side of the pool. His stomach
protruded and the water dried on it. Ralph squinted up at the sky . One could
guess at the movement of the sun by the progress of a light patch  among the
clouds. He knelt in the water and looked round.
"Where's everybody?"
Piggy sat up.
"P'raps they're lying in the shelter ."
"Where's Samneric?"
"And Bill?"
Piggy pointed beyond the platform.
"That's where they've gone. Jack's party ."
"Let them go," said Ralph, uneasily , "I don't care."
"Just for some meat―"
"And for hunting," said Ralph, wisely , "and for pretending to be a tribe,
and putting on war -paint."
Piggy stirred the sand under water and did not look at Ralph.
"P'raps we ought to go too." Ralph looked at him quickly and Piggy
blushed. "I mean―to make sure nothing happens." Ralph squirted water
again.
Long before Ralph and Piggy came up with Jack's lot, they could hear the
party . There was a stretch of grass in a place where the palms  left a wide
band of turf betw een the forest and the shore. Just one step down from the
edge of the turf was the white, b lown sand of above high water , warm, dry ,
trodden. Below  that again was a rock that stretched away toward the
lagoon. Beyond was a short stretch of sand and then the edge of the water .
A fire burned on  the rock and fat dripped from the roasting pigm eat into the
invisible flames. All the boys of the island, except Piggy , Ralph, Simon, and
the two tending  the pig, were grouped on the turf. They were laughing,
singing, lying, squatting, or sta nding on the grass, holding food in their
hands. B ut to judge by the greasy faces, the meat eating was almost done;
and some held coconut shells in their hands and were drinking from them.
Before t he party  had started a great log had been dragged into the center of
the l awn and Jack, painted and garlanded, sat there like an idol.  There were
piles of meat on green leaves ne ar him, and fruit, and coconut shells full of
drink.
Piggy and Ralph came to the ed ge of the grassy platform; and the boys,
as they noticed them, fell silent one by one till only the boy n ext to Jack
was talk ing. The n the silence in truded even there and Jack turn ed where he
sat. For a time he looked at them and the crackle of the fire was the loudest
noise ov er the droning of the re ef. Ralph looked away; and Sa m, thinking
that Ralph had turned to him accusingly , put down his gnawed bone with a
nervous giggle. Ralph took an uncertain step, pointed to a palm tree, and
whispered something inaudible to Piggy; and they both giggle d like Sam.
Lifting h is feet high out of the s and, Ralph started to stroll past.  Piggy tried
to whistle.
At this moment the boys who were cooking at the fire suddenly hauled
of f a great chun k of meat and ran with it toward the grass. Th ey bumped
Piggy , w ho was  burnt, and yelle d and danced. Immediately , Ralph and the
crowd o f boys were united and relieved by a storm of laughter . Piggy once
more wa s the center of social derision so that everyone felt c heerful and
normal.
Jack stood up and waved his spear .
"T ake them some meat."
The boys with the spit gave Ralph and Piggy each a succulent chunk.
They to ok the gift, dribbling. So they stood and ate beneath a sky of
thunderous brass that rang with the storm-coming.
Jack waved his spear again.
"Has everybody eaten as much as they want?"
There w as still food left, sizzling on the wooden spits, heaped on the
green platters. Betrayed by his stomach, Piggy threw a picked bone down
on the beach and stooped for more.
Jack spoke again, impatiently .
"Has everybody eaten as much as they want?"
His tone  convey ed a warning, g iven out of the pride of ownership, and
the boys ate f aster while there was still time. Seeing there was no
immediate likeli hood of a pause, Jack rose from the log that was his throne
and saun tered to  the edge of the grass. He looked down from behind his
paint at Ralph and Piggy . They moved a little farther of f over t he sand and
Ralph watched the fire as he at e. He noticed, without understanding, how
the f lames were visible now against the dull light. Evening was come, not
with calm beauty but with the threat of violence.
Jack spoke.
"Give me a drink."
Henry b rought h im a shell and he drank, watching Piggy and Ralph over
the jagged rim. Power lay in the  brown swell of his forearms: authority sat
on his shoulder and chattered in his ear like an ape.
"All sit down."
The boy s ranged  themselves in rows on the grass before him b ut Ralph
and Piggy stayed a foot lower , s tanding on the soft sand. Jack ignored them
for the moment, turned his mas k down to the seated boys and pointed at
them with the spear .
"Who's going to join my tribe?"
Ralph made a sudden movement that became a stumble. Som e of the
boys turned toward him.
"I ga ve you foo d," said Jack, "a nd my hunters will protect you from the
beast. Who will join my tribe?"
"I'm chief," said Ralph, "because you chose me. And we were going to
keep the fire going. Now you run after food―"
"Y ou ran yourself!" shouted Jack. "Look at that bone in your hands!"
Ralph went crimson.
"I said you were hunters. That was your job."
Jack ignored him again.
"Who'll join my tribe and have fun?"
"I'm chi ef," said  Ralph tremulously . "And what about the fire? And I've
got the conch― "Y ou haven't go t it with you," said Jack, sneering. "Y ou left
it behind. See, clever? And the conch doesn't count at this end of the
island―"
All a t on ce the thunder struck. Instead of the dull boom there w as a point
of impact in the explosion.
"The conch counts here too," said Ralph, "and all over the island."
"What are you going to do about it then?"
Ralph examined  the ranks of boys. There was no help in them  and he
looked away , confused and sweating. Piggy whispered.
"The fire―rescue."
"Who'll join my tribe?"
"I will."
"Me."
"I will."
"I'll blow the conch," said Ralph breathlessly , "and call an assembly ."
"W e shan't hear it."
Piggy touched Ralph's wrist.
"Come away . There's going to be trouble. And we've had our meat."
There was a bl ink of bright l ight beyond the forest and the  thunder
exploded again so that a littlun started to whine. Big drops of rain fell
among them making individual sounds when they struck.
"Going to be a storm," said Ralph, "and you'll have rain like when we
dropped here. Who's clever now? Where are your shelters? What are you
going to do about that?"
The hun ters wer e looking uneasily at the sky , flinching from the stroke of
the drops. A w ave of restlessness set the boys swaying a nd moving
aimlessly . The flickering light be came brighter and the blows of  the thunder
were only just bearable. The littluns began to run about, screaming.
Jack leapt on to the sand.
"Do our dance! Come on! Dance!"
He ran stumbling through the thick sand to the open space of rock
beyond the fire. Between the flashes of lightning the air was dark and
terrible; and the boys followed  him, clamorously . Roger became the pig,
grunting and char ging at Jack, who side-stepped. The hunters took their
spears, the cooks took spits, and the rest clubs of firewood. A circling
movement devel oped and a chan t. While Roger mimed the terro r of the pig,
the littluns ran and jumped on the outside of the circle. Piggy  and Ralph,
under the threat of the sky , found themselves eager to take a p lace in this
demented but partly secure society . They were glad to touch the brown
backs of the fence that hemmed in the terror and made it governable.
" Kill the beast! Cut his thr oat! Spill his blood! "
The movement became regular while the chant lost its first superficial
excitement and began to beat li ke a steady pulse. Roger ceased  to be a pig
and became a hu nter , so that the  center of the ring yawned emptily . Some of
the l ittluns started a ring on thei r own; and the complementary circles went
round and round as though repe tition would achieve safety of i tself. There
was the throb and stamp of a single or ganism.
The dar k sky was shattered by a blue-white scar . An instant later the
noise was on them like the blow of a gigantic whip. The chant rose a tone in
agony .
" Kill the beast! Cut his thr oat! Spill his blood! "
Now out of the terror rose another desire, thick, ur gent, blind.
" Kill the beast! Cut his thr oat! Spill his blood! "
Again the blue-white scar jagged above them and the sulphurous
explosion beat down. The littlu ns screamed and blundered about, fleeing
from the edge of the forest, and one of them broke the ring of biguns in his
terror .
"Him! Him!"
The circle became a horseshoe. A thing was crawling out of the forest. It
came darkly , uncertainly . The shrill screaming that rose before the beast
was like a pain. The beast stumbled into the horseshoe.
" Kill the beast! Cut his thr oat! Spill his blood! "
The blue-white scar was constant, the noise unendurable. Simon was
crying out something about a dead man on a hill.
" Kill the beast! Cut his thr oat! Spill his blood! Do him in! "
The sticks fell and the mouth of the new circle crunched and screamed.
The beast was on its knees in the center , its arms folded over its face. It was
crying o ut again st the abominable noise something about a body  on the hill.
The beast struggled forward, broke the ring and fell over the steep edge of
the rock  to the sand by the wate r . At once the crowd sur ged after it, poured
down the rock, leapt on to the b east, screamed, struck, bit, tore. There were
no words, and no movements but the tearing of teeth and claws.
Then the  clouds  opened and let down the rain like a waterfall. The water
bounded from the mountain-top , tore leaves and branches from the trees,
poured like a cold shower over the struggling heap on the sand. Presently
the heap  broke up and figures st aggered away . Only the beast lay  still, a few
yards from the sea. Even in the rain they could see how small a beast it was;
and already its blood was staining the sand.
Now a great wind blew the rain  sideways, cascading the water from the
forest trees. On the mountain-top the parachute filled and moved ; the figure
slid, ros e to its feet, spun, sway ed down through a vastness of wet air and
trod with ungainly feet the tops of the high trees; falling, still falling, it sank
toward the beach and the boys  rushed screaming into the darkness. The
parachute took the figure forward, furrowing the lagoon, and bumped it
over the reef and out to sea.
T oward midnigh t the rain ceased  and the clouds drifted away , so that the
sky was scattered once more with the incredible lamps of stars. Then the
breeze d ied too and there was no noise save the drip and trick le of water
that ran out of clefts and spilled down, leaf by leaf, to the brown earth of the
island. T he air was cool, moist, and clear; and presently even t he sound of
the water was still. The beast lay huddled on the pale beach and the stains
spread, inch by inch.
The edge of th e lagoon became a streak of phosphorescence which
advanced minut ely , as the grea t wave of the tide flowed. The clear water
mirrored the clear sky and the  angular bright constellations. The line of
phosphorescence bulged about the sand grains and little pebb les; it held
them ea ch in a dimple of tens ion, then suddenly accepted them with an
inaudible syllable and moved on.
Along th e shoreward edge of th e shallows the advancing clearness was
full of strange, m oonbeam-bodied creatures with fiery eyes. He re and there
a lar ger pebble c lung to its own  air and was covered with a coat of pearls.
The tide  swelled in over the rain-pitted sand and smoothed everything with
a lay er of silver . Now it touched the first of the stains that seep ed from the
broken body and the creatures  made a moving patch of light as they
gathered at the edge. The water rose farther and dressed Simon's coarse hair
with brightness. The line of his cheek silvered and the turn of h is shoulder
became sculptur ed marble. The strange attendant creatures, with their fiery
eyes and trailing vapors, busied themselves round his head. The  body lifted
a fraction of an  inch from the sand and a bubble of air escap ed from the
mouth with a wet plop. Then it turned gently in the water .
Somewhere ove r the darkened c urve of the world the sun and m oon were
pulling, and the film of water on  the earth planet was held, bulging slightly
on o ne side while the solid core turned. The great wave of the  tide moved
farther a long the  island and the water lifted. Softly , surrounded by a fringe
of in quisitive bright creatures, itself a silver shape beneath the steadfast
constellations, Simon's dead body moved out toward the open sea.
CHAPTER TEN
     
The Shell and the Glasses
     
Piggy eyed the advancing figur e carefully . Nowadays he sometimes found
that he saw more clearly if he re moved his glasses and shifted the one lens
to the other eye; but even through the good eye, after what had  happened,
Ralph remained unmistakably Ralph. He came now out of the coconut trees,
limping, dirty , with dead leaves hanging from his shock of yellow hair . One
eye was a slit in his puf fy cheek and a great scab had formed on his right
knee. He paused for a moment and peered at the figure on the platform.
"Piggy? Are you the only one left?"
"There's some littluns."
"They don't count. No biguns?"
"Oh―Samneric. They're collecting wood."
"Nobody else?"
"Not that I know of."
Ralph climbed on to the platfo rm carefully . The coarse grass was still
worn aw ay whe re the assembly used to sit; the fragile white conch still
gleamed by the polished seat. Ralph sat down in the grass facin g the chief's
seat and  the conch. Piggy knelt at his left, and for a long minute there was
silence.
At last Ralph cleared his throat and whispered something.
Piggy whispered back.
"What you say?"
Ralph spoke up.
"Simon."
Piggy said nothing but nodded,  solemnly . They continued to s it, gazing
with imp aired s ight at the chief 's seat and the glittering lagoon . The green
light and the glossy patches of sunshine played over their befouled bodies.
At length Ralph got up and went to the conch. He took the shell
caressingly with both hands and knelt, leaning against the trunk.
"Piggy ."
"Uh?"
"What we going to do?"
Piggy nodded at the conch.
"Y ou could―"
"Call an assembly?"
Ralph laughed sharply as he said the word and Piggy frowned.
"Y ou're still chief."
Ralph laughed again.
"Y ou are. Over us."
"I got the conch."
"Ralph! Stop laughing like that.  Look, there ain't no need, Ralph! What's
the others going to think?"
At last Ralph stopped. He was shivering.
"Piggy ."
"Uh?"
"That was Simon."
"Y ou said that before."
"Piggy ."
"Uh?"
"That was murder ."
"Y ou sto p it!" said Piggy , shrill y . "What good're you doing talking like
that?"
He jumped to his feet and stood over Ralph.
"It was dark. T here was that―that bloody dance. There was lightning
and thunder and rain. W e was scared!"
"I wasn't scared," said Ralph slowly , "I was―I don't know what I was."
"W e was  scared!" said Piggy excitedly . "Anything might have h appened.
It wasn't―what you said."
He was gesticulating, searching for a formula.
"Oh, Piggy!"
Ralph's voice, low and stricken, stopped Piggy's gestures. He bent down
and waited. Ralph, cradling the conch, rocked himself to and fro.
"Don't you understand, Piggy? The things we did―"
"He may still be―"
"No."
"P'raps he was only pretending―"
Piggy's voice trailed of f at the sight of Ralph's face.
"Y ou we re outside. Outside the circle. Y ou never really came in. Didn't
you see what we―what they did?"
There w as loath ing, and at the same time a kind of feverish ex citement,
in his voice.
"Didn't you see, Piggy?"
"Not all that well. I only got one eye now . Y ou ought to know that,
Ralph."
Ralph continued to rock to and fro.
"It was an accident," said Piggy suddenly , "that's what it was. An
accident." His voice shrilled a gain. "Coming in the dark―he hadn't no
business crawling like that out of the dark. He was batty . He asked for it."
He gesticulated widely again. "It was an accident."
"Y ou didn't see what they did―"
"Look, R alph. W e got to for get this. W e can't do no good think ing about
it, see?"
"I'm frightened. Of us. I want to go home. Oh God, I want to go home."
"It was an accident," said Piggy stubbornly , "and that's that."
He touched Ralph's bare shoul der and Ralph shuddered at th e human
contact.
"And l ook, Ralph"―Piggy glanced round quickly , then leaned
close―"don't let on we was in that dance. Not to Samneric."
"But we were! All of us!"
Piggy shook his head.
"Not us till last.  They never not iced in the dark. Anyway you said I was
only on the outside."
"So was I," muttered Ralph, "I was on the outside too."
Piggy nodded eagerly .
"That's r ight. W e was on the outside. W e never done nothing, we never
seen nothing."
Piggy paused, then went on.
"W e'll live on our own, the four of us―"
"Four of us. W e aren't enough to keep the fire burning."
"W e'll try . See? I lit it."
Samneric came dragging a great log out of the forest. They dum ped it by
the fire and turned to the pool. Ralph jumped to his feet.
"Hi! Y ou two!"
The twins checked a moment, then walked on.
"They're going to bathe, Ralph."
"Better get it over ."
The twins were very surprised to see Ralph. They flushed and looked
past him into the air .
"Hullo. Fancy meeting you, Ralph."
"W e just been in the forest―"
"―to get wood for the fire―"
"―we got lost last night."
Ralph examined his toes.
"Y ou got lost after the..."
Piggy cleaned his lens.
"After th e feast," said Sam in a stifled voice. Eric nodded. "Y es , after the
feast."
"W e left early ," said Piggy quickly , "because we were tired."
"So did we―"
"―very early―"
"―we were very tired."
Sam touched a scratch on his forehead and then hurriedly took his hand
away . Eric fingered his split lip.
"Y es. W e were very tired," rep eated Sam, "so we left early . W as it a
good―"
The air was he avy with unspoken knowledge. Sam twisted and the
obscene word shot out of him. "―dance?"
Memory of the dance that none of them had attended shook all four boys
convulsively .
"W e left early ."
When R oger cam e to the neck of land that joined the Castle Rock to the
mainland he was not surprised to be challenged. He had reckoned, during
the terri ble night, on finding at least some of the tribe holding out against
the horrors of the island in the safest place.
The voice rang out sharply from on high, where the diminishing crags
were balanced one on another .
"Halt! Who goes there?"
"Roger ."
"Advance, friend."
Roger advanced.
"Y ou could see who I was."
"The chief said we got to challenge everyone."
Roger peered up.
"Y ou couldn't stop me coming if I wanted."
"Couldn't I? Climb up and see."
Roger clambered up the ladder -like clif f.
"Look at this."
A log had been jammed under the topmost rock and another lever under
that. Robert leaned lightly on th e lever and the rock groaned. A full ef fort
would send the rock thundering down to the neck of land. Roger admired.
"He's a proper chief, isn't he?"
Robert nodded.
"He's going to take us hunting."
He jerked his head in the direction of the distant shelters where  a thread
of white smoke climbed up the sky . Roger , sitting on the very edge of the
clif f, loo ked som berly back at the island as he worked with his  fingers at a
loose tooth. His gaze settled on  the top of the distant mountain and Robert
changed the unspoken subject.
"He's going to beat W ilfred."
"What for?"
Robert shook his head doubtfully .
"I do n't know . He didn't say . He got angry and made us tie W ilfred up.
He's been"―he giggled excitedly―"he's been tied for hours, waiting―"
"But didn't the chief say why?"
"I never heard him."
Sitting on the tremendous rock in the torrid sun, Roger received this news
as an illuminatio n. He ceased to  work at his tooth and sat still, assimilating
the poss ibilities of irresponsible authority . Then, without anoth er word, he
climbed down the back of the rocks toward the cave and the rest of the
tribe.
The chief was s itting there, naked to the waist, his face blocked out in
white an d red. The tribe lay in a semicircle before him. The n ewly beaten
and unti ed W ilfred was snif fing noisily in the background. Roger squatted
with the rest.
"T omorrow ," went on the chief, "we shall hunt again."
He pointed at this savage and that with his spear .
"Some o f you will stay here to improve the cave and defend t he gate. I
shall tak e a few hunters with me  and bring back meat. The defenders of the
gate will see that the others don't sneak in."
A s avage raised his hand and the chief turned a bleak, pai nted face
toward him.
"Why should they try to sneak in, Chief?"
The chief was vague but earnest.
"They w ill. The y'll try to spoil things we do. So the watchers at the gate
must be careful. And then―"
The chi ef pause d. They saw a triangle of startling pink dart out, pass
along his lips and vanish again.
"―and then, the beast might try to come in. Y ou remember how he
crawled―"
The semicircle shuddered and muttered in agreement.
"He cam e―disguised. He may come again even though we gave him the
head of our kill to eat. So watch; and be careful."
Stanley lifted his forearm of f the rock and held up an interrogative finger .
"W ell?"
"But didn't we, didn't we―?"
He squirmed and looked down.
"No!"
In the silence that followed, each savage flinched away from his
individual memory .
"No! How could we―kill―it?"
Half-relieved, half-daunted by the implication of further terrors, the
savages murmured again.
"So leav e the mountain alone," said the chief, solemnly , "and give it the
head if you go hunting."
Stanley flicked his finger again.
"I expect the beast disguised itself."
"Perhaps," said the chief. A theological speculation presented itself.
"W e'd better keep on the right side of him, anyhow . Y ou can't tell what he
might do."
The trib e considered this; and th en were shaken, as if by a flow  of wind.
The chief saw the ef fect of his words and stood abruptly .
"But tomorrow we'll hunt and when we've got meat we'll have a feast―"
Bill put up his hand.
"Chief."
"Y es?"
"What'll we use for lighting the fire?"
The chief's blush was hidden by  the white and red clay . Into his uncertain
silence the tribe spilled their murmur once more. Then the chief held up his
hand.
"W e sha ll take fire from the oth ers. Listen. T omorrow we'll hunt and get
meat. T onight I'll go along with two hunters―who'll come?"
Maurice and Roger put up their hands.
"Maurice―"
"Y es, Chief?"
"Where was their fire?"
"Back at the old place by the fire rock."
The chief nodded.
"The rest of you can go to sleep as soon as the sun sets. But us three,
Maurice, Roger  and me, we've  got work to do. W e'll leave just before
sunset―"
Maurice put up his hand.
"But what happens if we meet―"
The chief waved his objection aside.
"W e'll keep along by the sands. Then if he comes we'll do our , our dance
again."
"Only the three of us?"
Again the murmur swelled and died away .
Piggy handed Ralph his glasses and waited to receive back his sight. The
wood w as damp ; and this was the third time they had lighted it. Ralph stood
back, speaking to himself.
"W e don't want another night without fire."
He look ed round guiltily at the three boys standing by . This was the first
time he had admitted the doubl e function of the fire. Certainly one was to
send up a beckoning column of smoke; but the other was to be a  hearth now
and a comfort u ntil they slept. E ric breathed on the wood till it glowed and
sent out  a little flame. A billow of white and yellow smoke reeked up.
Piggy took back his glasses and looked at the smoke with pleasure.
"If only we could make a radio!"
"Or a plane―"
"―or a boat."
Ralph dredged in his fading knowledge of the world.
"W e might get taken prisoner by the Reds."
Eric pushed back his hair .
"They'd be better than―"
He wou ld not name people and Sam finished the sentence for him by
nodding along the beach.
Ralph remembered the ungainly figure on a parachute.
"He said something about a dead man." He flushed painfully at this
admission that he had been pres ent at the dance. He made ur ging motions at
the smoke and with his body . "Don't stop―go on up!"
"Smoke's getting thinner ."
"W e need more wood already , even when it's wet."
"My asthma―"
The response was mechanical.
"Sucks to your ass-mar ."
"If I pull logs, I get my asthma bad. I wish I didn't, Ralph, but there it is."
The thre e boys went into the fo rest and fetched armfuls of rott en wood.
Once more the smoke rose, yellow and thick.
"Let's get something to eat."
T ogether they went to the fruit trees, carrying their spears, saying little,
cramming in haste. When they came out of the forest again the sun was
setting and only embers glowed in the fire, and there was no smoke.
"I can't carry any more wood," said Eric. "I'm tired."
Ralph cleared his throat.
"W e kept the fire going up there."
"Up there it was small. But this has got to be a big one."
Ralph ca rried a fragment to the fire and watched the smoke th at drifted
into the dusk.
"W e've got to keep it going."
Eric flung himself down.
"I'm too tired. And what's the good?"
"Eric!" cried Ralph in a shocked voice. "Don't talk like that!"
Sam knelt by Eric.
"W ell―what is the good?"
Ralph tried indignantly to remember . There was something good about a
fire. Something overwhelmingly good.
"Ralph's told you often enough, " said Piggy moodily . "How else are we
going to be rescued?"
"Of course! If we don't make smoke―"
He squatted before them in the crowding dusk.
"Don't y ou understand? What' s the good of wishing for radios and
boats?"
He held out his hand and twisted the fingers into a fist. "There's only one
thing we  can do to get out of this mess. Anyone can play at hunting, anyone
can get us meat―"
He look ed from face to face. Th en, at the moment of greatest passion and
conviction, that curtain flapped in his head and he for got what he had been
driving at. He knelt there, his fist clenched, gazing solemnly from one to the
other . Then the curtain whisked back.
"Oh, yes. So we've got to make smoke; and more smoke―"
"But we can't keep it going! Look at that!"
The fire was dying on them.
"T wo to mind th e fire," said Ral ph, half to himself, "that's twelve hours a
day ."
"W e can't get any more wood, Ralph―"
"―not in the dark―"
"―not at night―"
"W e can  light it every morning," said Piggy . "Nobody ain't going to see
smoke in the dark."
Sam nodded vigorously .
"It was dif ferent when the fire was―"
"―up there."
Ralph stood up, feeling curiousl y defenseless with the darkness pressing
in.
"Let the fire go then, for tonight."
He l ed the way to the first shelte r , which still stood, though battered. The
bed leaves lay within, dry and noisy to the touch. In the next she lter a littlun
was talk ing in his sleep. The four biguns crept into the shelter an d burrowed
under the leaves. The twins lay  together and Ralph and Piggy at the other
end. For a while there was the continual creak and rustle of leaves as they
tried for comfort.
"Piggy ."
"Y eah?"
"All right?"
"S'pose so."
At length, save for an occasional rustle, the shelter was silent. An oblong
of b lackness relieved with brill iant spangles hung before them and there
was the  hollow sound of surf on the reef. Ralph settled himself for his
nightly game of supposing....
Supposing they could be transported home by jet, then before morning
they wo uld land at that big airfield in W iltshire. They would go by car; no,
for things to be perfect they would go by train; all the way down to Devon
and take that cottage again. The n at the foot of the garden the wild ponies
would come and look over the wall....
Ralph tu rned res tlessly in the le aves. Dartmoor was wild and so  were the
ponies. But the attraction of wildness had gone.
His mind skated to a consider ation of a tamed town where savagery
could not set foot. What could be safer than the bus center with its lamps
and wheels?
All a t on ce, Ralph was dancing round a lamp standard. There w as a bus
crawling out of the bus station, a strange bus....
"Ralph! Ralph!"
"What is it?"
"Don't make a noise like that―"
"Sorry ."
From the darkness of the further end of the shelter came a  dreadful
moaning and they shattered the leaves in their fear . Sam and Eric, locked in
an embrace, were fighting each other .
"Sam! Sam!"
"Hey―Eric!"
Presently all was quiet again.
Piggy spoke softly to Ralph.
"W e got to get out of this."
"What d'you mean?"
"Get rescued."
For the first time that day , and  despite the crowding blackness, Ralph
sniggered.
"I mean it," whispered Piggy . "If we don't get home soon we'll be barmy ."
"Round the bend."
"Bomb happy ."
"Crackers;"
Ralph pushed the damp tendrils of hair out of his eyes.
"Y ou write a letter to your auntie."
Piggy considered this solemnly .
"I don't know where she is now . And I haven't got an envelope and a
stamp. An' there isn't a mailbox. Or a postman."
The suc cess of his tiny joke overcame Ralph. His sniggers  became
uncontrollable, his body jumped and twitched.
Piggy rebuked him with dignity .
"I haven't said anything all that funny ."
Ralph continued to snigger though his chest hurt. His twitchings
exhausted him till he lay , breat hless and woebegone, waiting for the next
spasm. During one of these pauses he was ambushed by sleep.
"Ralph! Y ou been making a noise again. Do be quiet, Ralph―because."
Ralph heaved over among the leaves. He had reason to be thankful that
his dream was broken, for the bus had been nearer and more distinct.
"Why―because?"
"Be quiet―and listen."
Ralph la y down  carefully , to the  accompaniment of a long sigh  from the
leaves. Eric moaned something and then lay still. The darkness, save for the
useless oblong of stars, was blanket-thick.
"I can't hear anything."
"There's something moving outside."
Ralph's head prickled. The soun d of his blood drowned all else and then
subsided.
"I still can't hear anything."
"Listen. Listen for a long time."
Quite clearly and emphatically , and only a yard or so away from the back
of th e shelter , a  stick cracked. The blood roared again in R alph's ears,
confused images  chased each ot her through his mind. A compo site of these
things was prowling round the s helters. He could feel Piggy's h ead against
his shoulder and the convulsive grip of a hand.
"Ralph! Ralph!"
"Shut up and listen."
Desperately , Ralph prayed that the beast would prefer littluns.
A voice whispered horribly outside.
"Piggy―Piggy―"
"It's come!" gasped Piggy . "It's real!"
He clung to Ralph and reached to get his breath.
"Piggy , come outside. I want you, Piggy ."
Ralph's mouth was against Piggy's ear .
"Don't say anything."
"Piggy―where are you, Piggy?"
Something brush ed against the back of the shelter . Piggy kept still for a
moment, then he had his asthma . He arched his back and crashed among the
leaves with his legs. Ralph rolled away from him.
Then there was a vicious snarl ing in the mouth of the shelter and the
plunge and thump of living thing s. Someone tripped over Ralph and Piggy's
corner became a complication of snarls and crashes and flying limbs. Ralph
hit o ut; then he and what seemed like a dozen others were rolli ng over and
over , hit ting, bit ing, scratching. He was torn and jolted, found fingers in his
mouth and bit them. A fist withdrew and came back like a piston, so that the
whole shelter exploded into li ght. Ralph twisted sideways on top of a
writhing body and felt hot breath on his cheek. He began to pound the
mouth below him, using his clenched fist as a hammer; he hit with more
and mor e passio nate hysteria as the face became slippery . A knee jerked up
between his legs and he fell sid eways, busying himself with his pain, and
the fight rolled over him. Then the shelter collapsed with smothering
finality; and the anonymous sha pes fought their way out and through. Dark
figures drew themselves out of the wreckage and flitted away , till the
screams of the littluns and Piggy's gasps were once more audible.
Ralph called out in a quavering voice.
"All you littluns, go to sleep. W e've had a fight with the others. Now go
to sleep."
      Samneric came close and peered at Ralph.
"Are you two all right?"
"I think so―"
"―I got busted."
"So did I. How's Piggy?"
They ha uled Pig gy clear of the wreckage and leaned him again st a tree.
The nigh t was cool and pur ged o f immediate terror . Piggy's breathing was a
little easier .
"Did you get hurt, Piggy?"
"Not much."
"That w as Jack and his hunter s," said Ralph bitterly . "Why can't they
leave us alone?"
"W e gav e them something to thi nk about," said Sam. Honesty compelled
him to go on. "At least you did. I got mixed up with myself in a corner ."
"I ga ve one of 'em what for ," said Ralph, "I smashed him up all right. He
won't want to come and fight us again in a hurry ."
"So did I," said Eric. "When I woke up one was kicking me in the face. I
got an awful bloody face, I think, Ralph. But I did him in the end."
"What did you do?"
"I got my knee up," said Eric with simple pride, "and I hit him with it in
the p ills. Y ou should have heard  him holler! He won't come back in a hurry
either . So we didn't do too badly ."
Ralph m oved su ddenly in the d ark; but then he heard Eric working his
mouth.
"What's the matter?"
"Jus' a tooth loose."
Piggy drew up his legs.
"Y ou all right, Piggy?"
"I thought they wanted the conch."
Ralph tr otted do wn the pale be ach and jumped on to the platform. The
conch still glimmered by the ch ief's seat. He gazed for a moment or two,
then went back to Piggy .
"They didn't take the conch."
"I know . They didn't come for the conch. They came for something else.
Ralph―what am I going to do?"
Far of f along th e bowstave of beach, three figures trotted toward the
Castle Rock. They kept away from the forest and down by the water .
Occasionally the y sang softly; o ccasionally they turned cartwhe els down by
the m oving streak of phosphore scence. The chief led then, trott ing steadily ,
exulting in his achievement. He was a chief now in truth; an d he made
stabbing motion s with his spear . From his left hand dangled Piggy's broken
glasses.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
     
Castle Rock
     
In the short chil l of dawn the four boys gathered round the bl ack smudge
where the fire had been, while Ralph knelt and blew . Grey , feathery ashes
scurried hither and thither at his breath but no spark shone am ong them.
The twins watched anxiously and Piggy sat expressionless behind the
luminous wall of his myopia. Ralph continued to blow till his ears were
singing with the ef fort, but then the first breeze of dawn took the job of f his
hands and blinded him with as hes. He squatted back, swore, and rubbed
water out of his eyes.
"No use."
Eric loo ked dow n at him through a mask of dried blood. Piggy peered in
the general direction of Ralph.
" 'Course it's no use, Ralph. Now we got no fire."
Ralph brought his face within a couple of feet of Piggy's.
"Can you see me?"
"A bit."
Ralph allowed the swollen flap of his cheek to close his eye again.
"They've got our fire."
Rage shrilled his voice.
"They stole it!"
"That's them," said Piggy . "They  blinded me. See? That's Jack Merridew .
Y ou call an assembly , Ralph, we got to decide what to do."
"An assembly for only us?"
"It's all we got. Sam―let me hold on to you."
They went toward the platform.
"Blow the conch," said Piggy . "Blow as loud as you can."
The fore sts re-e choed; and birds lifted, crying out of the treetops, as on
that firs t morning ages ago. Both ways the beach was deserted. Some
littluns c ame fro m the shelters. Ralph sat down on the polished trunk and
the three  others stood before him. He nodded, and Samneric sat down on
the right. Ralph pushed the conch into Piggy's hands. He held the shining
thing carefully and blinked at Ralph.
"Go on, then."
"I just take the conch to say this. I can't see no more and I got to get my
glasses back. A wful things has been done on this island. I voted for you for
chief. He's the o nly one who e ver got anything done. So now you speak,
Ralph, and tell us what. Or else―"
Piggy broke of f, sniveling. Ralph took back the conch as he sat down.
"Just an ordinary fire. Y ou'd thin k we could do that, wouldn't you? Just a
smoke signal so we can be res cued. Are we savages or what?  Only now
there's no signal going up. Ships  may be passing. Do you remember how he
went hunting and the fire went o ut and a ship passed by? And th ey all think
he's bes t as chief. Then there was, there was... that's his fau lt, too. If it
hadn't b een for him it would n ever have happened. Now Piggy can't see,
and they came, stealing―" Ralph's voice ran up "―at night, in darkness,
and stol e our fire. They stole it.  W e'd have given them fire if th ey'd asked.
But they  stole it and the signal's out and we can't ever be rescued . Don't you
see wha t I mean? W e'd have given them fire for themselves only they stole
it. I―"
He paused lamely as the curtain  flickered in his brain. Piggy held out his
hands for the conch.
"What y ou goin' to do, Ralph? This is jus' talk without decidin g. I want
my glasses."
"I'm tryi ng to think. Supposing we go, looking like we used to , washed
and hair brushed―after all we aren't savages really and being rescued isn't a
game―"
He opened the flap of his cheek and looked at the twins.
"W e could smarten up a bit and then go―"
"W e ought to take spears," said Sam. "Even Piggy ."
"―because we may need them."
"Y ou haven't got the conch!"
Piggy held up the shell.
"Y ou can take s pears if you wan t but I shan't. What's the good? I'll have
to be  led like a d og, anyhow . Y es, laugh. Go on, laugh. There's them on this
island as would laugh at anythi ng. And what happened? What's grownups
goin' to think? Y oung Simon was murdered. And there was that other kid
what had a mark on his face. Who's seen him since we first come here?"
"Piggy! Stop a minute!"
"I got the conch. I'm going to that Jack Merridew an' tell him, I am."
"Y ou'll get hurt."
"What c an he do more than he h as? I'll tell him what's what. Y ou let me
carry the conch, Ralph. I'll show him the one thing he hasn't got."
Piggy p aused fo r a moment an d peered round at the dim figures. The
shape of the old assembly , trodden in the grass, listened to him.
"I'm goi ng to him with this con ch in my hands. I'm going to ho ld it out.
Look, I' m goin' to say , you're  stronger than I am and you haven't got
asthma. Y ou can see, I'm goin' to say , and with both eyes. But I don't ask for
my glasses back, not as a favor . I don't ask you to be a sport, I'll say , not
because you're strong, but because what's right's right. Give me my glasses,
I'm going to say―you got to!"
Piggy en ded, flushed and trembling. He pushed the conch quickly into
Ralph's hands as though in a hurry to be rid of it and wiped the tears from
his e yes. The green light was gentle about them and the conch la y at Ralph's
feet, fragile and white. A single drop of water that had escaped Piggy's
fingers now flashed on the delicate curve like a star .
At last Ralph sat up straight and drew back his hair .
"All right. I mean―you can try if you like. W e'll go with you."
"He'll be painted," said Sam, timidly . "Y ou know how he'll be―"
"―he won't think much of us―"
"―if he gets waxy we've had it―"
Ralph scowled at Sam. Dimly he remembered something Simon had said
to him once, by the rocks.
"Don't be silly ," he said. And then he added quickly , "Let's go."
He held out the conch to Piggy who flushed, this time with pride.
"Y ou must carry it."
"When we're ready I'll carry it―"
Piggy so ught in his mind for words to convey his passionate w illingness
to carry the conch against all odds.
"I don't mind. I'll be glad, Ralph, only I'll have to be led."
Ralph put the conch back on the shining log.
"W e better eat and then get ready ."
They ma de thei r way to the devastated fruit trees. Piggy was helped to
his food  and found some by to uch. While they ate, Ralph thought of the
afternoon.
"W e'll be like we were. W e'll wash―"
Sam gulped down a mouthful and protested.
"But we bathe every day!"
Ralph looked at the filthy objects before him and sighed.
"W e ought to comb our hair . Only it's too long."
"I've got both so cks left in the shelter ," said Eric, "so we could pull them
over our heads like caps, sort of."
"W e could find some stuf f," said Piggy , "and tie your hair back."
"Like a girl!"
"No. 'Course not."
"Then we must go as we are," said Ralph, "and they won't be any better ."
Eric made a detaining gesture.
"But the y'll be painted! Y ou know how it is." The others nodd ed. They
understood only  too well the liberation into savagery that the  concealing
paint brought.
"W ell, we won't be painted," said Ralph, "because we aren't savages."
Samneric looked at each other .
"All the same―"
Ralph shouted.
"No paint!"
He tried to remember .
"Smoke," he said, "we want smoke."
He turned on the twins fiercely .
"I said 'smoke'! W e've got to have smoke."
There w as silen ce, except for th e multitudinous murmur of the bees. As
last Piggy spoke, kindly .
" ' Course we ha ve. 'Cos the sm oke's a signal and we can't be rescued if
we don't have smoke."
"I knew that!" shouted Ralph. He pulled his arm away from Piggy . "Are
you suggesting- -?"
"I'm jus'  saying what you always say ," said Piggy hastily . "I'd th ought for
a moment―"
"I hadn't," said Ralph loudly . "I knew it all the time. I hadn't for gotten."
Piggy nodded propitiatingly .
"Y ou're chief, Ralph. Y ou remember everything."
"I hadn't for gotten."
" 'Course not."
The twins were examining Ralph curiously , as though they were seeing
him for the first time.
They se t of f along the beach in  formation. Ralph went first, l imping a
little, his spear c arried over one shoulder . He saw things partially , through
the trem ble of the heat haze ove r the flashing sands, and his own long hair
and inju ries. Behind him came the twins, worried now for a w hile but full
of u nquenchabl e vitality . They said little but trailed the butts of their
wooden spears; for Piggy had found that, by looking down and shielding his
tired sight from the sun, he could just see these moving along t he sand. He
walked between  the trailing b utts, therefore, the conch held carefully
between his two hands. The boys made a compact little group that moved
over the beach, four plate-like shadows dancing and mingling beneath
them. T here wa s no sign left of the storm, and the beach was swept clean
like a blade that has been scou red. The sky and the mountain  were at an
immense distance, shimmering in the heat; and the reef was lifted by
mirage, floating in a kind of silver pool halfway up the sky .
They pa ssed the  place where the  tribe had danced. The charred sticks still
lay on the rocks where the rai n had quenched them but the sand by the
water w as smoo th again. They passed this in silence. No one d oubted that
the tribe would b e found at the Castle Rock and when they cam e in sight of
it th ey s topped with one accord.  The densest tangle on the island, a mass of
twisted stems, black and green and impenetrable, lay on their left and tall
grass swayed before them. Now Ralph went forward.
Here was the crushed grass whe re they had all lain when he ha d gone to
prospect. There was the neck o f land, the ledge skirting the rock, up there
were the red pinnacles.
Sam touched his arm.
"Smoke."
There was a tiny  smudge of smo ke wavering into the air on the other side
of the rock.
"Some fire―I don't think."
Ralph turned.
"What are we hiding for?"
He s tepped through the screen o f grass on to the little open spac e that led
to the narrow neck.
"Y ou tw o follow behind. I'll go first, then Piggy a pace behind me. Keep
your spears ready ."
Piggy pe ered anxiously into the luminous veil that hung between  him and
the world.
"Is it safe? Ain't there a clif f? I can hear the sea."
"Y ou keep right close to me."
Ralph moved forward on to the neck. He kicked a stone and it bounded
into the water . Then the sea su cked down, revealing a red, w eedy square
forty feet beneath Ralph's left arm.
"Am I safe?" quavered Piggy . "I feel awful―"
High above them from the pinnacles came a sudden shout and then an
imitation war -cry that was answered by a dozen voices from  behind the
rock.
"Give me the conch and stay still."
"Halt! Who goes there?"
Ralph bent back his head and glimpsed Roger's dark face at the top.
"Y ou can see who I am!" he shouted. "Stop being silly!"
He put the conch to his lips and began to blow . Savages appeared,
painted out of r ecognition, edgi ng round the ledge toward the neck. They
carried s pears and disposed themselves to defend the entrance. Ralph went
on blowing and ignored Piggy's terrors.
Roger was shouting.
"Y ou mind out―see?"
At length Ralph took his lips aw ay and paused to get his breath back. His
first words were a gasp, but audible.
"―calling an assembly ."
The savages guarding the neck muttered among themselves but made no
motion. Ralph walked forward s a couple of steps. A voice whispered
ur gently behind him.
"Don't leave me, Ralph."
"Y ou kneel down," said Ralph sideways, "and wait till I come back."
He stood halfway along the neck and gazed at the savages intently . Freed
by the paint, they had tied their hair back and were more comf ortable than
he was. Ralph made a resolutio n to tie his own back afterwards. Indeed he
felt like  telling them to wait and doing it there and then; but that was
impossible. The  savages sniggered a bit and one gestured at Ra lph with his
spear . H igh abov e, Roger took his hands of f the lever and leane d out to see
what was going on. The boys on the neck stood in a pool o f their own
shadow , diminished to shaggy heads. Piggy crouched, his back shapeless as
a sack.
"I'm calling an assembly ."
Silence.
Roger to ok up a small stone and flung it between the twins, aiming to
miss. They started and Sam only just kept his footing. Some source of
power began to pulse in Roger's body .
Ralph spoke again, loudly .
"I'm calling an assembly ."
He ran his eye over them.
"Where's Jack?"
The gro up of boys stirred and c onsulted. A painted face spoke with the
voice of Robert.
"He's hunting. And he said we weren't to let you in."
"I've come to see about the fire," said Ralph, "and about Piggy's specs."
The gro up in front of him shifted and laughter shivered outwa rds from
among them, light, excited laughter that went echoing among the tall rocks.
A voice spoke from behind Ralph.
"What do you want?"
The twin s made  a bolt past Ralph and got between him and the entry . He
turned q uickly . Jack, identifiable  by personality and red hair , was advancing
from the forest. A hunter crouch ed on either side. All three were masked in
black an d green.  Behind them o n the grass the headless and paunched body
of a sow lay where they had dropped it.
Piggy wailed.
"Ralph! Don't leave me!"
W ith lud icrous care he embraced the rock, pressing himself to it above
the sucking sea. The sniggering of the savages became a loud derisive jeer .
Jack shouted above the noise.
"Y ou go away , Ralph. Y ou keep to your end. This is my end and my tribe.
Y ou leave me alone."
The jeering died away .
"Y ou pinched Piggy's specs," s aid Ralph, breathlessly . "Y ou've got to
give them back."
"Got to? Who says?"
Ralph's temper blazed out.
"I sa y! Y ou voted for me for chief. Didn't you hear the conch? Y ou
played a dirty trick―we'd have given you fire if you'd asked for it―"
The blood was flowing in his cheeks and the bunged-up eye throbbed.
"Y ou could have had fire whenever you wanted. But you didn't. Y ou
came sneaking up like a thief and stole Piggy's glasses!"
"Say that again!"
"Thief! Thief!"
Piggy screamed.
"Ralph! Mind me!"
Jack made a rush and stabbed at Ralph's chest with his spear . Ralph
sensed the position of the weapon from the glimpse he caught of Jack's arm
and put the thrust aside with hi s own butt. Then he brought the end round
and caug ht Jack  a stinger across the ear . They were chest to chest, breathing
fiercely , pushing and glaring.
"Who's a thief?"
"Y ou are!"
Jack wrenched free and swung at Ralph with his spear . By common
consent they were using the spears as sabers now , no longer daring the
lethal points. The blow struc k Ralph's spear and slid down, to fall
agonizingly on his fingers. Then they were apart once more, their positions
reversed, Jack toward the Castle  Rock and Ralph on the outside toward the
island.
Both boys were breathing very heavily .
"Come on then―"
"Come on―"
T ruculently they squared up to each other but kept just out of fighting
distance.
"Y ou come on and see what you get!"
"Y ou come on―"
Piggy cl utching the ground was trying to attract Ralph's attention. Ralph
moved, bent down, kept a wary eye on Jack.
"Ralph―remember what we came for . The fire. My specs."
Ralph nodded. He relaxed his fighting muscles, stood easily and
grounded the butt of his spear . Jack watched him inscrutably through his
paint. Ralph glanced up at the pinnacles, then toward the group of savages.
"Listen. W e've come to say this. First you've got to give bac k Piggy's
specs. If he hasn't got them he can't see. Y ou aren't playing the game―"
The tribe of pa inted savages giggled and Ralph's mind faltered. He
pushed h is hair up and gazed at the green and black mask before  him, trying
to remember what Jack looked like.
Piggy whispered.
"And the fire."
"Oh yes. Then about the fire. I  say this again. I've been saying it ever
since we dropped in."
He h eld out his  spear and poin ted at the savages. "Y our only hope is
keeping a signal fire going as long as there's light to see. Th en maybe a
ship'll notice the smoke and co me and rescue us and take us home. But
without that smoke we've got to  wait till some ship comes by a ccident. W e
might wait years; till we were old―"
The shivering, silvery , unreal l aughter of the savages sprayed out and
echoed away . A gust of rage shook Ralph. His voice cracked.
"Don't you understand, you pain ted fools? Sam, Eric, Piggy and  me―we
aren't enough. W e tried to keep the fire going, but we couldn't. And then
you, playing at hunting...."
He pointed past them to where the trickle of smoke dispersed in the
pearly air .
"Look a t that! Call that a signal fire? That's a cooking fire. Now you'll eat
and there'll be n o smoke. Don't you understand? There may b e a ship out
there―"
He paus ed, defeated by the silence and the painted anonymi ty of the
group g uarding the entry . Jack opened a pink mouth and addressed
Samneric, who were between him and his tribe.
"Y ou two. Get back."
No o ne answered him. The twi ns, puzzled, looked at each oth er; while
Piggy , reassured  by the cessation of violence, stood up car efully . Jack
glanced back at Ralph and then at the twins.
"Grab them!"
No one moved. Jack shouted angrily .
"I said 'grab them'!"
The painted group moved round Samneric nervously and unhandily .
Once more the silvery laughter scattered.
Samneric protested out of the heart of civilization.
"Oh, I say!"
"―honestly!"
Their spears were taken from them.
"T ie them up!"
Ralph cried out hopelessly against the black and green mask.
"Jack!"
"Go on. T ie them."
Now the painted group felt the otherness of Samneric, felt the power in
their ow n hands. They felled t he twins clumsily and excitedly . Jack was
inspired. He knew that Ralph would attempt a rescue. He struck in a
humming circle behind him and  Ralph only just parried the blow . Beyond
them the  tribe and the twins were a loud and writhing heap. Piggy crouched
again. Then the twins lay , astonished, and the tribe stood round them. Jack
turned to Ralph and spoke between his teeth.
"See? They do what I want."
There w as silen ce again. The tw ins lay , inexpertly tied up, and  the tribe
watched Ralph to see what he would do. He numbered them through his
fringe, glimpsed the inef fectual smoke.
His temper broke. He screamed at Jack.
"Y ou're a beast and a swine and a bloody , bloody thief!"
He char ged.
Jack, kn owing this was the crisis, char ged too. They met with a jolt and
bounced apart. Jack swung with his fist at Ralph and caught him on the ear .
Ralph hit Jack i n the stomach a nd made him grunt. Then they were facing
each oth er again , panting and fu rious, but unnerved by each other's ferocity .
They became aware of the noise that was the background to this fight, the
steady shrill cheering of the tribe behind them.
Piggy's voice penetrated to Ralph.
"Let me speak."
He was standing  in the dust of the fight, and as the tribe saw his intention
the shrill cheer changed to a steady booing.
Piggy h eld up the conch and the booing sagged a little, then came up
again to strength.
"I got the conch!"
He shouted.
"I tell you, I got the conch!"
Surprisingly , the re was silence n ow; the tribe were curious to hear what
amusing thing he might have to say .
Silence and pause; but in the sil ence a curious air -noise, close b y Ralph's
head. H e gave it half his attention―and there it was again; a f aint "Zup!"
Someone was throwing stones: R oger was dropping them, his one hand still
on the lever . Below him, Ralph was a shock of hair and Piggy a bag of fat.
"I got this to sa y . Y ou're acting like a crowd of kids." The booing rose
and died again as Piggy lifted the white, magic shell.
"Which is better―to be a pack of painted Indians like you are, or to be
sensible like Ralph is?"
A great clamor rose among the savages. Piggy shouted again.
"Which is better―to have rules and agree, or to hunt and kill?"
Again the clamor and again―"Zup!"
Ralph shouted against the noise.
"Which is better , law and rescue, or hunting and breaking things up?"
Now Jack was yelling too and  Ralph could no longer make himself
heard. Ja ck had backed right aga inst the tribe and they were a so lid mass of
menace that bristled with spears. The intention of a char ge was forming
among them; they were working  up to it and the neck would be swept clear .
Ralph stood facing them, a little  to one side, his spear ready . B y him stood
Piggy still holding out the talisman, the fragile, shining beauty of the shell.
The stor m of sound beat at them , an incantation of hatred. Hig h overhead,
Roger , w ith a sense of delirious abandonment, leaned all his weight on the
lever .
Ralph heard the great rock before he saw it. He was aware of a jolt in the
earth tha t came to him through t he soles of his feet, and the bre aking sound
of stone s at the top of the clif f. Then the monstrous red thi ng bounded
across the neck and he flung himself flat while the tribe shrieked.
The roc k struck  Piggy a glanc ing blow from chin to knee; the conch
exploded into a thousand white f ragments and ceased to exist. Piggy , saying
nothing, with no time for even a grunt, traveled through the air sideways
from the rock, turning over as he went. The rock bounded tw ice and was
lost in the forest. Piggy fell forty feet and landed on his back  across the
square red rock in the sea. His head opened and stuf f came out  and turned
red. Pigg y's arm s and legs twitched a bit, like a pig's after it has been killed.
Then the sea bre athed again in a  long, slow sigh, the water boiled white and
pink over the rock; and when it went, sucking back again, the body of Piggy
was gone.
This tim e the silence was complete. Ralph's lips formed a word but no
sound came.
Suddenly Jack bounded out from the tribe and began screaming wildly .
"See? See? That's what you'll get! I meant that! There isn't a tribe for you
any more! The conch is gone―"
He ran forward, stooping.
"I'm chief!"
V iciously , with full intention, he  hurled his spear at Ralph. The point tore
the skin  and flesh over Ralph's ribs, then sheared of f and fell i n the water .
Ralph stumbled, feeling not pain but panic, and the tribe, screaming now
like the chief, began to advance . Another spear , a bent one that would not
fly s traight, went past his face and one fell from on high where  Roger was.
The twi ns lay hidden behind t he tribe and the anonymous devils' faces
swarmed across  the neck. Ralph turned and ran. A great noise as of sea
gulls rose behind him. He obeyed an instinct that he did no t know he
possessed and swerved over the  open space so that the spears went wide.
He saw the headless body of t he sow and jumped in time. Then he was
crashing through foliage and small boughs and was hidden by the forest.
The chief stopped by the pig, turned and held up his hands.
"Back! Back to the fort!"
Presently the tribe returned noisily to the neck where Roger joined them.
The chief spoke to him angrily .
"Why aren't you on watch?"
Roger looked at him gravely .
"I just came down―"
The han gman's horror clung round him. The chief said no more to him
but looked down at Samneric.
"Y ou got to join the tribe."
"Y ou lemme go―"
"―and me."
The chie f snatch ed one of the few spears that were left and poked Sam in
the ribs.
"What d 'you me an by it, eh?" said the chief fiercely . "What d'you mean
by coming with spears? What d'you mean by not joining my tribe?"
The prodding became rhythmic. Sam yelled.
"That's not the way ."
Roger edged past the chief, on ly just avoiding pushing him with his
shoulder . The yelling ceased, an d Samneric lay looking up in quiet terror .
Roger advanced upon them as one wielding a nameless authority .
CHAPTER TWEL VE
     
Cry of the Hunters
     
Ralph lay in a covert, wondering about his wounds. The bruised flesh was
inches in  diameter over his right ribs, with a swollen and bloody  scar where
the spear had hit him. His hair was full of dirt and tapped like the tendrils of
a cre eper . All ov er he was scratc hed and bruised from his flight through the
forest. By the time his breathing was normal again, he had worked out that
bathing these injuries would ha ve to wait. How could you listen for naked
feet if you were  splashing in w ater? How could you be safe by the little
stream or on the open beach?
Ralph li stened. He was not real ly far from the Castle Rock, and during
the first panic h e had thought he heard sounds of pursuit. But the hunters
had only sneaked into the fringe s of the greenery , retrieving spe ars perhaps,
and then had rushed back to the sunny rock as if terrified of the darkness
under th e leaves . He had even glimpsed one of them, striped brown, black,
and red,  and had judged that it w as Bill. But really , thought Ral ph, this was
not Bill. This was a savage whose image refused to blend with that ancient
picture of a boy in shorts and shirt.
The afternoon died away; the c ircular spots of sunlight moved steadily
over gre en frond s and brown fiber but no sound came from behind the rock.
At last Ralph wormed out of the ferns and sneaked forward to the edge of
that imp enetrable thicket that fronted the neck of land. He peered with
elaborate caution between branc hes at the edge and could see R obert sitting
on guard at the top of the clif f. He held a spear in his left ha nd and was
tossing up a pe bble and catching it again with the right. Be hind him a
column of smoke rose thickly , so that Ralph's nostrils flared and his mouth
dribbled. He wiped his nose and mouth with the back of his hand and for
the first time sin ce the morning felt hungry . The tribe must be s itting round
the gutted pig, watching the fat ooze and burn among the ashes. They would
be intent.
Another figure, an unrecognizab le one, appeared by Robert and gave him
something, then turned and wen t back behind the rock. Robert laid his spear
on th e ro ck beside him and began to gnaw between his raised h ands. So the
feast was beginning and the watchman had been given his portion.
Ralph sa w that for the time being he was safe. He limped away through
the fruit  trees, drawn by the th ought of the poor food yet bitter when he
remembered the feast. Feast today , and then tomorrow ....
He ar gued unconvincingly that they would let him alone, perhaps even
make an  outlaw  of him. But then the fatal unreasoning knowled ge came to
him aga in. The breaking of the  conch and the deaths of Piggy and Simon
lay over  the island like a vapor . These painted savages would go  further and
further . Then there was that in definable connection between himself and
Jack; who therefore would never let him alone; never .
He paused, sun-flecked, holding up a bough, prepared to duck under it. A
spasm of terror set him shaking and he cried aloud.
"No. They're not as bad as that. It was an accident."
He ducked under the bough, ran clumsily , then stopped and listened.
He cam e to the smashed acres  of fruit and ate greedily . He saw two
littluns a nd, not having any idea of his own appearance, wondered why they
screamed and ran.
When he  had eaten he went tow ard the beach. The sunlight wa s slanting
now into  the palms by the wrecked shelter . There was the platform and the
pool. Th e best thing to do was t o ignore this leaden feeling abo ut the heart
and rely  on their common sense, their daylight sanity . Now that the tribe
had eaten, the th ing to do was to try again. And anyway , he c ouldn't stay
here all night in  an empty shelt er by the deserted platform. His flesh crept
and he shivered in the evening s un. No fire; no smoke; no rescue. He turned
and limped away through the forest toward Jack's end of the island.
The slan ting sticks of sunlight were lost among the branches. At length
he came  to a cl earing in the fo rest where rock prevented vegetation from
growing. Now it was a pool of shadows and Ralph nearly flung himself
behind a  tree when he saw something standing in the center; but then he
saw that the white face was bone and that the pig's skull grin ned at him
from the top of a stick. He wal ked slowly into the middle of the clearing
and look ed steadily at the skull that gleamed as white as ever th e conch had
done and seemed to jeer at him  cynically . An inquisitive ant was busy in
one of the eye sockets but otherwise the thing was lifeless.
Or was it?
Little pr ickles of sensation ran up and down his back. He stood,  the skull
about on  a level with his face, and held up his hair with two hands. The
teeth gri nned, the empty sockets seemed to hold his gaze masterfully and
without ef fort.
What was it?
The sku ll regard ed Ralph like o ne who knows all the answers and won't
tell. A sick fear and rage swept him. Fiercely he hit out at the filthy thing in
front of him that bobbed like a toy and came back, still grinn ing into his
face, so that he lashed and cried out in loathing. Then he was  licking his
bruised knuckles and looking at the bare stick, while the skull lay in two
pieces, i ts grin now six feet acr oss. He wrenched the quivering stick from
the crack and held it as a spear between him and the white pieces. Then he
backed away , keeping his face to the skull that lay grinning at the sky .
When th e green  glow had gon e from the horizon and night was fully
accomplished, Ralph came again to the thicket in front of the Castle Rock.
Peeping through , he could see that the height was still occupied, and
whoever it was up there had a spear at the ready .
He k nelt among the shadows a nd felt his isolation bitterly . They were
savages it was true; but they were human, and the ambushing fears of the
deep night were coming on.
Ralph m oaned f aintly . T ired though he was, he could not relax and fall
into a well of sleep for fear of the tribe. Might it not be possible to walk
boldly in to the fort, say― "I've got pax," laugh lightly and sleep  among the
others? Pretend they were still boys, schoolboys who had said , "Sir , yes,
Sir"―and worn caps? Daylight might have answered yes; but darkness and
the horro rs of death said no. L ying there in the darkness, he knew  he was an
outcast.
" 'Cos I had some sense."
He rubb ed his cheek along his forearm, smelling the acrid scent of salt
and sweat and the staleness of dirt. Over to the left, the wav es of ocean
were breathing, sucking down, then boiling back over the rock.
There were sounds coming from behind the Castle Rock. Listening
carefully , detaching his mind from the swing of the sea, Ralph could make
out a familiar rhythm.
" Kill the beast! Cut his thr oat! Spill his blood! "
The trib e was dancing. Somewh ere on the other side of this ro cky wall
there wo uld be a dark circle, a glowing fire, and meat. They would be
savoring food and the comfort of safety .
A no ise nearer a t hand made him  quiver . Savages were clambering up the
Castle R ock, rig ht up to the top, and he could hear voices. He sneaked
forward a few yards and saw the shape at the top of the rock change and
enlar ge. There were only two bo ys on the island who moved or talked like
that.
Ralph put his he ad down on his forearms and accepted this new fact like
a wound. Samneric were part of the tribe now . They were guarding the
Castle Rock against him. The re was no chance of rescuing them and
building up an outlaw tribe at the other end of the island. Samneric were
savages like the rest; Piggy was dead, and the conch smashed to powder .
At l ength the g uard climbed down. The two that remained seemed
nothing more than a dark extension of the rock. A star appe ared behind
them and was momentarily eclipsed by some movement.
Ralph ed ged forward, feeling his way over the uneven surface as though
he were blind. T here were miles of vague water at his right and the restless
ocean lay under his left hand, as awful as the shaft of a pit. Every minute
the water breathed round the death rock and flowered into a field of
whiteness. Ralph  crawled until he found the ledge of the entry i n his grasp.
The loo kouts were immediately above him and he could see the end of a
spear projecting over the rock.
He called very gently .
"Samneric―"
There w as no reply . T o carry he  must speak louder; and this would rouse
those str iped an d inimical creatures from their feasting by the fire. He set
his teeth and started to climb, finding the holds by touch. The stick that had
supported a skull hampered him but he would not be parted from his only
weapon. He was nearly level with the twins before he spoke again.
"Samneric―"
He h eard a cry and a flurry fro m the rock. The twins had grabbed each
other and were gibbering.
"It's me. Ralph."
T errified that they would run and give the alarm, he hauled h imself up
until his head an d shoulders stuck over the top. Far below his armpit he saw
the luminous flowering round the rock.
"It's only me. Ralph."
At length they bent forward and peered in his face.
"W e thought it was―"
"―we didn't know what it was―"
"―we thought―"
Memory of their new and shameful loyalty came to them. Eric was silent
but Sam tried to do his duty .
"Y ou got to go, Ralph. Y ou go away now―"
He wagged his spear and essayed fierceness.
"Y ou shove of f. See?"
Eric nod ded agr eement and jabbed his spear in the air . Ralph l eaned on
his arms and did not go.
"I came to see you two."
His voice was thick. His throat was hurting him now though it had
received no wound.
"I came to see you two―"
W ords could not express the dull pain of these things. He f ell silent,
while the vivid stars were spilt and danced all ways.
Sam shifted uneasily .
"Honest, Ralph, you'd better go."
Ralph looked up again.
"Y ou two aren't painted. How can you―? If it were light―"
If it wer e light shame would burn them at admitting these thing s. But the
night wa s dark.  Eric took up; and then the twins started their antiphonal
speech.
"Y ou got to go because it's not safe―"
"―they made us. They hurt us―"
"Who? Jack?"
"Oh no―"
They bent to him and lowered their voices.
"Push of f, Ralph―"
"―it's a tribe―"
"―they made us―"
"―we couldn't help it―"
When Ralph spoke again his voice was low , and seemed breathless.
"What have I done? I liked him―and I wanted us to be rescued―"
Again the stars spilled about the sky . Eric shook his head, earnestly .
"Listen, Ralph. Never mind what's sense. That's gone―"
"Never mind about the chief―"
"―you got to go for your own good."
"The chief and Roger―"
"―yes, Roger―"
"They hate you, Ralph. They're going to do you."
"They're going to hunt you tomorrow ."
"But why?"
"I dunno. And Ralph, Jack, the chief, says it'll be dangerous―"
"―and we've got to be careful and throw our spears like at a pig."
"W e're going to spread out in a line across the island―"
"―we're going forward from this end―"
"―until we find you."
"W e've got to give signals like this."
Eric rais ed his head and achieved a faint ululation by beating on  his open
mouth. Then he glanced behind him nervously .
"Like that―"
"―only louder , of course."
"But I'v e done nothing," whispered Ralph, ur gently . "I only wanted to
keep up a fire!"
He p aused for a  moment, thinking miserably of the morrow . A matter of
overwhelming importance occurred to him.
"What are you―?"
He could not bring himself to  be specific at first; but then fear and
loneliness goaded him.
"When they find me, what are they going to do?"
The twins were silent. Beneath him, the death rock flowered again.
"What are they―oh God! I'm hungry―"
The towering rock seemed to sway under him.
"W ell―what―?"
The twins answered his question indirectly .
"Y ou got to go now , Ralph."
"For your own good."
"Keep away . As far as you can."
"W on't you come with me? Three of us―we'd stand a chance."
After a moment's silence, Sam spoke in a strangled voice.
"Y ou don't know Roger . He's a terror ."
"And the chief―they're both―"
"―terrors―"
"―only Roger―"
Both boys froze. Someone was climbing toward them from the tribe.
"He's coming to see if we're keeping watch. Quick, Ralph!"
As he prepared to let himself d own the clif f, Ralph snatched a t the last
possible advantage to be wrung out of this meeting.
"I'll lie up close;  in that thicket down there," he whispered, "so k eep them
away from it. They'll never think to look so close―"
The footsteps were still some distance away .
"Sam―I'm going to be all right, aren't I?"
The twins were silent again.
"Here!" said Sam suddenly . "T ake this―"
Ralph felt a chunk of meat pushed against him and grabbed it.
"But what are you going to do when you catch me?"
Silence above. He sounded silly  to himself. He lowered himself down the
rock.
"What are you going to do―?"
From the top of the towering rock came the incomprehensible reply .
"Roger sharpened a stick at both ends."
Roger sh arpened a stick at both ends. Ralph tried to attach a meaning to
this but could not. He used all the bad words he could think of in a fit of
temper that passed into yawning. How long could you go without sleep? He
yearned for a bed and sheets―but the only whiteness here was the slow
spilt milk, luminous round the rock forty feet below , where Piggy had
fallen. Piggy was everywhere, was on this neck, was become  terrible in
darkness and death.
If P iggy were to come back now out of the water , with his empty
head―Ralph wh impered and yawned like a littlun. The stick in his hand
became a crutch on which he reeled.
Then he tensed again. There were voices raised on the top of the Castle
Rock. Samneric were ar guing with someone. But the ferns and the grass
were near . That was the place to  be in, hidden, and next to the thicket that
would serve for tomorrow's hideout. Here―and his hands touched
grass―was a place to be in for t he night, not far from the tribe, so that if the
horrors o f the supernatural emer ged one could at least mix with humans for
the time being, even if it meant...
What di d it mean? A stick sharpened at both ends. What was there in
that? They had thrown spears and missed; all but one. Perhaps they would
miss next time, too.
He squa tted dow n in the tall grass, remembered the meat that Sam had
given him, and b egan to tear at it ravenously . While he was eatin g, he heard
fresh no ises―cries of pain from Samneric, cries of panic, angry voices.
What di d it mean? Someone besides himself was in trouble, for at least one
of the twins was catching it. Th en the voices passed away down the rock
and he ceased to think of them. He felt with his hands and found cool,
delicate fronds backed against th e thicket. Here then was the night's lair . At
first light he w ould creep into the thicket, squeeze between the twisted
stems, ensconce  himself so deep that only a crawler like himself could
come th rough, a nd that crawler would be jabbed. There he would sit, and
the s earch would pass him by , and the cordon waver on, ululatin g along the
island, and he would be free.
He pull ed himself between the ferns, tunneling in. He laid the stick
beside him, and huddled himself down in the blackness. One must
remember to wake at first light,  in order to diddle the savages―and he did
not kno w how quickly sleep came and hurled him down a d ark interior
slope.
He was awake before his eyes were open, listening to a noise  that was
near . He opened an eye, found the mold an inch or so from his face and his
fingers g ripped i nto it, light filtering between the fronds of fern. He had just
time to realize that the age-long nightmares of falling and death were past
and that the morning was come , when he heard the sound again. It was an
ululation over by the seashore―  and now the next savage answered and the
next. The cry swept by him across the narrow end of the island from sea to
lagoon, like the cry of a flyin g bird. He took no time to consider but
grabbed his sharp stick and wriggled back among the ferns. W ithin seconds
he was worming his way into t he thicket; but not before he had glimpsed
the legs of a savage coming toward him. The ferns were th umped and
beaten a nd he heard legs moving in the long grass. The savage, whoever he
was, ulu lated tw ice; and the cry  was repeated in both direction s, then died
away . Ralph crouched still, tangled in the ferns, and for a time he heard
nothing.
At last he examined the thicket itself. Certainly no one could attack him
here―and moreover he had a stroke of luck. The great rock that had killed
Piggy ha d boun ded into this thi cket and bounced there, right in  the center ,
making a smashed space a few feet in extent each way . When Ralph had
wriggled into this he felt secure, and clever . He sat down caref ully among
the s mashed stems and waited for the hunt to pass. Looking up between the
leaves h e caugh t a glimpse of something red. That must be th e top of the
Castle Rock, distant and unmenacing. He composed himself triumphantly ,
to hear the sounds of the hunt dying away .
Y et no one made a sound; and a s the minutes passed, in the green shade,
his feeling of triumph faded.
At last he heard a voice―Jack's voice, but hushed.
"Are you certain?"
The savage addressed said nothing. Perhaps he made a gesture.
Roger spoke.
"If you're fooling us―"
Immediately after this, there came a gasp, and a squeal of pain. Ralph
crouched instinc tively . One of th e twins was there, outside the thicket, with
Jack and Roger .
"Y ou're sure he meant in there?"
The twin moaned faintly and then squealed again.
"He meant he'd hide in there?"
"Y es―yes―oh―!"
Silver laughter scattered among the trees.
So they knew .
Ralph picked up his stick and prepared for battle. But what could they
do? It would ta ke them a week  to break a path through the thicket; and
anyone w ho wo rmed his way in would be helpless. He felt the point of his
spear with his th umb and grinned without amusement. Whoev er tried that
would be stuck, squealing like a pig.
They were going away , back to the tower rock. He could hear feet
moving and then someone sniggered. There came again that high, bird-like
cry that swept along the line. So some were still watching f or him; but
some―?
There was a lon g, breathless silence. Ralph found that he had bark in his
mouth from the gnawed spear . He stood and peered upwards to the Castle
Rock.
As he did so, he heard Jack's voice from the top.
"Heave! Heave! Heave!"
The red  rock that he could see at the top of the clif f vanished like a
curtain, and he could see figur es and blue sky . A moment later the earth
jolted, th ere was a rushing sound in the air , and the top of the thicket was
cuf fed as with a gigantic hand. The rock bounded on, thu mping and
smashing toward  the beach, whi le a shower of broken twigs and leaves fell
on him. Beyond the thicket, the tribe was cheering.
Silence again.
Ralph put his fingers in his mouth and bit them. There was only one other
rock up there th at they might co nceivably move; but that was half as big as
a cottag e, big as a car , a tank . He visualized its probable progress with
agonizing clearness―that one would start slowly , drop from ledge to ledge,
trundle across the neck like an outsize steamroller .
"Heave! Heave! Heave!"
Ralph p ut down  his spear , then picked it up again. He pushed his hair
back irritably , took two hasty steps across the little space and then came
back. He stood looking at the broken ends of branches.
Still silence.
He caug ht sight of the rise and f all of his diaphragm and was surprised to
see how quickly he was breathing. Just left of center his heart-beats were
visible. He put the spear down again.
"Heave! Heave! Heave!"
A shrill, prolonged cheer .
Something boom ed up on the red rock, then the earth jumped a nd began
to shake steadily , while the noise as steadily increased. Ralph was shot into
the air , thrown down, dashed ag ainst branches. At his right hand, and only a
few feet away , t he whole thicket bent and the roots screamed as they came
out of the earth together . He saw  something red that turned over  slowly as a
mill wheel. Then the red thin g was past and the elephanti ne progress
diminished toward the sea.
Ralph knelt on t he plowed-up soil, and waited for the earth to co me back.
Presently the white, broken stu mps, the split sticks and the tangle of the
thicket refocuse d. There was a kind of heavy feeling in his body where he
had watched his own pulse.
Silence again.
Y et not entirely so. They were whispering out there; and suddenly the
branches were shaken furiously at two places on his right. The pointed end
of a  stic k appeared. In panic, Ralph thrust his own stick throug h the crack
and struck with all his might.
"Aaa-ah!"
His spear twisted a little in his hands and then he withdrew it again.
"Ooh-ooh―"
Someone was moaning outside and a babble of voices rose.  A fierce
ar gument was going on and the wounded savage kept groaning. Then when
there was silence, a single voic e spoke and Ralph decided that it was not
Jack's.
"See? I told you―he's dangerous."
The wounded savage moaned again.
What else? What next?
Ralph fastened his hands round the chewed spear and his hair fell.
Someone was muttering, only a few yards away toward the Castle Rock. He
heard a savage s ay "No!" in a shocked voice; and then there was  suppressed
laughter . He squatted back on h is heels and showed his teeth at the wall of
branches. He raise his spear , snarled a little, and waited.
Once more the invisible group sniggered. He heard a curious trickling
sound and then a louder crepita tion as if someone were unwrapping great
sheets o f cellop hane. A stick sn apped and he stifled a cough. Smoke was
seeping through  the branches in  white and yellow wisps, the patch of blue
sky ove rhead turned to the col or of a storm cloud, and then the smoke
billowed round him.
Someone laughed excitedly , and a voice shouted.
"Smoke!"
He w ormed his way through the thicket toward the forest, keeping as far
as p ossible beneath the smoke. Presently he saw open space, and the green
leaves o f the edge of the thicke t. A smallish savage was standi ng between
him and  the rest of the forest, a s avage striped red and white, and carrying a
spear . H e was coughing and sme aring the paint about his eyes with the back
of h is hand as he tried to see through the increasing smoke. Ral ph launched
himself like a ca t; stabbed, snarling, with the spear , and the sava ge doubled
up. There was a shout from beyond the thicket and then Ralph w as running
with the swiftness of fear through the under growth. He came to a pig-run,
followed it for p erhaps a hundred yards, and then swerved of f. Behind him
the u lulation swept across the island once more and a single vo ice shouted
three times. He guessed that was the signal to advance and sped away again,
till his chest wa s like fire. Then  he flung himself down under a bush and
waited for a m oment till his breathing steadied. He passed his tongue
tentatively over  his teeth and lips and heard far of f the ulula tion of the
pursuers.
There w ere man y things he could do. He could climb a tree; but that was
putting all his e ggs in one basket. If he were detected, they had nothing
more dif ficult to do than wait.
If only one had time to think!
Another double cry at the same distance gave him a clue to their plan.
Any savage balked in the fores t would utter the double shout and hold up
the l ine till he was free again. That way they might hope to keep the cordon
unbroken right across the island . Ralph thought of the boar that had broken
through them with such ease. If necessary , when the chase came too close,
he c ould char ge the cordon while it was still thin, burst through, and run
back. Bu t run back where? The cordon would turn and sweep ag ain. Sooner
or later he wou ld have to sleep or eat―and then he would a waken with
hands clawing at him; and the hunt would become a running down.
What was to be  done, then? Th e tree? Burst the line like a boar? Either
way the choice was terrible.
A si ngle cry quickened his hea rt-beat and, leaping up, he dash ed away
toward the ocean side and the  thick jungle till he was hung up among
creepers; he stayed there for a moment with his calves quivering. If only
one could have quiet, a long pause, a time to think!
And there again, shrill and inev itable, was the ululation sweeping across
the i sland. At that sound he shied like a horse among the creep ers and ran
once mo re till he was panting. He flung himself down by som e ferns. The
tree, or the char ge? He mastered his breathing for a moment, wiped his
mouth, a nd told himself to be ca lm. Samneric were somewhere  in that line,
and hating it. Or were they? And supposing, instead of them,  he met the
chief, or Roger who carried death in his hands?
Ralph pushed back his tangled hair and wiped the sweat out of his best
eye. He spoke aloud.
"Think."
What was the sensible thing to do?
There was no Piggy to talk sense. There was no solemn assembly for
debate nor dignity of the conch.
"Think."
Most, he was b eginning to dread the curtain that might waver in his
brain, blacking out the sense of danger , making a simpleton of him.
A th ird idea would be to hide so  well that the advancing line would pass
without discovering him.
He j erked his he ad of f the grou nd and listened. There was anot her noise
to attend  to now , a deep grumb ling noise, as though the forest itself were
angry with him, a somber noise across which the ululations were scribbled
excruciatingly as on slate. He knew he had heard it before somewhere, but
had no time to remember .
Break the line.
A tree.
Hide, and let them pass.
A ne arer cry stood him on his feet and immediately he was away again,
running fast among thorns and brambles. Suddenly he blundered into the
open, found himself again in that open space―and there was the fathom-
wide grin of the skull, no longer ridiculing a deep blue patch of sky but
jeering up into a blanket of smoke. Then Ralph was running beneath trees,
with the grumble of the forest explained. They had smoked him  out and set
the island on fire.
Hide was better than a tree beca use you had a chance of breaking the line
if you were discovered.
Hide, then.
He won dered if  a pig would agree, and grimaced at nothing.  Find the
deepest thicket, the darkest hole on the island, and creep in. Now , as he ran,
he peere d about  him. Bars and  splashes of sunlight flitted ov er him and
sweat made glistening streaks on his dirty body . The cries were far now , and
faint.
At last he found what seemed to  him the right place, though the decision
was des perate. Here, bushes and a wild tangle of creeper made a mat that
kept out all the light of the sun. Beneath it was a space, perhaps a foot high,
though it was pierced everyw here by parallel and rising stems. If you
wormed into the middle of that you would be five yards from th e edge, and
hidden, unless the savage chose to lie down and look for you; and even
then, yo u would be in darkness― and if the worst happened and he saw you,
then you had a chance to burst out at him, fling the whole line out of step
and double back.
Cautiously , his stick trailing behind him, Ralph wormed between the
rising stems. When he reached the middle of the mat he lay and listened.
The fire  was a big one and the drum-roll that he had thought was left so
far behind was nearer . Couldn't a fire outrun a galloping horse? He could
see t he s un-splashed ground ove r an area of perhaps fifty yards from where
he lay , and as he  watched, the sunlight in every patch blinked a t him. This
was so like the curtain that fl apped in his brain that for a moment he
thought the blinking was inside him. But then the patches blinked more
rapidly , dulled and went out, so that he saw that a great heavine ss of smoke
lay between the island and the sun.
If an yone peered under the bushes and chanced to glimpse human flesh it
might be  Samneric who would pretend not to see and say noth ing. He laid
his cheek against the chocolate- colored earth, licked his dry lips  and closed
his e yes. Under the thicket, the e arth was vibrating very slightly; or perhaps
there wa s a sound beneath the obvious thunder of the fire an d scribbled
ululations that was too low to hear .
Someone cried out. Ralph jerke d his cheek of f the earth and lo oked into
the dulled light. They must be n ear now , he thought, and his chest began to
thump. Hide, break the line, clim b a tree―which was the best after all? The
trouble was you only had one chance.
Now the fire wa s nearer; those volleying shots were great limb s, trunks
even, bursting. The fools! The fools! The fire must be almost at the fruit
trees―what would they eat tomorrow?
Ralph st irred restlessly in his n arrow bed. One chanced nothing! What
could th ey do? Beat him? So what? Kill him? A stick sharpened at both
ends.
The crie s, sudde nly nearer , jerked him up. He could see a stripe d savage
moving hastily out of a green ta ngle, and coming toward the m at where he
hid, a savage wh o carried a spear . Ralph gripped his fingers in to the earth.
Be ready now , in case.
Ralph fu mbled t o hold his spear so that it was point foremost; and now
he saw that the stick was sharpened at both ends.
The savage stopped fifteen yards away and uttered his cry .
Perhaps he can hear my heart over the noises of the fire. Don't scream.
Get ready .
The savage moved forward so th at you could only see him from the waist
down. T hat was the butt of his spear . Now you could see him from the knee
down. Don't scream.
A he rd o f pigs came squealing out of the greenery behind the savage and
rushed away into the forest. Bi rds were screaming, mice shrieking, and a
little hopping thing came under the mat and cowered.
Five yards away the savage stopped, standing right by the thicket, and
cried ou t. Ralph drew his feet up and crouched. The stake was i n his hands,
the stake  sharpe ned at both ends, the stake that vibrated so wildly , that grew
long, short, light, heavy , light again.
The ululation spread from shore to shore. The savage knelt down by the
edge of the thick et, and there we re lights flickering in the forest behind him.
Y ou could see a knee disturb the mold. Now the other . T wo hands. A spear .
A face.
The sav age peer ed into the obsc urity beneath the thicket. Y ou could tell
that he saw light on this side and on that, but not in the middl e―there. In
the midd le was a blob of dark an d the savage wrinkled up his face, trying to
decipher the darkness.
The sec onds lengthened. Ralph was looking straight into the savage's
eyes.
Don't scream.
Y ou'll get back.
Now he's seen you. He's making sure. A stick sharpened.
Ralph sc reamed, a scream of fright and anger and desperation.  His legs
straightened, the screams became continuous and foaming. He shot
forward, burst the thicket, was i n the open, screaming, snarling, bloody . He
swung th e stake  and the savage tumbled over; but there were others coming
toward him, crying out. He swerved as a spear flew past and then was
silent, running. All at once th e lights flickering ahead of h im mer ged
together , the roar of the forest rose to thunder and a tall bush directly in his
path bur st into a great fan-shaped flame. He swung to the rig ht, running
desperately fast, with the heat beating on his left side and the fire racing
forward like a ti de. The ululation rose behind him and spread along, a series
of short sharp cries, the sighting  call. A brown figure showed up at his right
and fell away . T hey were all running, all crying out madly . He could hear
them cra shing in the under growth and on the left was the hot, bright thunder
of the fire. He f or got his wounds, his hunger and thirst, and b ecame fear;
hopeless fear on flying feet, rushing through the forest towa rd the open
beach. S pots jumped before his eyes and turned into red circles that
expanded quick ly till they passed out of sight. Below him someone's legs
were getting tired and the despe rate ululation advanced like a jagged fringe
of menace and was almost overhead.
He stum bled ov er a root and the cry that pursued him rose even higher .
He saw a shelter burst into flames and the fire flapped at his right shoulder
and ther e was the glitter of wate r . Then he was down, rolling over and over
in the warm sand, crouching with arm to ward of f, trying to cry for mercy .
He s taggered to his feet, tensed for more terrors, and looked up at a huge
peaked cap. It w as a white-topped cap, and above the green shade of the
peak wa s a crown, an anchor , gold foliage. He saw white drill, epaulettes, a
revolver , a row of gilt buttons down the front of a uniform.
A n aval of ficer stood on the sand, looking down at Ralph in wary
astonishment. O n the beach beh ind him was a cutter , her bows hauled up
and held by tw o ratings. In th e stern-sheets another rating held a sub-
machine gun.
The ululation faltered and died away .
The of fi cer look ed at Ralph dou btfully for a moment, then took  his hand
away from the butt of the revolver .
"Hullo."
Squirming a little, conscious o f his filthy appearance, Ralph answered
shyly .
"Hullo."
The of ficer nodded, as if a question had been answered.
"Are there any adults―any grownups with you?"
Dumbly , Ralph shook his head. He turned a halfpace on the sand. A
semicircle of little boys, their bodies streaked with colored clay , sharp sticks
in their hands, were standing on the beach making no noise at all.
"Fun and games," said the of ficer .
The fire reached the coconut palms by the beach and swallowed them
noisily . A flame, seemingly detached, swung like an acrobat an d licked up
the palm heads on the platform. The sky was black.
The of ficer grinned cheerfully at Ralph.
"W e saw your smoke. What have you been doing? Having a war or
something?"
Ralph nodded.
The of fi cer insp ected the little s carecrow in front of him. The kid needed
a bath, a haircut, a nose-wipe and a good deal of ointment.
"Nobody killed, I hope? Any dead bodies?"
"Only two. And they've gone."
The of ficer leaned down and looked closely at Ralph.
"T wo? Killed?"
Ralph nodded again. Behind him, the whole island was shuddering with
flame. T he of ficer knew , as a rule, when people were telling the truth. He
whistled softly .
Other bo ys were  appearing now , tiny tots some of them, brown, with the
distended bellie s of small savag es. One of them came close to the of ficer
and looked up.
"I'm, I'm―"
But there was no more to come. Percival W emys Madison sought in his
head for an incantation that had faded clean away .
The of ficer turned back to Ralph.
"W e'll take you of f. How many of you are there?"
Ralph shook his head. The of ficer looked past him to the group of painted
boys.
"Who's boss here?"
"I am," said Ralph loudly .
A little boy who  wore the remains of an extraordinary black cap on his
red hair and wh o carried the re mains of a pair of spectacles at his waist,
started forward, then changed his mind and stood still.
"W e saw your smoke. And you don't know how many of you there are?"
"No, sir ."
"I s hould have thought," said the of ficer as he visualized th e search
before him, "I should have thought that a pack of British boys―you're all
British, aren't you?―would have been able to put up a better  show than
that―I mean―"
"It was like that at first," said Ralph, "before things―"
He stopped.
"W e were together then―"
The of ficer nodded helpfully .
"I know . Jolly good show . Like the Coral Island."
Ralph lo oked at him dumbly . For a moment he had a fleeting picture of
the s trange glamour that had once invested the beaches. But the island was
scorched up like dead wood―S imon was dead―and Jack had.... The tears
began to flow an d sobs shook hi m. He gave himself up to them now for the
first time on the island; great, shuddering spasms of grief that seemed to
wrench his whole body . His voice rose under the black smoke before the
burning wreckag e of the island; and infected by that emotion, the other little
boys began to shake and sob too. And in the middle of them,  with filthy
body , m atted ha ir , and unwiped nose, Ralph wept for the end of  innocence,
the dark ness of man's heart, an d the fall through the air of th e true, wise
friend called Piggy .
The of ficer , surrounded by t hese noises, was moved and a little
embarrassed. He turned away to give them time to pull themselves together;
and waited, allowing his eyes to rest on the trim cruiser in the distance.
T a b l e  o f  C o n t e n t s
CHAPTER ONE
CHAPTER TWO
CHAPTER THREE
CHAPTER FOUR
CHAPTER FIVE
CHAPTER SIX
CHAPTER SEVEN
CHAPTER EIGHT
CHAPTER NINE
CHAPTER TEN
CHAPTER ELEVEN
CHAPTER TWEL VE
