The Political Prism Home Newsletter About
Memories of a Stolen Homeland
Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s fight for democracy, and the
collapse of global security promises
Alice Hutova·Follow
Published inThe Political Prism·10 min read·Mar 7, 2025
720 4Get unlimited access to the best of Medium for less than $1/week.Become a member
Open in app
Search Write
3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 1/17
The city of Toretsk in the Donetsk region was turned into ruins by Russia’s military aggression. July 2024.
Photo: Kostiantyn and Vlada Liberov
It’s been 10 years since I graduated from school. A lot has changed since then
— I learned English, graduated from university, worked for several IT
companies, became a refugee, and am now a writer and political scientist. I
come from a tiny village in Ukraine, and like everywhere else, some of my
classmates moved to big cities after graduation, while others stayed.
I came across the Instagram profile of one of my former classmates. I
haven’t spoken to her since graduation. She got pregnant when we were still
in our final year of school and stayed in our hometown with her husband
while I went to university and rarely returned home. Her son is now about
nine years old, and on Instagram, I saw a photo from his first day of school. I
3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 2/17
recognized the hall of the building where I had studied, but a new decoration
had appeared— a portrait of Putin on the wall.
If you’ve ever seen North Korean reports, then you know what it looks like. It
hangs in the center of the wall, standing out from the other pictures and
paintings, becoming the focal point of the composition.
I am originally from the Donetsk region of Ukraine, which is now occupied
by the Russian army. My classmate’s son not only started school late — he
couldn’t do so earlier because of the war, and even now, the front line is only
30 km away.
Ideological loss in the Donetsk region of Ukraine
When Russia first annexed Crimea in 2014 and then Donbass, people were
just lost, in all honesty. It all happened so fast and chaotically that a large
part of the population just got scared and left, and those who stayed had a
different version of what happened in every house.
One day, we were rehearsing a dance for graduation, and tanks drove down
the street — they were Ukrainian soldiers from L`viv, heading east. My
Ukrainian teacher started shouting curses at them and yelling at them to go
home. Another teacher interrupted her and publicly condemned her, saying
that the soldiers were there to protect us. She taught Russian, which was still
part of the school curriculum at the time. I had never seen this division
before; there was no logic in it, and nothing could have prepared me for
what I saw and heard that day.3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 3/17
Journalist Denis Kazansky, author of the book, “How Ukraine Lost Donbass”
(the book is not available in English), writes about the region:
This young region, which began to be actively populated only in the middle of the
19th century, did not have a lot of interethnic hatred and warlords. It would
require a lot of effort to bring Donbass to the brink of uncontrolled violence.
Of course, people lived in the area before, but they did not settle in an
organized manner until recently. The territory of today’s Donetsk region
often turned out to be a “transit” for different ethnic groups, who were
actively resettled from place to place by the Russian Empire and later by the
USSR.
In my village, for example, more than 90% of the population were
descendants of Greeks. The older generation often spoke Greek to each
other, and I still sometimes cook Greek dishes. The village next to us, just 10
kilometers away, was entirely Ukrainian-speaking, with little hint of other
ethnicities present.
I don’t remember any hostility towards anyone, but only recently did I
realize that I don’t recall the region having its own historical identity either.
Our local museum had exhibits of Tatars, Ukrainians, Greeks, and there
were German and Soviet exhibits. The region seemed multinational and
diverse, but it lacked a united cultural identity, a sense of belonging to
something larger.
A lack of cultural identity that Russia seized and second-chance
democracy3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 4/17
To understand what eastern Ukrainian society was like in the 2010s, we need
to stop thinking about it in terms of 2025. To us, the internet has always been
around. But laptops and computers weren’t in every home back then, and the
internet hadn’t yet outplayed television.
Instead, people got their information from centralized TV channels, many of
which were Russian, especially in eastern Ukraine. Not pro-Russian, but
actually Russian coming from Russia. A lot of time has passed since I left,
but it now appears that this media influence might have offered people the
feeling of historical and cultural identity that they lacked.
The Donetsk region, in particular, was the center of the coal and metallurgy
industry. For a resident of Donbass, it was presented as the main value of the
region, but in fact, it was in decline for decades. In the mines, since the
1990s, there have been periodic boycotts due to non-payment of wages, and
some workers, unpaid for months, resorted to theft — stealing equipment
and metal to sell to feed their families.
Miners, due to the health risk, were afforded early retirement and welfare
payouts. And although the salaries in the region were relatively high for that
time, there were a large number of people who were not producers of goods
but were recipients of governmental aid.
Returning home and turning on the TV, people found themselves in a
different Donbass, which only coincidentally had similar borders. They were
told that Donbass “feeds Ukraine” and “hands out money.”
In 2010, the wage arrears amounted to 253.6 million UAH, which at that
exchange rate was 32 million US dollars. And the average salary was only
2,510 UAH, that is, 313 dollars. It becomes obvious that enterprises did not3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 5/17
pay worker salaries for decades. The factories could not be competitive in
the world after the collapse of the Soviet Union and sell the extracted goods
— there were outdated technologies, badly managed processes, and
corruption. This state of industry is a heritage in many countries of the
former USSR.
The tactics of “othering” was chosen, combined with horror stories. Local
media divided the country into Ukrainian and Russian speakers, presenting
the West of Ukraine to the East as the main enemies. The main goal was to
create the impression that Ukraine does nothing but rob Donbass, and
therefore, the solution seemed to be isolation and later — separation from
Ukraine. As we will see later, Donetsk was not the center of separatism and
independence but followed the familiar scenario of the annexation of
territories by Russia, like Abkhazia and South Ossetia in Georgia or
Transnistria in Moldova.
Such an easy takeover was made possible by normalizing civil passiveness,
which had been instilled by Russian propaganda for years. In 2012, when
Putin returned for a third term and it became clear that democracy in Russia
was over, there was a need for their media to justify the authoritarian
backsliding of the country. Those ideas metastasized to Donbass, too, where
the influence of Russian media was especially strong.
At dinners with neighbors and in families, people argued that there was no
point in going to vote, that election results were falsified, and that politics
was a dirty business; thus, it was better to stay home.
The residents of Donbass stopped going to vote. Data shows that the south
and east of Ukraine had the lowest voter turnout. Using political science
terms, the democratic institutions were weakened, which was not only about3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 6/17
voting but also regarding the ability to organize at local and municipal levels.
Thus, there was resistance in 2014, both in Donetsk and in Crimea, but due
to the civic passiveness, it was small and disorganized.
Regions with voter turnout higher than average (60.2%) are marked red. Blue color is used to mark regions
with voter turnout less than average. Data refers to 2010 – 2019
Maidan, or the Revolution of Dignity, was not only a pro-European rally. It
was an act of reinstating independence and understanding one’s identity. As
some experts believe, countries that gained independence as a result of the
collapse of larger states, or as a result of decolonization, may not fully
recognize themselves as independent and face difficulties in governance.
And if democracy is established in such countries, it often happens that
people simply do not know how to live in it.
3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 7/17
Democracy implies political participation and the understanding that power
belongs to the people, not officials. The passive civic society of the post-
Soviet countries did not understand participation and the absence of fear.
In the USSR, it was customary to be afraid of the authorities, the police, the
KGB, the security apparatus, and neighbors who could turn you in to the
authorities for an incorrect statement. Entire generations grew up in such a
regime, and they did not realize that their voices were important and that
civic engagement would not put their lives at risk. And only during the
Maidan, a 500,000-strong rally, did Ukrainians realize that they could
influence authority. I guess the term “second-chance democracy” is suitable,
at least in terms of active participation.
Geopolitical myths, security guarantees, and the Budapest Memorandum
Ukraine will always be close to Russia, therefore it will
always be under threat
This statement is heard in the public space here and there. It also has many
sequels. It is suggested not to take risks and give Ukraine to Russia, not to
accept it into the EU and NATO, to make it neutral, or simply to take a wait-
and-see position and do nothing. Proximity to a neighbor that can start a war
at any moment has kept investors from investing in the country’s economy
for years. It kept Ukraine from fully integrating into economic turnover and
global financial markets, only making it more fragile over time.3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 8/17
The fate of Ukraine, which is located between Russia and Europe, is often
presented as something indestructible and unchangeable. And it is difficult
to argue — indeed, it is unlikely that a mountain range or an ocean will form
between the countries. Still, such narratives are used to justify aggression;
they never offer a solution.
It is impossible to explain all processes by the geographical location of the
country. Countries can be on the same peninsula, have the same size of
territory and culture — and at the same time be different, like North and
South Korea. Or, they can be on different continents, have different climates,
languages,   and customs, and be such similar regimes as Russia and
Venezuela.
Turkey controls several important trade straits and earns good money on
this, while Morocco struggles more. The answer is always deeper than
geography. It lies in international cooperation, economic turnover, laws, and
inclusion. These are conventional, and they are subject to change.
The current negotiations on security guarantees and NATO membership are
the result of the failure of the Budapest Memorandum of 1994, when Ukraine
agreed to get rid of its nuclear weapons. The text of the agreement is written
vaguely and can be interpreted in different ways. For example, countries
agreed to provide assistance. It is possible to deploy soldiers, provide
weapons, grants or loans, or provide humanitarian aid. These differences
carry enormous weight in a crisis, but they have not been clarified.
Also, concerning current discussions of a deal on minerals, ‘countries should
refrain from economic coercion designed to subordinate to their own interests the
exercise by Ukraine of the right inherent in its sovereignty and thus to secure
advantages of any kind.’3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 9/17
In any case, the document has already been violated, and that is why the
specifics of the new agreements matter. Perhaps, it is not necessarily about
sending soldiers, but the clear mechanisms of protection matter at the very
least.
Putin’s pseudo motivations (and more realistic versions)
Just over a year ago, Tucker Carlson interviewed Putin, and the video went
viral. The interviewer listened to a history lecture starting in the year 900,
that did not explain the motivations of the aggressor country, did not directly
answer Carlson’s questions, and looked more like evasions than answers.
Putin prioritizes historical ambitions. He has repeatedly compared himself
to Peter the Great, the emperor who significantly expanded the Russian
Empire. He certainly wants to get into history books as a conqueror and
victor who, to use more familiar terms, made the country great again.
However, historical versions like “Ukraine has always been part of Russia”
are not the goal of the invasion. Such versions do not explain anything —
neither why the war began, when it began, nor, most importantly, whether it
was possible not to start it at all. This is only a justification for the domestic
consumer — Russians, whose historical identity resembles a mix between
the USSR and earlier imperial times.
We will never know what is exactly in Putin’s head, but there are some
guesses. One of the versions most worthy of attention is the attempt to turn
Ukraine into a quasi-state dependent on Russia. If a government loyal to
Moscow appears in Ukraine, we will see many propaganda surprises. All3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 10/17
historical explanations will simply be ignored, and any other motivation will
cease to matter.
That is why there is so much talk about a change of power in Ukraine and
new elections — it is the new political environment and new figures that can
become a tool for establishing influence, even if this happens slowly over
decades.
The timing could be explained by an attempt to hold on to power. We all
know that Russia did not expect much resistance when the war began. The
soldiers, who had been listening to propaganda for years, didn`t think
Ukraine would resist, but they weren’t alone. Leaders of other countries were
thinking the same. The Russian soldiers were unprepared at first; they had
only a few days’ worth of food and medicine.
That is why some believe that Putin hoped to repeat the 2014 scenario. Back
then, when Russia annexed Crimea, there was a wave of euphoria in Russia,
and Putin had high approval ratings. 2021 has seriously undermined the
ratings — the scandal with Navalny’s poisoning just happened; in addition,
strict quarantine restrictions were in force, and the Russian economy was
suffering. The war in Ukraine was supposed to be an attempt to distract the
population and increase ratings — a quick victory — just like the annexation
of Crimea.
A quick victory did not happen, however. The war is still ongoing. What are
the reasons now?
It appears the war has become a solution to a lot of internal societal
problems in Russia. Originally, we saw some resistance (small and3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 11/17
disorganized), and there was a need to turn a war into something beneficial
to prevent that from happening in the future.
There is an alarmingly high level of marginalized groups among the military.
These include low-income individuals and released prisoners who, through
war, have been removed from society. They simply no longer pose a threat. A
theoretical alcoholic stepfather who may have resorted to domestic violence
is now gone or dead, while his family now can receive money from the state.
Whatever Putin’s motivations, war has impacted both countries. But my
homeland in Ukraine will never be the same.
If you found this piece insightful and want to support my work, you can buy me a
coffee here: buymeacoffee.com/alicehutova
Published in The Political Prism
4.8K Followers·Last published 1 day ago
Celebrating diverse political perspectives and viewpoints.Follow
Written by Alice Hutova
90 Followers·28 FollowingFollowPolitics World War Ukraine Geopolitics
3/29/25, 6:26 PM Memories of a Stolen Homeland. Donbass, Putin’s motives, Ukraine’s… | by Alice Hutova | The Political Prism | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/the-political-prism/memories-of-a-stolen-homeland-c7cc081f4cf5 12/17
