E³ — Entertain Enlighten E… Home Newsletter About
What Is A Secret Friend?
And when is a benevolent deception acceptable?
Susan Bostian ·Follow
Published inE³ — Entertain Enlighten Empower·5 min read·2 days ago
249 9
When the doctor told Abby that she had Early Onset Alzheimer’s, she said,
“F*ck you,” and ran out of his office.
When her husband told me this story during a chance encounter in a
parking lot, he broke down and cried.
Like most people, I thought Alzheimer’s was a disease that stole people’s
memories. When I became Abby’s secret friend, I learned it’s much more
devastating.
Open in app
Search Write
3/29/25, 5:04 PM What Is A Secret Friend?. And How Could Someone With Alzheimer’s… | by Susan Bostian | E³ — Entertain Enlighten Empower | M…
https://medium.com/the-springboard/what-is-a-secret-friend-dd30ac70734d 1/11
Photo by Sydney Herron on Unsplash
Think about all the parts of your life you cherish and value: Your dreams and
visions. Your relationships and who you see yourself to be in the world. Your
physical abilities. Your independence.
Now, imagine all these parts of your life being taken away from you. Imagine
your sadness, frustration, and anger. And, it’s not just about you. Everyone
around you is affected too.
When I met Abby’s husband, John, he was overwhelmed, exhausted, and
suffering from grief and guilt. He had a full-time job and a wife with
Alzheimer’s. His wife would wander and get lost, and the police would call
him. He would have to leave work and retrieve her. He was being advised to
put her in a locked memory facility. He had only one last option on the fated
day we met: a secret friend for his wife.
3/29/25, 5:04 PM What Is A Secret Friend?. And How Could Someone With Alzheimer’s… | by Susan Bostian | E³ — Entertain Enlighten Empower | M…
https://medium.com/the-springboard/what-is-a-secret-friend-dd30ac70734d 2/11
John said his wife refused to accept her diagnosis, a day program, or any
kind of caregiver. He said she just wanted to feel normal and do everything
everyone else did. He said he needed to find someone, a friend who could
take her places and keep her safe, and he would secretly pay them.
He asked me if I would be that person. I had just gone through a devastating
divorce, and I needed a job. Still, I felt uncomfortable with the deception of
the arrangement. However, after consulting with my sister, Nancy, I agreed
to become Abby’s secret friend.
I wasn’t aware of any job description, so I made up my own. I have a
bachelor’s degree in psychology and a lifelong interest in health and
wellness. I have two grown children and many happy memories of taking
them on outings and adventures when they were young.
We started with a trip to get coffee, and within a week, we were meeting
every day. Four hours turned into forty hours and then fifty hours a week. As
I learned more about Abby, I designed our days to reflect her interests and
personality. We made friends wherever we went, and soon, we had an
entourage joining us on our adventures.
We became the stars of Zumba classes. We were the darlings of the
community center. We were famous at our Starbucks location. We were
greeted at the Goodwill Store, the Allied Arts Guild, and Stanford University
Biology Greenhouses.
The Bay Area, from San Francisco to San Jose and Half Moon Bay became
our playground. We snuck into the Filoli Gardens, ate dinner across from
Neil Young, and attended lectures by scientists from 23andMe.3/29/25, 5:04 PM What Is A Secret Friend?. And How Could Someone With Alzheimer’s… | by Susan Bostian | E³ — Entertain Enlighten Empower | M…
https://medium.com/the-springboard/what-is-a-secret-friend-dd30ac70734d 3/11
We attended a play, Alice in Wonderland, at Alice’s Restaurant, and ended up
at a tea party with the cast members. We giggled our way through estate
sales as we tried on every crazy hat we could find. We were chased by
potbelly pigs and covered in paint as we danced in a field at a Holi
Celebration. We learned some valuable lessons at a ceremony with a voodoo
priestess.
We had more fun in one year than some people do in a lifetime. Abby’s sister
said she hadn’t seen Abby that happy since she was four years old.
But not every day was sunshine and rainbows. The losses from Alzheimer’s
are staggering and heartbreaking. To watch yourself forget is a special kind
of hell. Over the course of a year, I saw many of Abby’s fears become reality.
One of the most painful losses was the loss of independence. Abby said her
driver’s license had been taken away because she had hit someone with her
car. She couldn’t remember exactly what had happened, but she was mad
that someone had called the police, and her husband said she couldn’t drive
anymore.
As the months progressed, along with her disease, Abby found simple tasks
such as getting into the car, answering her phone, or unzipping her
pocketbook to be challenging. Sometimes, her insights were brilliant. When
she couldn’t remember how to unbuckle her seatbelt, she sat back, defeated,
and said, “Alzheimer’s is a kind of bondage.”
When her husband and her sister took her to the lawyer’s office, they all left
in tears. Abby had forgotten how to sign her name. When she and her
husband fought over what clothes she should wear and he stormed out the3/29/25, 5:04 PM What Is A Secret Friend?. And How Could Someone With Alzheimer’s… | by Susan Bostian | E³ — Entertain Enlighten Empower | M…
https://medium.com/the-springboard/what-is-a-secret-friend-dd30ac70734d 4/11
door, she collapsed in tears and said, “He doesn’t want a wife with
Alzheimer’s. He’s going to send me away.”
One day, we were driving on Skyline Boulevard and accidentally found the
place where Koko, the gorilla who learned to communicate with sign
language, lived. I encouraged Abby to get out of the car and walk toward the
giant, enclosed play structure in hopes of seeing Koko. When she realized
what it was, Abby refused to go. “Nothing should be in cages or locked up. It
makes me mad.” I hoped she would never find herself in a locked ward.
As her condition worsened and her husband’s ability to handle the stress of it
dwindled, I saw how Alzheimer’s can decimate the lives of caregivers. Where
I once wondered if I would recognize when it would no longer make sense or
be safe to take Abby out in the world, I knew now it would be obvious. And
where I had been troubled by the “benevolent deception” of being a secret
friend, I realized that Abby had become a real, dear, beloved friend.
I promised Abby that I would write a story about her. She wanted everyone
to know that someone with Alzheimer’s can still have fun, be a good friend,
and get up and dance.
I also understand the tsunami of stress on a person caring for someone with
Alzheimer’s. In addition to keeping her safe, Abby’s husband was also
dealing with the loss of his vision of growing old with the love of his life.
And, of course, so much more.
In the end, I wrote a book called The Secret Friend, to help anyone dealing
with Alzheimer’s to learn from what we did right and what we could have
done better.3/29/25, 5:04 PM What Is A Secret Friend?. And How Could Someone With Alzheimer’s… | by Susan Bostian | E³ — Entertain Enlighten Empower | M…
https://medium.com/the-springboard/what-is-a-secret-friend-dd30ac70734d 5/11
Here are a few things that I learned about being a secret friend to someone
with Alzheimer’s.
1. Safety first. Always.
2. Focus on what the person is still capable of doing.
3. Be kind and compassionate.
4. Acknowledge losses and try to fill in the gaps.
5. Find activities the person enjoys. Embrace adventures.
6. Listen carefully to feedback from the person.
7. Don’t force any activity.
8. Don’t let your ego interfere with life. Be silly.
9. Caregivers need a break.
10. Focus on joy.
If you are the secret friend, take care of yourself. Caregivers often become
burned out and are unable to help their loved ones or themselves. If you
need help, ask for help.
In hindsight, I believe the outcome justified the “benevolent deception.” I
wasn’t able to cure Alzheimer’s, but as Abby’s sister told me, I was able to
bring happiness to Abby’s last cognizent years. In the world of Alzheimer’s,
it’s sometimes kinder and more compassionate to bend the truth and give
someone peace and joy.
Psychology Alzheimers Life Life Lessons Caregiving3/29/25, 5:04 PM What Is A Secret Friend?. And How Could Someone With Alzheimer’s… | by Susan Bostian | E³ — Entertain Enlighten Empower | M…
https://medium.com/the-springboard/what-is-a-secret-friend-dd30ac70734d 6/11
Published in E³ — Entertain Enlighten Empower
6K Followers·Last published 11 hours ago
Putting the reader firstFollow
Written by Susan Bostian
3K Followers·12K Following
Author. The Secret Friend. We are here to learn about love. Like my stories?
https://ko-fi.com/susanbostianFollow
Responses (9)
Ashley caceres Pagan
Fedeminozzi
1 day ago
This is a wonderful story. It touched me deeply. Going to check out your book, too :) It's a story worth telling.
1 reply Reply
Fedeminozzi
1 day ago
What are your thoughts?
623/29/25, 5:04 PM What Is A Secret Friend?. And How Could Someone With Alzheimer’s… | by Susan Bostian | E³ — Entertain Enlighten Empower | M…
https://medium.com/the-springboard/what-is-a-secret-friend-dd30ac70734d 7/11
