INSTRUCTION MANUAL
ESPAÑOL ENGLISH5 series
Blood Pressure Monitor
Model BP742N
TABLE OF CONTENTS
2Before using the Monitor
Introduction ............................................................................................... 3
Important Safety Information..................................................................... 4
Operating Instructions
Know Your Device..................................................................................... 8
Display symbols ..................................................................... 10
Before Taking a Measurement ............................................... 12
Preparation ............................................................................................. 13
Battery Installation.................................................................. 13Setting the Date and Time...................................................... 14
Using the Device..................................................................................... 15
Applying the Arm Cuff ............................................................ 15How to Sit Correctly................................................................ 17
Taking a Measurement........................................................... 17
Using the Memory Function ................................................... 20
Care and Maintenance
Error Messages and Troubleshooting..................................................... 23
Error Messages...................................................................... 23
Troubleshooting...................................................................... 25
Maintenance and Storage....................................................................... 26
Maintenance........................................................................... 26
Storage................................................................................... 27
Optional Medical Accessories ................................................ 27
Specifications.......................................................................................... 29
FCC Statement ....................................................................................... 31
Limited Warranty..................................................................................... 32
Guidance and Manufacturer’s Declaration ............................................. 33
INTRODUCTION
3Thank you for purchasing the OMRON® BP742N Blood Pressure Monitor. 
Your new blood pressure monitor uses the oscillometric method of blood 
pressure measurement. This means the monitor detects your blood movement 
through your brachial artery and converts the movements into a digital reading. 
An oscillometric monitor does not need a stethoscope so the monitor is simple 
to use. 
Intended Use 
This device is a digital monitor intended for use in measuring blo od pressure 
and pulse rate in adult patient population. The device detects the appearance of 
irregular heartbeats during measurement and gives a warning signal with the 
measurement result.
 Please read this instruction manual thor oughly before using the device. /g3
Please keep for future reference. For specific information about your own 
blood pressure, CONSULT YOUR PHYSICIAN.
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
4Warning: Indicates a potentially hazardous situation which, if not 
avoided, could result in death or serious injury.
(General Usage)
DO NOT adjust medication based on measurement results from this blood 
pressure monitor. Take medication as prescribed by your physician. Only a 
physician is qualified to diagnose and treat High Blood Pressure.
This device is not intended to be a diagnostic device. 
Consult your physician before using the device for any of the following 
conditions: common arrhythmias such as atrial or ventricular premature 
beats or atrial fibrillation, arterial sclerosis, poor perfusion, diabetes, age, pregnancy, pre-eclampsia, renal diseases.
Note that PATIENT motion, trembling, shivering may affect the measurement 
reading.
Do not use the device on the injured arm or the arm under medical treatment.
Do not apply the arm cuff on the arm while being on an intravenous drip or 
blood transfusion.
Consult your physician before using the device on the arm with an arterio-
venous (A-V) shunt.
Do not use the device with other medical electrical (ME) equipment 
simultaneously.
Do not use the device in the area the HF surgical equipment, MRI, or CT 
scanner exists, or in the oxygen rich environment.
The air tube or the AC adapter cable may cause accidental strangulation in 
infants.
Contains small parts that may cause a choking hazard if swallowed by 
infants.
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
5Caution: Indicates a potentially  hazardous situation which, if not 
avoided, may result in minor or moderate injury to the user or patient or damage to the equipment or other property.
(General Usage)
Always consult your physician. Self-diagnosis of measurement results and /g3
self-treatment are dangerous.
Consult your physician before using the device for any of the following 
conditions:
• If you have had a mastectomy.
• Do not take measurements more than necessary. It may cause bruising 
due to blood flow interference.
• People with severe blood flow problems or blood disorders as cuff inflation 
can cause bruising.
Remove the arm cuff if it does not start deflating during the measurement.
Do not use this device on infants or persons who cannot express their 
intentions.
Do not use the device for any purpose other than measuring blood pressure.
Use only the approved arm cuff for this device. Use of other arm cuffs may 
result in incorrect measurement results.
Do not use a mobile phone or other devices that emit electromagnetic fields, 
near the device. This may result in incorrect operation of the device.
Do not disassemble the monitor or arm cuff. This may cause an inaccurate 
reading.
Do not use in a location with moisture, or a location where water may splash 
on the device. This may damage the device.
Do not use the device in a moving vehicle (car, airplane). 
Read “If your systolic pressure is more than 210 mmHg” of this instruction 
manual, if your systolic pressure is known to be more than 210 mmHg. 
Inflating to a higher pressure than necessary may result in bruising where 
the arm cuff is applied.
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
6(AC Adapter (optional) Usage)
Do not use the AC adapter if the device or the power cord is damaged. Turn 
off the power and unplug the power cord immediately. 
Plug the AC adapter into the appropriate voltage outlet. Do not use in a 
multi-outlet plug.
Never plug in or unplug the power cord from the electric outlet with wet 
hands.
Fully insert the power plug into the outlet.
When disconnecting the power plug from the outlet, do not pull the power 
cord. Be sure to pull from the power plug safely.
When handling the power cord, take care not to do the following:
Do not damage. Do not break it.
Do not tamper with it. Do not forcibly bend or pull.
Do not twist. Do not bundle during use.Do not pinch. Do not place under heavy objects.
Wipe the dust off from the power plug.
Unplug monitor when not in use.
Disconnect the power plug before cleaning.
Use only an OMRON AC adapter designed for this device. Use of 
unsupported adapters may damage and/or may be hazardous to the device.
(Battery Usage)
Do not insert the batteries with their p olarities incorrectly aligned.
Use only 4 “AA” alkaline or manganese batteries with this device. Do not use 
other types of batteries. Do not use new and used batteries together.
Remove the batteries if the device will not be used for three months or more.
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
7General Precautions
• Do not forcibly crease the arm cuff or the air tube excessively.
• Do not press the air tube while taking a measurement.
• To unplug the air plug, pull on the air plug at the connection with the monitor , 
not the tube itself.
• Do not drop the monitor or subject device to strong shocks or  vibrations.
• Do not inflate the arm cuff when it is not wrapped around your arm.• Do not use the device outside the specified environment. It may cause an 
inaccurate reading.
• Dispose of the device, components and opt ional accessories according to 
applicable local regulations. Unlawful disposal may cause environmental 
pollution.
KNOW YOUR DEVICE
8Contents:
Monitor, arm cuff, battery set, instruction manual, quick start guide
Monitor:
Arm cuff:A. Display
B. Up/Down buttonsC. USER ID selection switch
D. Date/Time setting button
E. START/STOP buttonF. Memory button
G. Battery compartmentH. Air jack
I. AC adapter jack /g3
(for optional AC adapter)G
HIDA
F
EB
C
DD
J
LKJ. Arm cuff /g3
(Arm circumference 9” - 17” (22 - 42 cm))
K. Air plugL. Air tube
KNOW YOUR DEVICE
9Display:
M. USER ID symbol
N. Systolic blood pressure
O. Diastolic blood pressure
P. Low battery symbolQ. Heartbeat symbol /g3
(Flashes during measurement.)
R. Memory symbolS. Average value symbol
T. Date/Time display
U. Movement error symbol
V. Irregular heartbeat symbolW. Blood pressure level indicator
X. Deflation symbol
Y. Pulse display / Memory numberN
O
PR
MS
T
QU
V
W
X
Y
KNOW YOUR DEVICE
10Display symbols
Irregular Heartbeat Symbol ( )
Irregular HeartbeatNormal Heartbeat
Pulse
Blood pressure
Blood pressureShort Long
PulseWhen the monitor detects an irregular 
rhythm two or more times during the 
measur ement, the irregular heartbeat 
symbol will appear on the display with the 
measurement values. 
An irregular heartbeat rhythm is defined 
as a r hythm that is 25% less or 25% more 
than the average rhythm detected while 
the monitor is measuring the systolic and 
diastolic blood pressure. 
If the irregular heartbeat symbol displays with your measur ement results, we 
recommend you consult your physician. Follow the directions of your physician.
Movement Error Symbol ( )
The movement error symbol is displayed if you move your body during the measurement. Please remove the arm cuff, and wait 2 - 3 minutes. /g3
Take another measurement, remain still during measurement.
Average Value Symbol ( )
The average value symbol is displayed when you press and hold the memory 
button for more than 3 seconds. The most recent average value appears on the 
display screen.
KNOW YOUR DEVICE
11Blood Pressure Level Indicator  
2013 ESH/ESC Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension
Definitions of hypertension by office and home blood pressure levels
Office Home
Systolic Blood Pressure /g149 140 mmHg /g149 135 mmHg
Diastolic Blood Pressure /g149 90 mmHg /g149 85 mmHg
These are from statistical values for blood pressure.
KNOW YOUR DEVICE
12Before Taking a Measurement
To help ensure an accurate reading, follow these directions:
1. Avoid bathing, drinking alcohol or caffeine, smoking, exercising and eating for 
30 minutes before taking a measurement. Rest for a t least 15 minutes before 
taking the measurement.
2. Stress raises blood pressure. Avoid taking measurements during stressful 
times.
3. Measurements should be taken in a quiet place.
4. Remove tight-fitting clothing from your arm.
5. Sit on a chair with your feet flat on the floor. Rest your arm on a table so that 
the ar m cuff is at the same level as your heart.
6. Remain still and do not talk during the measurement.
7. Keep a record of your blood pressure and pu lse readings for your physician. 
A single measurement does not provide an accurate indication of your true 
blood pressure. You need to take and record several readings over a period 
of time. Try to measure your blood pressure at the same time each day for consistency.
PREPARATION
13Battery Installation
1.Remove the battery cover.
2.Insert 4 “AA” batteries as 
indicated in the battery 
compartment.
3.Replace the battery cover.
Notes:
• When the low battery symbol ( ) appears on the display, turn the monitor 
off, then replace all batteries at the same time. Long life alkaline batteries 
are recommended.
• The measurement values continue to be stored  in me mory even after the 
batteries are replaced.
• The supplied batteries may have a shorter life.• Dispose of the device, components and option al accessories according to 
applicable local regulations. Unlawful disposal may cause environmental 
pollution.
PREPARATION
14Setting the Date and Time
Set the monitor to the correct date and time before taking a measurement for 
the first time.
1.Press the  button.
2.Push  or  to change the year.
Push  button to confirm the year and then the month flashes. Repeat the 
same steps to change the month, day, hour, and minute.
Minute
Change ConfirmChange ConfirmChange ConfirmChange ConfirmChange ConfirmYear
Month
Day
Hour
 : Forward /g3
 : Back
3.Press the START/STOP button to turn the monitor off.
Notes:
• If the batteries have been replaced, the date and time setting will need to be 
reset.
• If the date and time are not set, “-:--” app ears during or after measurement.
USING THE DEVICE
15Applying the Arm Cuff
Remove tight-fitting clothing or tight rolled up sleeve from your left upper arm. /g3
Do not place the arm cuff over thick clothes.
1.Insert the air plug into the air jack 
securely.
2.Wrap the arm cuff firmly in place around you r left upper 
arm.
1/2 inch /g3
(1 - 2 cm)The bottom edge of the arm cuff 
should be 1/2 inch (1 to 2 cm) above 
the elbow. Air tube is on the inside 
of your arm and aligned with your 
middle finger.
USING THE DEVICE
163.Secure closed with the 
fabric fastener.
Notes:
•When you take a measurement on the right 
arm, the air tube will be at the side of your elbow . Be careful not to rest your arm on the 
air tube.
• The blood pressure can differ between the  right arm and the left arm, and 
the measured blood pressure values can be different. OMRON 
recommends to always use the same arm for measurement. If the values 
between both arms differ substantially, please check with your physician which arm to use for your measurements.
USING THE DEVICE
17How to Sit Correctly
To take a measurement, you need to 
be relaxed and comfortably seated, under comfortable room temperature. 
Avoid bathing, drinking alcohol or 
caffeine, smoking, exercising or eating 
30 minutes before taking a measurement.
• Sit on a chair with your feet flat on the floor.
• Sit upright with your back straight.
• Sit with your back and arm being 
supp orted.
• The arm cuff should be placed on your arm 
at the same level as your heart.
Taking a Measurement
Notes:
• To stop the measurement, press the START/STOP button once to deflate the 
arm cuff.
• Remain still and quiet while t aking a measurement.
The monitor is designed to take measurements and store the measurement 
values in the memory for 2 people using USER ID 1 and USER ID 2.
1.Select your User ID (1 or 2).
USING THE DEVICE
182.Press the START/STOP button.
The arm cuff will start to inflate automatically.
START INFLATE DEFLATE COMPLETE
If your systolic  pressure is more than 210 mmHg
After the arm cuff starts to inflate, press and hold the START/STOP 
button until the monitor inflates 30 to 40 mmHg higher than your 
expected systolic pressure.
Notes:
• The monitor will not inflate above 299 mmHg.
Inflating to a higher pressure than necessary may result in bruising 
where the arm cuff is applied.
USING THE DEVICE
193.Remove the arm cuff.
4.Press the START/STOP button to turn the monitor off.
The monitor automatically stores the measurement result in its memory.
It will automatically turn off after 2 minutes.
Note: Wait 2-3 minutes before taking another measurement. Waiting 
between  measurements allows the arteries to return to the condition 
prior to taking a measurement.
Using the Guest Mode
The monitor stores measurement values for 2 users in the memory. /g3
The guest mode can be used to take a single measurement for another user. 
No measurement values are stored in the memory when the guest mode is selected.
1.Press and hold the START/STOP 
button for more than 3 seconds.
The USER ID symbol and the Date/Time 
display will disappear.
2.Release the START/STOP bu tton when the Date/Time 
display turns off.
The arm cuff will start to inflate automatically.
DO NOT adjust medication based on measurement results from this blood 
pressure monitor. Take medication as prescribed by your physician. Only a 
physician is qualified to diagnose and treat High Blood Pressure.
This device is not intended to be a diagnostic device.
USING THE DEVICE
20Always consult your physician. Self-diagnosis of measurement results and /g3
self-treatment are dangerous.
Inflating to a higher pressure than necessary may result in bruising where 
the arm cuff is applied.
Using the Memory Function
The monitor automatically stores the results up to 50 sets for each user (1 and 2). It can also calculate an average value based on the last 3 measurement values taken within 10 minutes.
Notes:
• If there are only 2 measurement values in the memory for that period, the 
average will be based on these 2 values.
• If there is 1 measurement value in the mem ory for that period, this is displayed 
as the average.
• If the memory is full, the monito r will delete the oldest value.
• When viewing the measurement value taken without setting the date and time, 
“-:--” is displayed instead of the date and time.
To View the Measurement Values Stored in Memory
1.Select your User ID (1 or 2).
2.Press the  button.
The Memory number appears for a second 
before the pulse rate is displayed. /g3
The newest set is numbered “1”.Alternating date/time /g3
display
USING THE DEVICE
213.Press the  or  button to view the values stored in 
memory.
: To view the older values
: To view the more recent values
To View the Average Value
1.Select your User ID (1 or 2).
2.Press and hold the  button for 
more than 3 seconds.
Notes:
• If the previous measurement was taken without setting the date and time, 
the average value is not calculated.
• If there are no measurements results stored in the memory, 
the screen to the right is displayed.
USING THE DEVICE
22To Delete All the Values Stored in Memory
The values stored in the memory are deleted by USER ID.
1.Select your User ID (1 or 2).
2.Press the  button, while the memory symbol appears. 
3.While holding the  
button down, press the 
START/STOP button for 
more than 3 seconds.
Note: You cannot partially delete the values stored in the memory. /g3
All values for the user you select will be deleted.
ERROR MESSAGES AND TROUBLESHOOTING
Error Display Cause Solution
Irregular heartbeats 
are detected.Remove the arm cuff. Wait 2 - 3 minutes 
and then take another measurement. 
Repeat the steps in “Taking a 
Measurement” . If this error continues to 
appear, contact your physician.
Movement during measurement.Carefully read and repeat the steps in 
“Taking a Measurement” .
The batteries are low.You should replace the batteries with 
new ones ahead of time.
Refer to “Battery Installation”.
The batteries are 
exhausted. You should replace the batteries with 
new ones at once.
Refer to “Battery Installation”.
Air plug 
disconnected.Insert the plug securely.
Refer to “Applying the Arm Cuff”.
Arm cuff is applied 
too loosely.Apply the arm cuff tighter.
Refer to “A pplying the Arm Cuff”.
Air is leaking from 
the a rm cuff.Replace the arm cuff with a new one.
Refer to “Optional Medical Accessories”.
23Error Messages
ERROR MESSAGES AND TROUBLESHOOTING
Error Display Cause Solution
Movement during 
measurement and 
the arm cuff has not 
been inflated 
sufficiently.Repeat measurement. Remain still 
and do no t talk during measurement.
Refer to “Taking a Measurement” .
If “E2” appears repeatedly, inflate /g3
the arm cuff manually until it is 
30 to 40 mmHg above your previous 
measurement r esult.
Refer to “Taking a Measurement” .
The arm cuff was 
inflated exceeding the 
maximum allowable 
pressure, and then 
deflated automatically 
when inflating the arm 
cuff manually.Do not touch the arm cuff and/or bend 
the air tube while taking a 
measurement. Do not inflate the arm 
cuff more than necessary.
Refer to “Taking a Measurement” .
Movement during 
measurement.Repeat measurement. Remain still 
and do no t talk during measurement.
Refer to “Taking a Measurement” .
Clothing is interfering 
with the arm cuff.Remove any clothing interfering with 
the arm cuff.
Refer to “Applying the Arm Cuff”.
Device error. Contact Customer Service.
24
ERROR MESSAGES AND TROUBLESHOOTING
Problem Cause and Solution
No power.
No display appears on the monitor.Replace all batteries with new ones.
Check the battery installation for 
proper placement of the battery 
polarities.
Refer to “Battery Installation”.
Measurement values appear too high 
or too low .Blood pressure varies constantly. 
Many factors including stress, time of 
day, and how you wrap the cuff, may 
affect your blood pressure. Review the 
sections “Before Taking a 
Measurement” and “Taking a 
Measurement” .
25Troubleshooting
MAINTENANCE AND STORAGE
26Maintenance
To protect your device from da mage, please observe the 
following:• Store the device and the components in a clean, safe location.
• Do not use any abr asive or volatile cleaners.
• Do not wash the device and any components or immerse them 
in water .
• Do not use gasoline, thinners or similar solvents to clean the 
devic e.
• Use a soft and dry cloth, or a soft and mo istened cloth and 
neutral soap to clean on the monitor and the arm cuff.
• Changes or mod ification not ap proved by the manufacturer 
will void the user warranty. Do not disassemble or attempt to repair the device or co mponents. Consult Customer Service. 
MAINTENANCE AND STORAGE
27Storage
1.Unplug the air plug from the air jack.
2.Gently fold the air tube into the arm 
cuff.
Note: Do not bend or crease the air tube 
excessively.
Do not store the device in the following situations:
• If the device is wet.
• Locations exposed to extreme temperatures, humidity, direct sunlight, 
dust or corrosive vapors such as bleach.
• Locations exposed to vibrations, sho cks or where it will be at an angle.
Arm cuff AC Adapter 
Arm circumference
9” - 17” (22 - 42 cm)
CD-WR17
(Model: HEM-RML31)HEM-ADPTW5Optional Medical Accessories
MAINTENANCE AND STORAGE
28Using the Optional AC Adapter
1.Insert the AC adapter plug 
into the AC adapter jack on 
the rear side of the monitor.
2.Plug the AC adapter  into an 
electrical outlet.
To disconnect the AC adapter, unplug the AC adapter from the electrical 
outlet first, and then remove the AC adapter plug from the monitor.
SPECIFICATIONS
Model BP742N HEM-7131-Z
Display LCD digital display
Measurement rangePressure: 0 to 299 mmHg
Pulse: 40 to 180 beats / min.
AccuracyPressure: /g1143 mmHg or 2% of reading
Pulse: /g114 5% of display reading
Inflation Fuzzy-logic controlled by electric pump
Deflation Automatic pressure release valve
Measurement method Oscillometric method
IP classification IP 20
Power source4 “AA” batteries 1.5V or optional AC adapter /g3
(INPUT AC100-240V 50/60Hz 0.12A)
Battery life Approximately 1000 measurements (using new alkaline batteries)
Operating temperature / 
humidity50°F to 104°F (10°C to 40°C) / 15 to 90% RH
Storage temperature / 
humidity / air pressure-4°F to 140°F (-20°C to 60°C) / 10 to 95% RH / 700 to 1060 hPa
WeightMonitor : Approximately 10 5/8 oz. (300 g) not including batteries
Arm cuff : Approximately 6 oz. (170 g)
DimensionsMonitor : Approximately 4 1/4” (w) /g117 3 1/8” (h) /g117 5 1/2” (l)
(107 mm /g117 79 mm /g117 141 mm)
Arm cuff : Approximately 5 3/4” /g117 23 1/2” (air tube: 29 1/2”)
(145 mm /g117 594 mm (air tube: 750 mm))
Cuff circumference 9” to 17” (220 to 420 mm)
Memory Up to 50 per user
Contents Monitor, arm cuff, battery set, instruction manual, quick start guide 
Applied part = Type BF
Protection against 
electric shock Internally powered ME equipment (When using only the batteries)
= Class II ME equipment (Optional AC adapter)
29
SPECIFICATIONS
30Notes:
• These specifications are subject to  change without notice.
• In the clinical validation study, the 5th phase was used on 85 subjects for 
determination of diastolic blood pressure.
• This device has not been validated for use on pregnant patients.
FCC STATEMENT
31FCC CAUTION
Changes or modifications not expressly appr oved by the party responsible for 
compliance could void the user’s authority to operate the equipment.
Note:
This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for a Class B 
digital device, pursuant to part 15 of the FCC Rules. These limits are designed to 
provide reasonable protection against harmful interference in a residential 
installation. This equipment generates, uses and can radiate radio frequency 
energy and, if not installed and used in accordance with the instructions, may 
cause harmful interference to radio communications. However, there is no 
guarantee that interference will not occur in a particular installation. If this equipment does cause harmful interference to radio or television reception, which 
can be determined by turning the equipment off and on, the user is encouraged to 
try to correct the interference by one or more of the following measures:
• Reorient or relocate the receiving antenna.
• Increase the separation between the equipment and receiver.
• Connect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from that to which 
the re ceiver is connected.
• Consult the dealer or an experienced rad io/TV technician for help.
LIMITED WARRANTY
32Your BP742N Automatic Blood Pressure Monitor, excluding the arm cuff and 
batteries, is warranted to be free from defects in materials and workmanship appearing within 2 years from the date of purchase, when used in accordance with the instructions provided with the monitor. The arm cuff is warranted to be free 
from defects in materials and workmanship appearing within 1 year from the date 
of purchase when the monitor is used in accordance with the instructions provided 
with the monitor. The above warranty extends only to the original retail purchaser.
We will, at our option, replace without charge any monitor or arm cuff covered 
by the above warranty. Replacement is our only responsibility and your only 
remedy under the above warranty.
To obtain warranty service con tact Customer Service by calling 1-800-634-4350  
for the address of the inspection center and the return shipping and handling fee.
Enclose the original printed receipt. Include a letter, with your name, address, phone number, and description of the specific problem. Pack the product 
carefully to prevent damage in transit. Because of possible loss in transit, we 
recommend insuring the product with return receipt requested.
THE FOREGOING IS THE SOLE WARRANTY PROVIDED BY OMRON IN 
CONNE CTION WITH THIS PRODUCT, AND OMRON HEREBY DISCLAIMS 
ANY OTHER WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING IMPLIED 
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE. IMPLIED WARRANTIES AND OTHER TERMS THAT MAY BE 
IMPOSED BY LAW, IF ANY, ARE LIMITED IN DURATION TO THE PERIOD 
OF THE ABOVE EXPRESS WARRANTY.
OMRON SHALL NOT BE LIABLE FOR LOSS OF USE OR ANY OTHER 
SPECIAL, INCIDENT AL, CONSEQUENTIAL OR INDIRECT COSTS, 
EXPENSES OR DAMAGES.
This warranty provides you with specific le gal rights, and you may have other 
rights that vary by jurisdiction. Because of special local requirements, some of 
the above limitations and exclusions may not apply to you.
FOR CUSTOMER SERVICE
Visit our web site at: www.omronhealthcare.com
Call toll free: 1-800-634-4350
GUIDANCE AND MANUFACTURER’S DECLARATION
33OMRON Automatic Blood Pressure Monitor
Information for accompanying documents in the scope of IEC60601-1-2:2007
Model: BP742N including AC-adapter
Important information regarding El ectro Magnetic Compatibility (EMC)
With the increased number of electronic devices such as PC’s and mobile (cellular) 
telephones, medical devices in use may be susceptible to electromagnetic interference from other devices. Electromagnetic interference may result in incorrect operation of the 
medical device and create a potentially unsafe situation. Medical devices should also not 
interfere with other devices.
In order to regulate the requirements for EMC (Electro Magnetic Compatibility) with the 
aim to prevent unsafe product situations, the IEC60601-1-2 standard has been 
implemented. This standard defines the levels of immunity to electromagnetic interferences as well as maximum levels of electromagnetic emissions for medical 
devices.
Medical devices manufactured by OMRON Healthcare conform to this IEC60601-1-2:2007 
standard for both immunity and emissions.
Nevertheless, special precautions need to be observed:
• The use of accessories and cables other t han those specified by OMRON, with the 
exception of cables sold by OMRON as replacement parts for internal components, may 
result in increased emission or decreased immunity of the device.
• The medical devices should not be used adjacent  to or stacked with other equipment. /g3
In case adjacent or stacked use is necessary , the medical device should be observed to 
verify normal operation in the configuration in which it will be used.
• Refer to further guidance below regarding the EMC environment in which the device 
shoul d be used.
• The MEDICAL ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT BP742N including AC-adapter needs 
special pre cautions regarding EMC and needs to be installed and put into service 
according to the EMC information provided in this documentations.
• The Essential Performance of the BP742N includ ing AC-adapter is to measure a blood 
pressure and a pulse rate and using the memory function.
The BP742N including AC-adapter may be interfered with by other equipment, even if that 
other equipment complies with CISPR EMISSION requirements.
GUIDANCE AND MANUFACTURER’S DECLARATION
Guidance and manufacturer’s declaration - electromagnetic immunity
OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter is intended for use in the electromagnetic environment 
specified below . The customer or the user of this OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter should 
assure that it is used in such environment.
Emissions test Compliance Electromagnetic environment - guidance
RF emissions /g3
CISPR 11Group 1The OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter uses RF 
energy only  for its internal function. Therefore, its RF 
emissions are very low and are not likely to cause any interference in nearby electronic equipment.
RF emissions /g3
CISPR 11Class B
The OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter is 
suitable for use in all establishments, including 
domestic establishments and those directly connected to the public low-voltage power supply network that 
supplies buildings used for domestic purposes.Harmonic 
emissions
IEC 61000-3-2Class A
Voltage 
fluctuations/flicke r 
emissionsIEC61000-3-3Complies
34
GUIDANCE AND MANUFACTURER’S DECLARATION
Guidance and manufacturer’s declaration - electromagnetic immunity
OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter is intended for use in the electromagnetic environment 
specified below . The customer or the user of this OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter should 
assure that it is used in such environment.
Immunity testIEC 60601
test leve lCompliance levelElectromagnetic
environment - guidance
Electrostatic 
discharge (ESD)
IEC 61000-4-2±6 kV contact
±8 kV air±6 kV contact
±8 kV airFloor should be wood, concrete, or ceramic tile. If floors are 
covered with synthetic material, 
the relative humidity should be 
at least 30 %.
Electrical fast /g3
transient/burst
IEC 61000-4-4±2 kV for power 
supply lines
±1 kV for /g3
input/output lines±2 kV for power 
supply lines
±1 kV for input/
output linesMains power quality should 
be th at of a typical 
commercial and/or hospital environment.
Surge
IEC 61000-4-5±1 kV line(s) to 
line(s)
±2 kV line(s) to earth±1 kV line(s) to 
line(s)
±2 kV line(s) to earthMains power quality should be 
that of a typical commercial 
and/or hospital environment.
Voltage dips, short interruptions and 
voltage variations on 
power supply inputlines
IEC 61000-4-11<5 % U
T (>95 % dip 
in UT)
for 0.5 cycle<5 % UT (>95 % dip 
in UT)
for 0.5 cycleMains power quality should 
be that of a typical 
commercial and/or hospital 
environment. If the user of 
the OMRON BP742N 
including AC-adapter 
requires continued operation 
during power mains 
interruption, it is 
recommended that the OMRON BP742N including 
AC-adapter be powered from 
an uninterruptible power 
supply.40 % UT (60 % dip /g3
in UT)
for 5 cycles40 % UT (60 % dip /g3
in UT)
for 5 cycles
70 % UT (30 % dip /g3
in UT)
for 25 cycles70 % UT (30 % dip /g3
in UT)
for 25 cycles
<5 % UT (95 % dip /g3
in UT)
for 5 sec.<5 % UT (95 % dip /g3
in UT)
for 5 sec.
Power frequency /g3
(50/60 Hz) magnetic 
field
IEC 61000-4-83 A/m 3 A/mPower frequency magnetic 
fields should be at levels 
characteristic of a typical 
location in a typical commercial 
or hospital environment.
Note: UT is the A.C. mains voltage prior to application of the test level.
35
GUIDANCE AND MANUFACTURER’S DECLARATION
Guidance and manufacturer’s declaration - electromagnetic immunity
OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter is intended for use in the electromagnetic environment 
specified below. The customer or the user of this OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter should assure 
that it is used in such environment.
Immunity testIEC 60601 
test levelCompli-
ance 
levelElectromagnetic environment - guidance
Conducted RF
IEC 61000-4-6
Radiated RF
IEC 61000-4-33 V rms
150 kHz to 
80 MHz
3 V/m
80 MHz to 
2.5 GHz3 V rms
3 V/mPortable and mobile RF communications equipment should be 
used no closer to any part of the OMRON BP742N including /g3
AC-adapter including cables, than the recommended 
separation distance calculated from the equation appropriate to 
the frequency of the transmitter.
Recommend separation distance
d = 1.2 /g165Pd = 1.2 /g165P
/g3
80 MHz to 800 MHz
d = 2.3 /g165P /g3
800 MHz to 2.5 GHz
where P is the maximum output power rating of the 
transmitter in watts (W) according to the transmitter 
manufacturer and d is the recommended separation distance in meters (m).
Field strengths from fixed RF transmitters as determined by 
an electromagnetic site survey,a should be less than the 
compliance le vel in each frequency range.b
Interference may occur in the vicinity of equipment marked 
with the following symbol:
Note1: At 80 MHz and 800 MHz, the higher frequency range applies.
Note2: These guidelines may not apply in all situations. Electromagnetic propagation is affected by 
absorption and reflection from structures, objects, and people.
a Field strengths from fixed transmitters, such as base stations for radio (cellular/ cordless) telephones 
and land mobile radio, AM and FM radio broadcast, and TV broadcast cannot be predicted 
theoretically with accuracy. To assess the electromagnetic environment due to fixed RF transmitters, 
an electromagnetic site survey should be considered. If the measured field strength in the location in 
which the OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter is used exceeds the applicable RF compliance 
level above, the OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter should be observed to verify normal 
operation. If abnormal performance is observed, additional measures may be necessary, such as 
reorienting or relocating the OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter.
b Over the frequency range 150 kHz to 80 MHz, field strengths should be less than 3 V/m.
36
GUIDANCE AND MANUFACTURER’S DECLARATION
Recommended separation distance between portable and mobile RF communications 
equipment and the OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter
OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter is intended for use in an electromagnetic environment in which radiated RF disturbances are controlled. The customer or the user of this OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter can help prevent electromagnetic interference by maintaining a minimum distance between portable and mobile RF communications equipment (transmitters) and the 
OMRON BP742N including AC-adapter as recommended below, according to the maximum 
output power of the communications equipment.
Output Power of Transmitter 
in WattSeparation distance according to frequency of 
transmitte r in meter
150 kHz to 80 
MHz
d = 1.2 /g165P80 MHz to 800 MHz
d = 1.2 /g165P800 MHz to 2.5GHz
d = 2.3  /g165P
0.01 0.12 0.12 0.23
0.1 0.38 0.38 0.73
1 1.2 1.2 2.3
10 3.8 3.8 7.3
100 12 12 23
For transmitters rated at a maximum output power not listed above, the recommended separation 
distance d in meters (m) can be estimated using the equation applicable to the frequency of the 
transmitter, where P is the maximum output power rating of the transmitter in watts (W) according 
to the transmitter manufacturer.
Note: At 80 MHz and 800 MHz, the separation distance for the higher frequency range applies.
Note: These guidelines may not apply in all situations. Electromagnetic propagation is affected by 
absorpt ion and reflection from structures, objects, and people.
37
Manufactured for:
OMRON HEALTHCARE Co., Ltd.53, Kunotsubo, Terado-cho, Muko, Kyoto, 617-0002 JAPAN
Distributed by:
OMRON HEALTHCARE, INC.
1925 West Field Court Lake Forest, IL 60045 U.S.A.
www.omronhealthcare.com© 2013 OMRON HEALTHCARE, INC.Made in Vietnam 2298802-0D
