Parent’s Guide
91-003342-000 US BC

2INTRODUCTION
Thank you for purchasing Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2 by VTech®! 
This great smartwatch features two cameras that allow your child to 
capture everything from action videos to selfies. Then, play games and tell time with customizable clock faces.
Product Layout and Buttons
Side Camera
Selfie Camera
Home Button Micro-USB Port
Shutter Button
Master Power Switch1.44" Touch 
ScreenWristband
3Shutter Button 
Press this button to launch the camera and to take photos and videos.
Home Button 
From Clock Mode: 
Press this button to display the home menu to choose other activities. Hold down this button for 2 seconds to turn the screen off.
From the Home Menu:
Press this button to display the Clock screen.
In other activities:
Press this button to return to the previous screen.
Smart Wake Up
Double tap the screen to wake up the watch and see the current time. For best results, we recommend tapping the screen with the pad of your finger and not your finger nail.
Micro-USB Port 
Connect to your computer with the included Micro-USB Cable to 
transfer files and charge the watch.
INCLUDED IN THIS PACKAGE
• One Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2 
• One micro-USB cable
• One parent's guide
WARNING: All packing materials such as tape, plastic sheets, 
packaging locks, removable tags, cable ties and packaging screws are not part of this toy, and should be discarded for your child’s safety.
NOTE: Please keep this parent's guide as it contains important information.
ATTENTION: Pour la sécurité de votre enfant, débarrassez-vous de tous les produits d’emballage tels que rubans adhésifs, feuilles de plastique, attaches, étiquettes et vis d’emballage. Ils ne font pas partie du jouet.
NOTE: Il est conseillé de conserver ce guide des parents car il comporte des informations importantes.
The battery in this product must not be disposed of with household waste. This battery is recyclable. Please follow your local recycling 
regulations. Battery is not replacable.
4PRODUCT SPECIFICATION
Display 1.44" color touch screen
Supported Languages US English
Photo Resolution 640 X 480 (0.3 MP)
Video Resolution 320 X 240 or 160 X 120
Video Length Limit Per File 60 seconds
Focus Range 1.5 feet - ∞
Internal Memory256 MB built-in memory (shared 
with program data, actual memory available for user storage will be less)
Storage CapacityIndoor Typical Conditions:
Photos: approx. 1520
Videos: Approx. 10.5 minutes at 320 
x 240, approx. 22 minutes at 
160 X 120
Note: The storage capacity is an approximation, the actual amount depends on the shooting environment.
File FormatPhotos: Standard Baseline JPEG
Video: AVI (Motion JPEG)
ConnectivityMicro-USB 2.0 cable (included) for 
connection to computer
Battery Li-ion Polymer battery (not replaceable)
Optimum Operating and Charging Temperature32°F - 104°F (0°C - 40°C)
5WEARING THE SMARTWATCH
People with very sensitive skin may notice some irritation after wearing 
the Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2 for extended periods of time. The skin 
may become irritated when moisture, sweat, soap, or other irritants get 
trapped under the watch band and are left in contact with the skin. To prevent this, we suggest children remove the watch before going to bed for the night, take the watch off if it's feeling uncomfortable, and keep their wrist and the band clean and dry.
In addition, wearing the watch too tightly may also cause irritation. Make 
sure the fit is good - tight enough so the watch stays in place but not so tight that it's uncomfortable. If you notice any redness, swelling, or other irritation, you may want to consult a doctor before wearing the watch again.
GETTING STARTED
Master Power Switch
When you use Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2 for the 
first time, you will need to slide the Master Power 
Switch (located on the underside of the watch) to 
the ON position . You may need a small tool 
such as a paper clip to move the switch to the on position. Then, fully charge the watch before first use. A full charge will take about 3 hours.
When the Master Power Switch is set to the OFF  
position, the unit will not function and the battery will not charge. Only 
move the switch to the OFF position when the watch will not be used for 
an extended period of time.
Note: It is not necessary to switch off the watch in daily use. Once the 
master power switch is off, the watch will stop functioning and after it is turned on again, the time and date has to be reset.
BATTERY RECHARGING
Note: Adult operation required.
To charge Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2, the watch needs to be 
connected to a computer with the included Micro-USB Cable. To do so 
correctly, please follow these steps: 
• Make sure that the Master Power Switch is set to the ON position 
before charging.
• Pull up the rubber cover of the Micro-USB Port on the side of the 
watch.
6• Insert the Micro-USB Cable (small end) into the Micro-USB Port on 
the watch.
• Insert the large end of the Micro-USB Cable into a USB port on your 
computer. A USB port is usually marked with this symbol: .
• Once the connection is successful, you will see a  battery recharging 
symbol appear on the watch screen.
• Check the charging progress regularly throughout recharging.
• When the battery is fully charged, a message will display on the screen for a while before the screen automatically turns off. You may then disconnect your fully charged watch from the computer.
Note: It will take approximately 3 hours to fully charge the battery. The 
actual charging time depends on the charging current, the remaining charge in the battery prior to recharging, and the ambient temperature. The optimum ambient temperature is 32°F - 104°F (0°C to 40°C). If your watch needs a much longer time to fully charge the battery, try a 
different USB power source.
BATTERY LIFE
The time the battery lasts between charges depends on play. Like other 
electronic devices, more frequent usage will drain the battery more quickly. Some activities are more demanding on the battery, such as taking photos and videos. The remaining battery capacity will appear in the top right corner of the screen. When the battery level is low, it is recommended to recharge the battery before further use. When the battery level is too low, the watch will not turn on until it is charged.
Battery Time for Reference
Condition Battery Time
Low Usage 2 weeks
Typical Usage 2-3 days
Heavy Usage 1 day
Note: The above battery time assumptions are based on the screen 
display set to turn off when not in use.
Battery Maintenance
Charge the battery regularly to keep it operating at optimum performance, even when the watch isn’t regularly in use. For example, charge the watch at least once every six months. Move the Master Power Switch 
to the ON position before recharging the battery. Move the Master 
Power Switch to the OFF  position if the watch will not be in use for an 
extended period of time.
7BATTERY NOTICE
Misuse of batteries can lead to them bursting, causing a fire or chemical 
burns. Please read the following precautions:
• Do not disassemble.
• Do not crush and do not expose the battery to any shock or force such 
as hammering, dropping or stepping on it.
• Do not short circuit.
• Do not expose to high temperatures or place near a heat source. Do not leave in direct sunlight for any length of time.
• Do not dispose of in a fire.
• Do not handle damaged or leaking batteries.
• Keep the battery out of the reach of children.
• Keep the battery dry.
• If you find the time between charges is considerably shortened with no change in usage, the battery could be nearing the end of its life. Please dispose of the used battery as described in this manual. The battery life varies from battery to battery depending on storage, operating conditions and environment.
• Examine the charging cord periodically for conditions that may result in the risk of fire, electric shock, or injury to persons such as damage to the cord, housing, or other parts. In the event of such conditions, the cord should not be used until properly repaired or replaced.
SPLASH PROOF FOR E vERYDAY PLAY
• Do not put under running water.
• Do not submerge in water, not suitable for showering, bathing or 
swimming.
• Keep the rubber cover over the Micro-USB Port closed tightly while it 
is not in use in order to prevent any water getting in the watch.
TO BEGIN USING  
KIDIz OOM® SMARTWATCH DX2
Make sure the Master Power Switch is set to the ON position  and 
that the battery is fully charged before using the watch.
To wake the watch, either press the Home Button , Shutter 
Button , or double-tap the screen.
8When turning on the watch for the first time, the date and time setting 
screen will display first. Swipe up or down over the month, day, year, hours and minutes to set the current date and time. Tap the check icon 
 
when you're done. 
When the clock appears on screen, press the Home Button to go to 
the Home Menu. Press the Shutter Button  to take photos and videos.
AUTOMATIC SCREEN OFF
To preserve battery life, the screen will automatically shut off after a 
short period of time when in Clock Mode.
Note: The auto screen off time can be adjusted in Settings / Advanced / 
Auto Screen Off. Please refer to the Settings section in this guide. From other activities, the watch screen will return to Clock Mode automatically if there is no input for 1 minute. When it is in Camera Mode, it will auto-exit after 3 minutes of inactivity. When in Slideshow Mode, the auto-exit 
time is approximately 15 minutes.
CONNECTING TO A COMPUTER
You can connect Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2 to a PC or Mac computer 
using the included Micro-USB Cable. To transfer files between your 
watch and computer, follow these steps:
• Pull up the rubber cover of the Micro-USB Port on the side of your 
watch.
• Insert the Micro-USB Cable (small end) into the Micro-USB Port on 
the watch. 
• Insert the larger end of the cable into a USB port on your computer.  
A USB port is usually marked with this symbol .
• You will see a removable drive called VTech 1938 , please use this to 
transfer files to and from the watch. There is another removable drive 
called VT SYSTEM, which is for storage of system data and should 
not be accessed by users.
Note: Once the watch is connected to your computer, do not disconnect the watch while files are transferring. Only when your watch completes transferring files should you eject it from your computer. Once ejected, you can then physically disconnect the watch from your computer.

9To Backup Photos or Videos Taken with Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2:
• Locate and open the DCIM folder on the removable drive VTech 
1938 .
• Copy and paste the photo and/or video files to a location on your 
computer.
To Backup Sounds Recorded with Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2:
• Locate and open the VOICE folder on the removable drive VTech 
1938 .
• Drag and drop the files to a location on your computer.
To Transfer Photos or Videos to Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2:
• First, select the photo or video files you would like to download from your computer.
• Locate and open the DOWNLOAD folder on the removable drive 
VTech 1938  and drag and drop the photo or video files into the 
PHOTO or VIDEO subfolders.
Note: Do not transfer photo or video files created by other cameras (except for Kidizoom camera photo or video files) to Kidizoom
® 
Smartwatch DX2 , as these files may not be compatible.
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR  
COMPUTER CONNECTION
Microsoft®, Windows Vista®, Windows® 7, Windows® 8 or Windows® 10 
Operating System or a Macintosh Computer with macOS version 10.6, 10.7, 10.8, 10.9, 10.10, 10.11 or 10.12.
Microsoft
®, Windows® and their logos are trademarks of the Microsoft 
Corporation in the United States and other countries. Macintosh and 
Mac logos are trademarks of Apple Inc. in the United States and other countries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
ACTIvITIES
Clock Display  
When the screen is off, press the Home Button to show 
the clock screen. 
• Tilt the watch in different angles to experience the 3D 
clock faces. You can turn the 3D effect off in Settings.
• Tap the center of the screen to switch the clock face 
between analog and digital displays.

10• Swipe left or right to see more clock faces.
• Swipe up from the bottom of the screen to display the 
Speak Time Menu and tap the mouth icon to hear the 
current time. Swipe down to hide this menu.
• Swipe down from the top of screen to display the Sound 
On/Off Menu. Tap the speaker icon to mute or unmute the sound. Swipe up to hide this menu.
Press the Home Button  again to go to the Home Menu 
and select other activities.
Press the Shutter Button to enter Camera Mode.
Note: Hold the Home Button for approximately 1-2 
seconds to turn off the screen.
Home Menu 
When the screen is off, press the Home Button to show the clock screen. When the watch shows a clock face, press the Home Button 
again to display the Home Menu and choose an activity. Swipe left or right to scroll through the menu pages and tap an icon to enter the activity.
1
32
45
76
89 10
11 12 1513
1614
1. Camera
2. Video
3. Playback
4. Voice Recorder
5. Games
6. Monster Catcher
7. Noodle Booster
8. Silly Yourself
9. Photo Clock Faces Maker10. Action Challenges
11. Sound Shakers
12. Pedometer
13. Timing Tools  
  (Alarm, Timer,  
  Stopwatch, Calender)
14. Time Master15. Downloads
16. Settings
111. Camera  
Press the Shutter Button  to enter Camera Mode.
• Press the Shutter Button or Shutter icon 
  to 
take a photo.
• Tap the Camera Switch icon 
  to switch between 
the Side Camera  and Selfie Camera .
• To explore the different photo effects, tap the Star icon, then swipe or 
tap on the left or right arrows to choose an effect. Tap the Star icon 
  
again to turn off the photo effect.
• Tap the Playback icon 
  to view your photos. 
2. Video  
Tap the Video icon from the Home Menu to go to Video 
Mode.
• Press the Shutter Button or Record icon 
  to start 
recording. 
• To stop, either press the Shutter Button  again or the 
Stop icon 
 .
• Tap the Video Switch icon 
  to switch between the Side Camera  
and Selfie Camera .
• To explore the different video effects, tap the Star icon, then swipe or 
tap on the left or right arrows to choose an effect. Tap the Star icon again to turn off the video effect.
• Tap the Playback icon to view your videos.
When you finish recording a video, the playback screen will appear.
• Tap the Play icon 
 to play the last recorded video.
• Tap the Trash Can icon 
  to display the Delete Menu.
Note: Each video can be a maximum of 1 minute long.
3. Playback  
Here you can view your photos and videos.
• The most recently captured photo or video will be shown first. Tap the 
arrow icons or swipe to see others.Note: If games are turned off in Settings / Advanced / Parental Control, 
the Games, Monster Catcher and Noodle Booster icons will not appear in the Home Menu. The icon arrangement will be different so  that Alarms, Timer, Stopwatch and Calendar will not be grouped together in Timing Tools.

12• Tap the Slideshow icon 
  to view the photos in a slideshow.
• Tap the Play icon to play a video.
• Tap the Trash Can icon to display the Delete Menu. 
Note: To delete all photos and videos, tap the Down Arrow icon on the 
Delete Menu and then follow the instructions to continue.
While playing a video, tap the Fast Rewind 
  or Fast Forward 
  icons 
to toggle the fast rewind / forward functions at 1X, 2X and 4X speeds.
4. Voice Recorder  
The Voice Recorder allows you to record your own 
voice for up to 60 seconds per recording and apply fun voice-changing effects. 
Tap the Record icon to start recording. When you're 
finished, tap the Stop icon.
Swipe left or right to review the previous or next 
recording. Tap the Star icon to display the Voice Effects screen.
There are five built-in voice effects. On the Voice Effect 
screen, tap the left or right icon to preview the different effects. Tap the Save As icon to save the recording with the selected effect as a separate file. To exit the voice effects screen, tap the Star icon again or press the Home Button.
To delete a recording, tap the Trash Can icon to display 
the Delete Menu and tap the Check icon 
 to confirm.
5. Games  
There are 3 built-in games on the Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2.
• Mousy Maze
• Ancient Adventure
• Puzzle Swap
Swipe left or right to choose the game you want to play.
Mousy Maze
The mouse is trapped! Help it collect cheese and find 
the key to escape. Eat as many cheese wedges as you can to set a new high score.

13Control: Tap an object on the current floor to direct the mouse to that 
location. Tap cheese to eat them, and tap the key to grab it. Tap a ladder on the current floor and the mouse will climb up or down. Tap the door when you reach it to exit and beat the level.
Ancient AdventureLife is hard when animals are trying to eat you! Help 
the caveman avoid the obstacles and bring food home for his family. Run as fast as possible for a high score.
Control: Tap the red or blue footprints to choose the 
next circle on the path. Avoid animals, stones and traps along the way.
Puzzle SwapHelp, these photos don't make any sense! Solve the 
puzzle to see the beautiful pictures. In higher levels, you'll even see some of your own photos made into puzzles.
Control: Tap one puzzle piece and then another to 
swap their positions.
6. Monster Catcher 
There are invisible monsters hiding all around us. Use the Monster Catcher on your watch to find and capture monsters. Level up as you gain experience and special awards on your way to finding all 60+ monsters.
Hunting ModeWhen you first enter hunting mode, the world seen 
through the watch's Side Camera  will appear in black 
and white. Walking around powers up the watch and enables it to see evidence of the nearest monster. Just aim the watch camera at a large collection of the colored monster particles and tap on the screen to take a sample. Now the monster can be fully revealed and captured! Continue tapping until the monster's energy is gone.
For some monsters to appear you will need to cast a 
spell by connecting the dots on the screen. Connect the dots to form the shape shown and the monster will appear.
Every time you capture a monster your Experience Points (XP) and 
Magic Power (MP) will increase.
Note: We suggest playing this game with natural light or in white lighting. 
Some lighting conditions, like fluorescent or yellow lights may affect the camera's ability to accurately detect colors.

14Exploration Mode
When you see the walking man icon, keep walking to 
reach the next monster. You can see the distance to reach the monster on the bottom of the screen. Pay attention along the way, as some magic items may appear as you travel to increase your MP and XP.
The next three modes can be found from the Monster 
Catcher Main Menu:
Monster Book – Learn everything there is to know 
about all the monsters you've discovered.
Monster Album – Review the photos taken when you 
captured all the monsters.
Levels and Awards – Here you can see your XP, MP, current level and 
all the medals you've earned.
7. Noodle Booster 
Train your brain with these three fun, progressive logic games! Each one 
gets harder as you get more correct answers.
• Balloon Numbers
• Odd One Out
• Treasure Hunt
Balloon NumbersAs the balloons appear, tap them in ascending or 
descending order according to the direction of the arrow above the stairs. See how many sets you can order correctly before time runs out.
Odd One Out
The four images may look similar, but look closely and 
you'll see one is different! Pay attention to the shapes, quantity, colors, and configuration of the candies to tap on the set that's different as fast as you can. 
Treasure Hunt
Help find the buried treasure! Follow the sequence of 
arrows at the bottom of the screen to count the squares from the flag to the hidden treasure. Pay close attention, as some directions may even have you retrace your steps backwards. Think fast and see how much treasure you can collect before time runs out.

158. Silly Yourself 
Take a normal selfie or photo of a friend and let the watch make it into a 
silly face! Follow these instructions to create some memorable laughs:
• Tap the Camera Switch icon to switch between the Side and Selfie 
Cameras .
• Carefully align your face or your friend's so it fits within the face outline 
on the watch. Try moving both the watch and your face to get it just right.
• The watch will randomly choose a silly effect to put on the image.
Once you've made some silly faces, tap on the Gallery icon 
 to see 
all the silly faces you created.
9. Photo Clock Faces Maker 
With Photo Clock Faces Maker you can create custom clock faces from your own photos. From the main menu, either select a saved clock face to edit 
 or choose to create a new clock face 
 .
Take a New Photo
• From the Create a New Photo Clock Face menu, first tap on the 
Capture icon on the left.
• Next, swipe left or right or tap on the arrow icons to select a clock face style.
• Position the watch so it's pointing at the image you'd like to capture and tap the Camera icon in the lower-left corner to take a picture. You can also choose to use the Selfie camera by tapping the Camera Switch icon in the upper-left corner.
• After you take a picture it will freeze on the screen. If you're happy with the image, tap the green Check icon in the lower-right corner to create the new clock face. To re-take the picture, tap the red X icon in the lower-left corner.
• After you save the clock face you will enter the Gallery. See below for instructions on browsing the gallery and editing existing photo clock faces. Press the Home Button to return to the main Photo Clock 
Faces menu.
Use a Photo from the Camera Roll
• From the Create a New Photo Clock Face menu, first tap the Album 
icon on the right.
• Next, swipe left or right or tap on the arrow icons to select the photo you would like to use. Tap the green Check icon to select an image.
16• Next, swipe left or right or tap on the arrow icons to select the clock 
face style you would like to use with the selected photo. Tap the green Check icon to create the clock face.
• After you create the clock face you will enter the Gallery. See below for instructions on browsing the gallery and editing existing photo clock faces. Press the Home Button to return to the main Photo 
Clock Faces menu.
Photo Clock Faces Gallery
• Tap the arrow icons to see all the clock faces you've created.
• Tap the Trash icon to display the Delete Menu.
• Tap the Pencil icon to enter Edit mode and select a different clock 
style to use with the same image.
Note: Saved photo clock faces will appear on the Clock Display mode automatically.
10. Action Challenge 
Action Challenge is a fun and active way to challenge yourself. It includes three activities that count your movement during a period of time: Racing Run, Crazy Dance and Funky Jump.
Swipe left or right or tap on the arrows to choose a challenge.A. Racing Run
Tap the Stopwatch icon to set an amount of time and 
start running as fast as you can. While you run, the character on the screen runs. The character will try his best to run as fast as you can. Don’t worry if he can’t keep up with you. Tap the stopwatch icon to choose different times, swipe the screen to choose different characters and then press the go button and start running. When the time is up, it will show your score.
B. Crazy Dance
Tap the Music Note icon to select a song and start 
dancing. While you dance, the character on the screen dances. The character will try his best to dance as well as you can. Don’t worry if his moves aren’t as cool as yours. Tap the song icon to choose a song, swipe the screen to choose different characters and then press the go button  and start dancing.

17C. Funky Jump
Tap the Stopwatch icon to set an amount of time and 
start jumping as many times as you can. While you jump, the character on the screen jumps. The character will try his best to jump as much as you can. Don’t worry if he can’t keep up. You can also swipe left or right to choose different characters to compete against. Press the green Play icon to start jumping. When the time is up, it will show how many times you jumped.
11. Sound Shaker 
Walk like a dinosaur or run like a race car! Choose from 10 different sound effects and then shake your hand with the Kidizoom
® Smartwatch DX2 
to play. 
12. Pedometer 
This is a basic pedometer to count your movements. The watch should be worn on the wrist for greatest accuracy.
• Tap the Start icon to start the pedometer, and it will 
automatically stop at the end of the day, or when you 
tap the Stop icon.
• Tap the History graph icon to look at your past movement.
• Tap the Goal icon to set a goal and challenge yourself 
or your friends.
Once the pedometer is running:
• Tap the Stop Button to stop the counter.
• Tap the Reset Button to reset the counter to zero.
Note: This kid-friendly pedometer is just for fun and is not as accurate 
as a commercial pedometer for adults. The pedometer only counts movement when it is in the Pedometer Activity or Clock Mode. Entering other activities will suspend the counter. The pedometer will only count movement if it is worn on the arm that is moving.
13. Timing Tools 
From the Timing Tools menu, tap the arrow icons or swipe to select an activity, then tap the screen to make a selection.
Alarm 
Set an alarm by choosing from a selection of alarm 
tones and animations. You can also record your own voice to use as an alarm.

18• Tap the Time or Alarm icons to change the alarm time.
• Tap the Bell icon to toggle the alarm ON or OFF.
To set the Alarm Time:
• Select the hour and minute by swiping up or down on 
the hours, minutes and AM/PM. 
• Tap the Tone icon to display the Alarm Tone Selection 
menu. There are nine built-in alarm sounds and one 
voice recording alarm. Swipe left or right to preview the different tones and animations. Tap the Check icon to confirm your selection. 
• To make your own voice alarm, tap the Record icon to start recording. 
While recording, tap the Stop icon to end the recording, or it will stop automatically after three seconds. Tap the Play icon to play the 
recorded voice.
• Once you choose an alarm, tap the green Check icon to confirm.
Note: If the battery level is too low, the alarm will need to be set again.
Timer 
Use this app to set a countdown timer.
• Tap the Play icon to start the timer immediately.
• Tap the Style icon or swipe left or right to change the timer style. There 
are five different timers for you to try out.
• Tap the time to enter Timer Settings. Swipe up or down on the minutes 
and seconds to change the time. Once set, tap the green Check to 
confirm. 
• While the timer is running, tap the Pause icon to pause the countdown 
and tap it again to resume. Tap the Timer Reset icon to stop the countdown and reset the timer.
Stopwatch 
• Tap the Play icon to start the stopwatch.
• Tap the Style icon or swipe left or right to change the stopwatch style. 
There are 5 fun stopwatch styles to try!
• While the stopwatch is running, tap the Pause icon to pause the timer. 
Tap it again to resume. Tap the Timer Reset icon to stop the timer and reset the time to zero.

19Calendar  
Explore the Calendar by swiping left or right to see the 
previous or next month. Swipe up or down to see the previous or next year.
Time Master 
This activity will help you learn how to tell time. 
• Tap on the clock or the owl to hear the time spoken. The owl tells the 
time in both analog and digital modes.
• Tap the Hour icon or Minute icon to select the time you want the owl to 
say.
• Tap the Plus or Minus icon to adjust the time by one hour or minute.
Downloads 
Downloads is where the Download Manager and any content downloaded 
from Learning Lodge® will appear. To access downloadable content you 
first have to register an account with VTech's Learning Lodge®. 
Downloading Learning Lodge® Content
Follow these steps to download Learning Lodge® content:
1. Connect Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2 to a computer using the 
included Micro-USB Cable.
2. Click the Download Website link in the drive VTECH 1938  that 
appears on your computer, or visit vtechkids.com/download.
3. Download and install the correct Learning Lodge® software for your 
operating system.
4. Launch the Learning Lodge® application and find all the great extra 
content for your Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2!
Note: For further details about downloading content from the Learning 
Lodge®, please refer to the online help section at vtechkids.com/support.
Download Manager
Here you can view the memory size of each download or delete 
unwanted content to free up memory.
To delete downloads, scroll up or down to select the application to 
remove  and then tap the Delete icon to display the Delete Menu.
Note: If the downloadable content is accidentally deleted, you may 
connect to the Learning Lodge® to re-download the applications.

2016. Settings 
Swipe left or right to scroll through the options:
Volume • Tap the Up or Down icons to set the system volume.
Brightness • Tap the Up or Down icons to set the screen's brightness.
Date • Swipe up or down on the month, day and year to set the date.
• Tap the Date Format icon to change the date format (DD/MM/YYYY 
or MM/DD/YYYY). 
• Tap the green Check icon to save.
Time 
• Swipe up or down on the hours, minutes, or AM/PM to set the time. 
• Tap the green Check icon to save.
3D Effects • Tap On/Off to enable or disable the 3D effects feature.
Note: If the watch enters Power Saving Mode, the screen will dim and 
the 3D effect may not be shown.
Smart Wake Up 
• When Smart Wake Up is enabled, you can double-tap on the screen 
to wake up the watch.
• Tap On/Off to enable or disable this feature.
Wallpaper 
• Tap the left or right arrow icons to change the wallpaper.
• Tap the green Check mark to save your selection.
Advanced Settings• Memory 
See a summary of memory usage or reformat the memory.Note: Formatting will erase all data in the memory, including all photos, 
videos, voice files, photo clockfaces and downloaded apps.
21• Image Display (Aspect Ratio) 
All photos and videos are saved at 4:3 ratio, but you can select from 
two different aspect ratios for displaying the image in the preview and playback screens:
Cropped: Image appears to fully fill the screen with the left and right sides cut off.
Fit Screen: Image scaled to fit the screen, with the whole image 
displayed.
• Video Resolution 
There are two resolution options:
160 X 120: The video size is smaller and you can record and save more videos.
320 X 240: The video quality is better and takes up more memory, so 
fewer videos can be saved.
• Auto Screen Off 
Allows you to set an Auto Screen Off timer. Tap the left and the right arrows to set the time, then tap the green Check icon to confirm.
Selecting Disable Auto Screen Off will not turn off the screen, but the 
screen will dim if there is no input for 30 seconds in Clock Display Mode to save power. At this time, operation of the watch will be limited to showing the time. No other functions will be operational, including 3D clock face effects, until the watch wakes up. 
Tip: If the Auto Screen Off time is set to one of the longer options, battery 
consumption will increase and the time the battery lasts will decrease. • Indoor Light Frequency 
Use this setting to set the AC power frequency when traveling. If this 
is not set correctly, you may see flickering on the preview screen and photos and videos captured in indoor environments.
• Parental Control 
Access these settings to either disable games or set a daily time limit. 
By default there is no time limit set, you can choose a limit of 15, 30, 60 or 90 minutes per day. Once a time limit is reached, games will not be accessible until the following day. When games are disabled, icons will appear in the Main Menu in a slightly different configuration.
Tip: This feature is designed for parents of children who cannot yet 
read, as access to the setting is granted by following simple, on-screen 
instructions.
22Note: The time limit will reset if the date or time settings are changed.
• Factory Reset 
Factory Reset will erase content stored in the memory and reset all 
system settings to factory defaults.
Care & Maintenance
1. Keep the rubber cover over the Micro-USB Port closed tightly when 
not in use in order to prevent dust or water from getting in.
2. Keep the watch clean by wiping it with a slightly damp cloth.
3. Keep the watch out of direct sunlight and away from direct heat 
sources.
4. Do not drop the watch on a hard surface, expose it to moisture, or 
immerse it in water.
5. Keep the lens clean. If the pictures taken are blurry, it could be 
because there is dust or dirt on the lens. You can clean the lens by:
 • Blowing on the lens.
 • Gently wiping the lens with a dry cloth.
WARNING
A very small percentage of the public, due to an existing condition, may experience epileptic seizures or momentary loss of consciousness when viewing certain types of flashing colors or patterns.
While Kidizoom
® Smartwatch DX2 does not contribute to any additional 
risks, we do recommend that parents supervise their children while 
they play games. If your child experiences dizziness, altered vision, disorientation, or convulsions, discontinue use immediately and consult your doctor. Please note that focusing on at close range and handling 
a Kidizoom
® Smartwatch DX2 as a game controller for a prolonged 
period of time may cause fatigue or discomfort. We recommend that children take a 15-minute break for every hour of play.
23TROUBLESHOOTING
Check this section if you experience difficulty operating Kidizoom® 
Smartwatch DX2.
Problem Correction
The watch 
has stopped 
working1. Turn the Master Power Switch OFF  for 30 seconds.
2. Turn the Master Power Switch ON again and then 
press the Home Button to turn the watch on. It 
should now work properly.
3. If the watch doesn't work, recharge the battery and repeat steps 1 and 2.
 (Refer to the battery recharging section for details)
Screen is not working correctly1. Turn the Master Power Switch OFF  for 30 seconds.
2. Turn the Master Power Switch ON again and then 
press the Home Button  to turn the watch on. The 
screen should now function normally.
Image taken is not clear1. Make sure the lighting conditions of the shooting 
environment are good.
2. Check to see if the camera lens is clean. If you find 
some dust or dirt on it, please see the steps to clean the lens in Care and Maintenance.
Cannot connect the watch to a computer1. Check the connections on the cable between the watch and the computer and review the Connecting to a Computer section of this guide.
2. Turn the Master Power Switch OFF for 30 seconds.
Turn the Master Power Switch ON and reconnect the watch and computer.
Cannot view videos or photos loaded from a computerCheck if the files are in the correct directories on the 
Kidizoom
® Smartwatch DX2. Photos should be put in 
the DOWNLOAD\PHOTO folder, and videos should be 
put in the DOWNLOAD\VIDEO folder on Kidizoom® 
Smartwatch DX2  when it is connected to a computer.
Kidizoom® Smartwatch DX2 only supports the formats 
below:
• Photos in Standard Baseline JPEG
• Video in AVI (motion JPEG) created by Kidizoom® 
Smartwatch DX2
24BATTERY DISPOSAL
How to Take Out the Battery for Disposal
CAUTION: These steps must be performed with 
care by an adult. Wear protective gloves in case of 
battery leakage.
1. Ensure the Master Power Switch is set to the 
OFF  position.
2. Loosen the four screws on the back of the watch 
using a Phillips head screwdriver, then remove the back plate.
3. Locate the positive red wire and the negative black wire that connect the battery to the watch.
4. Pull out the battery pack until both the positive and negative wires are detached from the watch.
5. After the battery is removed, cover the exposed wires with electrical tape and make sure it is handled and disposed of properly.
Note: Do not cut the wires simultaneously with scissors, pointed objects 
or any other electrical conductors.
Important note:
• Do not pierce the battery pack with any sharp objects.
• Do not allow any wires left attached to the battery to touch each other.
• Do not touch ends of wires attached to the battery with any other 
electrical conductors.
• Do not expose the battery to direct sunlight or high temperatures.
• Do not handle a damaged Li-ion polymer battery.Battery pack
Negative wirePositive wire
25DISCLAIMER AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITY
VTech® Electronics North America, L.L.C. and its suppliers assume no 
responsibility for any damage or loss resulting from the use of this guide. 
VTech® Electronics North America, L.L.C. and its suppliers assume no 
responsibility for any loss or claims by third parties that may arise through the use of this product. VTech
® Electronics North America, L.L.C. and 
its suppliers assume no responsibility for any damage or loss caused by deletion of data as a result of malfunction, dead battery, or repairs.
Company: VTech
® Electronics North America, L.L.C.
Address: 1156 W. Shure Drive, Suite 200, Arlington Heights, IL 60004 USA
Phone: 1-800-521-2010 in the U.S. or 1-877-352-8697 in Canada
IMPORTANT NOTE:
Creating and developing VTech® products is accompanied by a 
responsibility that we at VTech® take very seriously. We make every 
effort to ensure the accuracy of the information, which forms the value 
of our products. However, errors sometimes can occur. It is important for you to know that we stand behind our products and  encourage you to call our Consumer Services Department at 1-800-521-2010 in the U.S. or 1-877-352-8697 in Canada, or by going to our website at vtechkids.com and filling out our Contact Us form located under the Customer Support link with any problems and/or suggestions that you might have. A service representative will be happy to help you.
Note: 
This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for 
a Class B digital device, pursuant to Part 15 of the FCC Rules. These 
limits are designed to provide reasonable protection against harmful interference in a residential installation.  This equipment generates, uses 
and can radiate radio frequency energy and, if not installed and used in accordance with the instructions, may cause harmful interference to radio communications.  However, there is no guarantee that interference 
will not occur in a particular installation.  If this equipment does cause 
harmful interference to radio or television reception, which can be determined by turning the equipment off and on, the user is encouraged to try to correct the interference by one or more of the following measures:
• Reorient or relocate the receiving antenna.
• Increase the separation between the equipment and receiver.
• Connect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from that to 
which the receiver is connected.
• Consult the dealer or an experienced radio / TV technician for help.
26THIS DEVICE COMPLIES WITH PART 15 OF THE FCC 
RULES. OPERATION IS SUBJECT TO THE FOLLOWING TWO CONDITIONS: (1) THIS DEVICE MAY NOT CAUSE HARMFUL INTERFERENCE, AND (2) THIS DEVICE MUST ACCEPT ANY INTERFERENCE RECEIVED, INCLUDING INTERFERENCE THAT MAY CAUSE UNDESIRED OPERATION.
CAN ICES-3 (B)/NMB-3(B)
Caution : Changes or modifications not expressly approved by the party 
responsible for compliance could void the user’s authority to operate the equipment.
Shielded cables must be used with this unit to ensure compliance with 
the Class B FCC limits.
27
Register your product online at vtechkids.com/warranty.
PRODUCT WARRANTY
This Warranty is applicable only to the original purchaser, 
is non-transferable and applies only to “VTech” products or parts. This product is covered by a 3-month Warranty from the original purchase date, under normal use and service, 
against defective workmanship and materials. This Warranty does not apply to (a) consumable parts, such as batteries; (b) cosmetic damage, including but not limited to scratches and dents; (c) damage caused by use with non-VTech products; (d) damage caused by accident, misuse, unreasonable use, immersion in water, neglect, abuse, battery leakage, or improper installation, improper service, or other external causes; (e) damage caused by operating the product outside the permitted or intended uses described by VTech in the owner’s manual; (f) a product or part that has been modified (g) defects caused by normal wear and tear or otherwise due to the normal aging of the product; or (h) if any VTech serial number has been removed or defaced. 
Prior to returning a product for any reason, please notify the VTech Consumer 
Services Department by going to our website at vtechkids.com, filling out our Contact Us form located under the Customer Support link or calling 
1-800-521-2010.
If the service representative is unable to resolve the issue, you will be provided 
instructions on how to return the product and have it replaced under Warranty. Return of the product under Warranty must adhere to the following rules: If VTech believes that there may be a defect in the materials or workmanship of the 
product and can confirm the purchase date and location of the product, we will 
at our discretion replace the product with a new unit or product of comparable value. A replacement product or parts assumes the remaining Warranty of the original product or 30 days from the date of replacement, whichever provides longer coverage. 
THIS WARRANTY AND THE REMEDIES SET FORTH ABOVE ARE EXCLUSIVE AND 
IN LIEU OF ALL OTHER WARRANTIES, REMEDIES AND CONDITIONS, WHETHER ORAL, WRITTEN, STATUTORY , EXPRESS OR IMPLIED. IF VTECH CANNOT LAWFULLY DISCLAIM STATUTORY OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES THEN TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, ALL SUCH WARRANTIES SHALL BE LIMITED TO 
THE DURATION OF THE EXPRESS WARRANTY AND TO THE REPLACEMENT 
SERVICE AS DETERMINED BY VTECH IN ITS SOLE DISCRETION.
To the extent permitted by law, VTech will not be responsible for direct, special, 
incidental or consequential damages resulting from any breach of Warranty.
This Warranty is not intended to persons or entities outside the United States 
of America. Any disputes resulting from this Warranty shall be subject to the 
final and conclusive determination of VTech. 
Visit our website for more
information about our products,
downloads, resources and more.
vtechkids.com
TM & © 2017 VTech Holdings Limited.
All rights reserved.
Printed in China.
91-003342-000 US
