Product Overview
1. Upper Handle
2. Fingertip Controls
3. Solution and Steam 
Spray Trigger
4. Clean Water Tank
5. Clean Out Cycle Button6. Dirty Water Tank 
Removal Button
7. Dirty Water Tank with 
Filter and Strainer
8. Control Panel
9. Brush Roll WindowImportant Safety Instructions  ........................... 2
Warranty  ..................................................................... 3
What’s in the Box?  .................................................. 3
Assembly  .................................................................... 3
Changing the Brush Roll  ...................................... 4
Filling the Clean Water Tank  ............................. 5
Controls and Cleaning Modes  ............................ 6
Cleaning Your Floors  ............................................. 7
Sanitizing Hard Floors  ........................................... 7
Emptying the Dirty Water Tank  ........................ 8
Using the Clean Out Cycle  .................................. 8
After-Cleaning Care  ............................................... 9
Storing Your Machine  ............................................ 9
Troubleshooting  ..................................................... 10CROSSWAVE® HYDROSTEAM™
ALL-IN-ONE MULTI-SURFACE CLEANER
3515 AND 3518 SERIES 1
2
5
7
93
4
6
8
Meet your new BISSELL® product! 
Go to support.BISSELL.com  for a comprehensive walkthrough 
of your new purchase, including videos, tips, support, and more. 
Want to get started right away? This guide has all the information 
you need to set up your new product. Let’s take a look…
2   BISSELL.comIMPORTANT SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS
WARNING 
TO REDUCE THE RISK OF FIRE, ELECTRIC SHOCK OR INJURY:
• Connect to a properly grounded outlet only. See grounding instructions. 
Do not modify the three-prong grounded plug.
• Do not leave appliance when it is plugged in. Unplug from outlet when 
not in use and before servicing.
• Use indoors only.
• Do not immerse. Use only on surfaces moistened by cleaning process.
• Always install float before any wet pick-up operation.
• Use only BISSELL® cleaning products intended for use with this appliance 
to prevent internal component damage. See the Cleaning Formulas 
section of this guide.
• Do not allow to be used as a toy. Close attention is necessary when used 
by or near children.
• Do not use for any purpose other than described in this user guide. Use 
only manufacturer’s recommended attachments.
• Do not use with damaged cord or plug. If appliance is not working 
as it should, has been dropped, damaged, left outdoors, or dropped 
into water; do not attempt to operate it and have it repaired at an 
authorized service center.
• Do not pull or carry by cord, use cord as a handle, close door on cord, 
or pull cord around sharp edges or corners. Do not run appliance over 
cord. Keep cord away from heated surfaces.
• Do not unplug by pulling on cord. To unplug, grasp the plug, not the 
cord.
• Do not handle plug or appliance with wet hands.
• Do not put any object into openings. Do not use with any opening 
blocked; keep openings free of dust, lint, hair, and anything that may 
reduce air flow.• Keep hair, loose clothing, ﬁngers, and all parts of body away from 
openings and moving parts of the appliance and its accessories.
• Turn OFF all controls before plugging or unplugging appliance.
• Use extra care when cleaning on stairs.
• Do not use to pick up flammable or combustible materials (lighter fluid, 
gasoline, kerosene, etc.) or use in areas where they may be present.
• Do not pick up anything that is burning or smoking, such as cigarettes, 
matches, or hot ashes.
• Unplug from outlet before ﬁlling, rinsing, or cleaning. 
• Do not turn over the steam-cleaning nozzle, or touch the surface of the 
nozzle when using the steam-cleaner.
• Do not apply steam directly to any person or animal.
• Do not touch the steam-cleaning nozzle or adjacent surfaces when 
steam-cleaning or when the nozzle is heated.
• Use only manufacturer’s recommended attachments - use of 
attachments not provided or sold by BISSELL may cause fire, electric 
shock or injury.
• Do not turn your appliance ON until you are familiar with all instructions 
and operating procedures.
• Keep appliance on a level surface.
• Do not leave steam cleaner unattended.
• Do not use appliance in an enclosed space filled with vapors given off 
by oil-based paint, paint thinner, some moth-proofing substances, 
flammable dust, or other explosive or toxic vapors.
• Do not use to pick up toxic material (chorine bleach, ammonia, drain 
cleaner, etc.)
• Do not pick up hard or sharp objects such as glass, nails, screws, coins, 
etc.
• Plastic film can be dangerous. To avoid danger of suffocation, keep 
away from children.
SAVE THESE INSTRUCTIONS 
THIS MODEL IS FOR HOUSEHOLD USE ONLY.  
COMMERCIAL USE OF THIS UNIT VOIDS THE MANUFACTURER’S WARRANTY.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION 
• When finished using the product, wrap cord around cord wrap for storage. Store unit indoors in a dry location in an area where the product 
is not likely to get damaged.
• Any other maintenance or servicing not included in this manual should be performed by an authorized service representative.READ ALL INSTRUCTIONS BEFORE USING YOUR APPLIANCE.
When using an electrical appliance, basic precautions should be observed, including the following:
WARNING 
Improper connection of the equipment-grounding conductor 
can result in a risk of electrical shock. Check with a qualified 
electrician or service person if you aren’t sure if the outlet is 
properly grounded. DO NOT MODIFY THE PLUG. If it will not fit the 
outlet, have a proper outlet installed by a qualified electrician. 
This appliance is designed for use on a nominal 120-volt circuit, 
and has a grounding attachment plug that looks like the plug 
in the illustration. Make certain that the appliance is connected 
to an outlet having the same configuration as the plug. No plug 
adapter should be used with this appliance.Grounded
Outlets
Grounding
PinGROUNDING INSTRUCTIONS
This appliance must be connected to a grounded 
wiring system. If it should malfunction or break 
down, grounding provides a safe path of least 
resistance for electrical current, reducing the risk 
of electrical shock. The cord for this appliance 
has an equipment-grounding conductor and a 
grounding plug. It must only be plugged into an 
outlet that is properly installed and grounded in 
accordance with all local codes and ordinances.
BISSELL.com   3Body Handle Brush Roll(s) Trial Formula(s) Clean-Out and 
Storage TrayWhat’s in the Box?
Standard accessories may vary by model. To identify what should be included with your purchase, 
please refer to the “Carton Contents” list located on the carton top flap.
Assembly
 Go to support.BISSELL.com  for assembly videos.
1. Insert handle into machine. 2. Insert clean water tank into 
back of machine.3. Wrap cord. To easily 
unwrap, turn the Quick 
Release™ Cord Wrap down.Warranty
Limited 3-year warranty, may vary by state. Visit support.BISSELL.com or call 1-844-383-2630 for 
complete warranty information.
4   BISSELL.comChanging the Brush Roll
 Visit BISSELL.com  to purchase additional brush rolls.
Multi-Surface Brush Roll  
Microfibers mop and 
nylon bristles help 
remove tough, sticky 
messes while picking up 
dry debris.Wood Floor Brush Roll  
Soft-touch microfibers 
gently clean sealed hard 
floors.Area Rug Brush Roll  
Bristles work on area 
rugs to pick up dry debris 
and pet hair.PET Multi-Surface  
Brush Roll  
Microfibers mop and 
nylon bristles help 
remove tough, sticky 
messes while picking up 
pet hair and dry debris.
1. Grab the front of the brush 
window and pull upward to 
remove.2. Remove the brush roll by 
pulling the tab.3. Reinstall by placing the end 
of the brush into the right side 
of the foot.
4. Press the tab of the brush 
down so it locks into place.5. Replace the brush roll 
window by lining up tabs on 
the edges of the foot.6. Press the window back so it 
clicks into place.
BISSELL.com   51. The clean water tank is 
located on the back of the 
machine. To remove, grasp the 
tank and pull up.2. Open the top of the clean 
water tank by removing the 
screw cap 3. Choose your formula*.
Scan the QR code with your 
smartphone camera or visit 
BISSELL.com for formulas.
Large 
Area
Small 
Area
4. The clean water tank has a Large Area volume and a Small 
Area volume. Pick the one that best suits the space that you 
would like to clean.
For large area cleaning  (up to 700 sq ft)  
a. Fill clean water tank with warm tap water to the second water 
fill line (24 fl. oz.).  
b. Then add formula to the second formula fill line (4 fl. oz.).
For small area cleaning  (<350 sq ft)  
a. Fill clean water tank with warm tap water to the first water fill 
line (12 fl. oz.).  
b. Then add formula to the first formula fill line (2 fl. oz.).5. Close the top of the clean 
water tank by replacing the 
screw cap.
*Compatible BISSELL formulas include: Multi-Surface, Wood Floor, PET Multi-Surface with Febreze Freshness, Hard Floor 
Sanitize, Simply Multi-Surface Pet 
Certain trademarks used under license from The Procter & Gamble Company or its affiliates.Filling the Clean Water Tank 
 Go to support.BISSELL.com  to watch additional how-to videos.
WARNING To reduce the risk of ﬁ re and electric shock due to internal component damage, use only BISSELL 
cleaning fluid intended for use with the appliance.
6   BISSELL.com1. Mode  
Switch between SteamWash™ mode, hard floor mode, area 
rug modes. Mode selection appears on the foot display.
2. Power  
Turn the machine ON and OFF
3. Clean Out Cycle  
Automatic self-cleaning cycle
Hard Floor Mode  
Clean everyday messes on sealed hard floors 
such as tracked-in mud, spilled cereal and milk, 
coffee, and cooking splatters.Area Rug Mode  
Refresh area rugs and clean dry messes such 
as crumbs, dirt, hair, and more.
SteamWash™ Mode  
Power through tough, stuck-on messes on hard 
floors and remove dirt on area rug with the 
power of HydroSteam™ Technology. Fingertip Controls
Foot Display & Cleaning Modes
Mode selection appears on the foot display. 
When powered ON, starts in SteamWash mode. Controls and Cleaning Modes
1
2
3
BISSELL.com   7Cleaning Your Floors
 For cleaning tips for stuck-on messes and more, visit support.BISSELL.com .
Note: Before cleaning area rugs, check the manufacturer’s tag and test an inconspicuous spot on the 
rug for colorfastness. Don’t use on silk or delicate rugs.
1. Plug machine into a properly 
grounded outlet. Press power 
button to turn machine ON and 
OFF. When powered ON, starts 
in SteamWash mode. 2. Press mode button to 
switch between modes. See 
page 6 for cleaning mode 
information. Mode selection 
appears on foot display. If you 
chose SteamWash™, wait 30 
seconds for it to warm up. 
The steam ready light will 
illuminate.3. Recline machine to start 
brush roll spinning. When 
machine is standing upright, 
brush roll will not spin.
Note: When returning to the 
upright position, continue to 
push machine forward after 
the click until machine is 
secured.
4. Before each use, hold 
solution spray trigger for 10 
seconds to wet the brush roll.
Note: Bubbles will appear in 
brush roll window when solution 
is flowing. Water on floor during 
steam cleaning is normal.5. Hold trigger to dispense 
formula for all cleaning modes 
and to dispense formula plus 
steam in SteamWash mode.  
Make forward and backward 
passes to clean your floors.6. To dry floor, release trigger 
to stop dispensing solution 
and steam. Make forward and 
backward passes to suction up 
excess water. 
Please read the Hard Floor Sanitize formula label prior to each use. Use on hard nonporous floors only.
1. Follow cleaning instructions 
above to remove visible soils.  
To sanitize: Hold trigger to 
apply solution to floor.2. Allow floor to remain 
visibly wet with formula for 
five minutes. This may require 
additional passes.3. With trigger released, make 
forward and backward passes 
to extract solution.Sanitizing Hard Floors
8   BISSELL.comUsing the Clean Out CycleEmptying the Dirty Water Tank
Note: Empty dirty water tank before beginning and be sure the strainer and filter stay dry. Use the 
Clean Out Cycle after each use.
1. Fill clean tank with water and 
formula up to the Clean Out 
fill line. Optional: With the unit 
removed from the tray, add 
2 fluid ounces of FreshStart™ 
formula to the Clean Out Tray.2. Plug machine into a 
properly grounded outlet and 
place on the tray. The Clean 
Out Cycle button on the handle 
will light up blue when ready.3. Press the Clean Out Cycle 
button to begin. Note: For best 
results, never run the cycle 
more than twice.
1. Press the button on the top 
of dirty water tank, grab the 
front handle and pull out.2. Hold top of tank near the 
sides of the filter and pull up to 
remove. Pull strainer stem and 
remove from the tank. Throw 
debris into the trash.3. Pour dirty water into a 
utility sink or similar waste-
water receptacle. Thoroughly 
rinse the tank.
WARNING To reduce the risk of ﬁ re, electric shock or injury, turn power OFF and disconnect plug from 
electrical outlet before performing maintenance or troubleshooting.
BISSELL.com   91. Remove brush roll following 
steps on page 3. Pull brush roll 
tab and place in tray to dry. 
Check steam bar for clogs. 
Wipe steam nozzle with cloth.2. Remove machine from tray 
and wipe excess water or dirt. 
Do NOT rinse under faucet.3. Empty dirty water tank and 
strainer following steps on 
page 6.
4. Remove filter from lid. Open 
screen and remove debris.5. Wash filter in warm water 
and mild detergent. Clean 
and dry filter after each use. 
Replace every 3 months.6. Rinse the bottom of the tank 
cover to remove wet debris.
7. Let parts air dry for 24 
hours before next use.8. Reinstall brush roll following 
steps on page 3. Reinstall filter, 
strainer, and tank lid.9. Insert bottom of tank first. 
Pivot top toward the machine 
until it clicks.After-Cleaning Care
Storing Your Machine
When finished using the product, wrap cord around cord wrap for storage. Store machine indoors in 
a dry location in an area where the product is not likely to get damaged.
NOTICE To reduce the risk of a leaking condition, do not store machine where freezing may occur. Damage to internal 
components may result.
WARNING To reduce the risk of ﬁ re, electric shock or injury, turn power OFF and disconnect plug from 
electrical outlet before performing maintenance or troubleshooting.
10   BISSELL.comProblem Possible Cause Remedies
Streaking  
OR
loss of suction 
powerToo much solution dispensed. Go over area without spraying solution.
Brush roll window is not latched. Reinstall brush roll window.
Debris channel in foot is clogged. Clean channel with a paper towel.
Filter is clogged by debris and/or is wet. Remove debris clogging filter screen. Clean and dry filter.
Brush roll is wet and dirty. Clean and dry brush roll.
No spray or steamClean water tank is not seated properly. Remove and reseat tank.
Not holding trigger to spray solution. Hold trigger continuously while using machine.
SteamWash™ is turned off. Press mode button on handle to change to 
SteamWash mode. Ensure steam indicator light is on.
Steam system is not primed. Prime machine by holding trigger for 30 seconds, 
expelling steam.
Steam ports are clogged. Wipe underside of front steam bar with a wet towel.
LeakingClean water tank or lid is damaged. Remove tank from machine and inspect for damage 
on tank and/or lid. If damage is found, contact us.
Dirty water tank is damaged. Remove tank from machine and inspect for damage. If 
damage is found, contact us.
Dirty water tank is full. Empty tank following steps on page 8.
Brush roll isn’t 
turningBrush roll is not installed properly. Reinstall brush roll following steps on page 4.
Machine is standing upright. Recline machine to turn brush roll on.
Brush roll stalled by debris. Unplug machine and remove brush window and brush 
roll to remove obstruction.
Clean-Out Cycle not 
workingMachine is not on storage tray / 
machine is not plugged in.Place machine on storage tray and plug in.
Clean tank low. Refill tank.
Dirty water tank is full. Empty tank before starting the Clean-Out Cycle.
Machine won’t 
turn ONBrush roll stalled by debris. Unplug machine. Remove brush window and brush 
roll to remove obstruction.
Handle not installed properly. Reinstall handle and push down until it clicks into 
place.
Drips on floor 
during cleaningCleaning with water only. Add BISSELL cleaning formula to tank.
Holding trigger after cleaning pass. Release trigger to stop dispensing solution and steam, 
making forward and backward passes to suction 
excess water.
Brush roll stops 
turning unxpectedly 
and motor continues 
to operateMachine is overheating. Unplug machine from power and allow to cool.
Note: Any other servicing should be performed by an authorized service representative.Troubleshooting
 Below are some of the issues you may run into. If you don’t see the issue you’re 
experiencing below, scan the QR code  or visit support.BISSELL.com .
WARNING To reduce the risk of ﬁ re, electric shock or injury, turn power OFF and disconnect plug from 
electrical outlet before performing maintenance or troubleshooting.

©2023 BISSELL Inc. All rights reserved.  
Part Number 1630880 10/22 RevJBut wait, there’s more!
Join us online for a complete guide to your new product, including 
troubleshooting, product registration, parts, and more.  
Go to support.BISSELL.com.
VIDEOS INFO REGISTER PARTS SUPPORTWe’re Waggin’ Our Tails!
BISSELL proudly supports BISSELL Pet Foundation® and its mission to 
help save homeless pets. When you buy a BISSELL® product, you help 
save pets, too. We’re proud to design products that help make pet 
messes, odors and pet homelessness disappear.  
Visit BISSELLsavespets.com  to learn more.
