10 oz6oz
8oz12ozSTRONG OVER ICE
Get the most from your 
new Keurig ® brewerUse & Care GuideK•Supreme™
Over Ic e
10oz 6oz
8oz4oz12 3
12ozSTRENGTH TEMPRemove packing tape from brewer. 
Plug into a grounded outlet. 
Place a large mug (10oz minimum) 
on the drip tray.
NOTE:  If changing water tank position to the back, 
please complete before first brew (refer to instructions 
included).Remove the water reservoir lid, then 
lift the reservoir straight up to remove 
it. If you have a Keurig® Water Filter, 
install it now. Refer to your Water 
Filter Starter Kit for instructions.
Rinse reservoir with fresh water and 
fill to the MAX FILL line. 
Replace water reservoir . Replace lid.
NOTE:  Do not use distilled water.
Lift and lower the handle. Do not 
insert a K-Cup® pod.  The brewer will 
power on automatically.The 4 cup sizes will blink. Press the 8oz  
button, then press the blinking brew 
button to start a cleansing brew. Pour 
the hot water into the sink.
The one-time setup process is now 
complete and you are ready to brew!1
3
52
4
6Before You Brew
Place a mug on the drip tray. If using a 
travel mug, remove the drip tray and 
place the mug on the drip tray base. 
Lift the handle and place a K-Cup® pod 
in the K-Cup® pod holder. Lower the 
handle completely to close the lid. 
Do not remove the foil lid on the 
K-Cup® pod.The 4 brew size buttons will blink. 
Select your brew size, then press the 
blinking brew button. For a stronger 
coffee, press the STRONG button 
before brewing. The brew button will 
remain illuminated while brewing. 
Brewing is complete when the buttons 
are no longer illuminated. Lift the 
handle and dispose of the K-Cup® pod.  
CAUTION:  While brewing, there is extremely hot water 
in the K-Cup® pod holder. To avoid injury, do not lift the 
handle during the brewing process.6oz
8oz 10oz12ozSTRONG OVER ICE
6oz
8oz 10oz12ozSTRONG OVER ICEPlug & Place Rinse & Fill
Lift & Lower Cleansing Brew
Place Mug & Pod Brew & Enjoy!
Brewer Features
Smart Start heats then brews in one simple process. No need 
to wait for the brewer to heat before selecting brew size. Simply 
power on your brewer by lifting the handle, add a K-Cup® Pod, 
select your brew size, then press the brew button. The brewer will 
heat, then automatically begin brewing.
Auto Off automatically turns your brewer off 5 minutes after the 
last brew for energy savings.
High Altitude To ensure your brewer works properly at higher 
altitudes (5,000 feet), enable the High Altitude setting by 
pressing and holding the brew button and 8oz buttons for
3 seconds. 
Strong Brew for a bolder, more intense cup.
Over Ice brew your favorite beverages over ice.Brew Your First Cup
For bolder coffee press the STRONG button, 
followed by the brew button.
For iced beverages fill a large plastic tumbler 
with ice. Insert any K-Cup® pod, then press the 
OVER ICE button, followed by brew button.”   
 
NOTE:  choose a tumbler large enough to accommodate both the ice 
and dispensed liquid to prevent overflow.
Multi-position Water Reservoir  
Position along the left or back of the brewer to 
optimize counter space.
ATTENTION!
This brewer is only compatible with newly designed
Keurig® My K-Cup® Universal Reusable Coffee Filter.
Do not attempt to use any other reusable filter or
previous versions of Keurig® My K-Cup® Universal
Reusable Coffee Filter; may cause damage
to brewer.Power Button
Brew Button
Brew Button1

Water Tank Repositioning
Flip Brewer Over
Remove the drip tray and  
the water tank and set  
them aside. On a flat surface,  
carefully turn the brewer  
over so the base is facing up.   
You will see two parts: the  
water tank base (Part B)  
and the locking tab (Part A).2
     Remove Part A
Slide Part A out of the 
brewer. It should release 
freely with little resistance.3
Lift, Pivot Part B
Next re-position part B.
• Gently pull outward to   
   disengage from the brewer.
• Rotate upward, as shown    
   above. Part B will remain  
   attached to the brewer. 
• Part B should now pivot  
   freely to the second position.
Remember to move the power 
card, so it does not get caught.4
Insert B, Replace A
Replace Part B in its new 
position. Rotate downward so 
that B is parallel to the base, 
then slide B back into position. 
Remember to replace the 
power cord. 
 
Slide Part A back into the 
second position to lock B in 
place. Flip the brewer back 
upright.
You are now ready to use your 
Keurig Brewer!
Caring For Your Brewer
Regular cleaning keeps your brewer running smoothly. Always be sure to turn off and unplug your brewer before cleaning. 
The water reservoir should be 
cleaned periodically by wiping the 
inside of the reservoir and underside 
of the lid with a damp, non-abrasive, 
lint free cloth. Do not dry the inside 
of the water reservoir with a cloth as 
lint may remain. Allow the reservoir 
to dry completely.    Brewer Exterior
Keep your Keurig® brewer looking its  
best by cleaning the exterior from  
time to time. Just clean with a damp, 
soapy, lint-free, non-abrasive cloth.  
Never immerse the brewer in water or 
other liquids. 
Drip Tray
The drip tray can hold up to 8 ounces  
of overflow and should be emptied  
and cleaned occasionally. To remove,  
slide it toward you, keeping it level to 
avoid spilling. Rinse and clean with a 
damp, soapy, lint-free, non-abrasive 
cloth. Water Reservoir
10oz6ozADD WATER
DESCAL E
8oz12ozSTRONG OVERICE
10oz6ozADD WATER
DESCAL E
8oz12ozSTRONG OVERICE
6oz
8oz 10oz12ozSTRONG OVERICE
Regular Maintenance
For great-tasting coffee, keep your brewer running at peak 
performance by following the recommended maintenance 
schedule:
*To turn off Descale notification, follow the full descaling procedure as outlined 
in the Use & Care Guide
K-Cup® Pod Holder
To remove the K-Cup® pod holder from 
the brewer, lift the handle and grasp 
the top of the K-Cup® pod holder 
with one hand while pushing up on 
the bottom of the K-Cup® pod holder 
from underneath with the other until 
it releases. After cleaning, align the 
K-Cup® pod holder with the opening 
using the two front ribs as a guide  
and snap into place from the top. 
Funnel 
Washing the funnel ensures a fresh 
beverage experience. The funnel 
should be washed regularly and can 
be removed from the K-Cup® pod 
holder by pulling on it until it pops off. 
To replace it, orient the snaps to the 
indent and just snap it back onto the 
K-Cup® pod holder.STRONGExit Needle
Remove the pod holder assembly 
and detach the funnel. Locate the 
exit needle on the inside bottom 
of the K-Cup® pod holder. Insert a 
straightened paper clip into the exit 
needle to loosen any coffee grounds.
CAUTION: There are sharp needles that puncture the K-Cup® pod above the K-Cup® pod holder and in the 
bottom of the K-Cup® pod holder. To avoid risk of injury, do not put your fingers in the K-Cup® pod holder.
NOTE: Always remove and dispose of the used K-Cup® pod after brewing.
You should descale your brewer every 3 months, or when the 
descale notification turns on. Properly follow the descaling 
procedure.
Depending on the mineral content of your water, calcium 
deposits or scale may build up in your brewer. Scale is non-
toxic but if left unattended can hinder brewer performance. 
Regularly descaling your brewer every 3 months helps 
maintain the heating element, and other internal parts that 
come in contact with water. Calcium deposits may build up 
faster, making it necessary to descale more often. 
Descaling Procedure
Before you begin, you will need a large ceramic mug, fresh 
water, Keurig® Descaling Solution, and access to a sink.       
Do not use a paper cup. Ensure that there is no beverage 
pod in the K-Cup® pod holder. Please allow approximately             
15-20 minutes for the descaling procedure.
You will need: a large ceramic mug, fresh water, Keurig® 
Descaling Solution, and access to a sink. Do not use a
paper cup. Ensure that there is no beverage pod in 
the K-Cup® pod holder. The descaling procedure takes  
approximately 20 minutes.
STEP 1: Prepare the Brewer
Pour the entire bottle of Keurig® Descale Solution 
into an empty water reservoir. Then, fill the empty 
bottle with water and pour into the water reservoir.                                                                                                       
Do not insert a K-Cup® pod.  Place a large mug on
the drip tray.STEP 2: Descale the Brewer
To activate Descale Mode, begin with the brewer plugged 
in and powered off, then press and hold the 8oz  and 12oz 
buttons together for 3 seconds. When flashing, press the 
brew button to start the descaling process. Once the brew is 
complete, pour the hot liquid into the sink. Repeat this step 
until the ADD WATER light illuminates.
STEP 3: Fresh Water Rinse
Empty and rinse the water reservoir and refill to the MAX  fill 
line with fresh water. When flashing, press the brew button 
to start the rinsing process. Once the brew is complete, 
pour the hot liquid into the sink. Repeat this step until the 
DESCALE notification turns off. The brewer has now exited 
Descale Mode and will be ready for use!
NOTE: The cleaning action of Keurig® Descaling Solution may result in a “foam” dispensed from the brewer. This 
is natural, as the solution is reacting with the scale inside. For a brewer that is heavily scaled, the brewer may not 
fill properly after the descaler is added. If this occurs, you may see only a small or no output dispensed, followed 
by the sound of air blowing out. If this occurs:
• Turn off and unplug the brewer.
•  If there is Keurig® Descaling Solution in the water reservoir, discard the contents, rinse the water reservoir 
thoroughly and refill with water.
•  Plug the brewer back in, power on, and repeat the Step 3 Fresh Water Rinse cycle. The brewer should begin to 
function normally as the solution is rinsed out and the scale is removed. If problem persists, allow brewer to sit 
unplugged for at least 30 minutes before continuing with the rinse.Descaling Your BrewerEntrance Needles
 Lift the brewer handle and locate the 
entrance needles on the underside 
of the lid. To clean the holes in the 
needles, hold the brewer handle 
in the upward position and with 
your other hand, carefully insert a 
straightened paper clip into all the 
holes. Gently move it around to 
loosen any coffee grounds. Lower 
the handle completely and run a 
cleansing brew two times. Do not 
insert a K-Cup® pod. 
Troubleshooting
Grounds in Your Coffee
Grounds may have gathered in the exit or entrance needles 
and can be cleaned using a straightened paper clip or similar 
tool.
•  Clean the exit needle of the K-Cup® pod holder. Refer to the 
Exit Needle care instructions.
•  Clean the brewer entrance needles. Refer to the Entrance 
Needles care instructions.
Brewer Will Not Brew
•  A minimum of 6oz of water is required to brew. Add an 
additional 2oz of water to the reservoir to ensure the 
minimum fill level has been met, then press the brew 
button. Repeat until the brewer begins to dispense.
Brewing a Partial Cup
•  Power the brewer off. Press and hold the brew button and 
12oz button for 5 seconds until water starts dispensing. 
Then release and let the water purge. Discard the contents 
into the sink. Press the power button to restart.
• The exit needle may be clogged. Refer to the Exit Needle   
   care instructions.
• Clean the K-Cup® Pod Holder, see K-Cup® Pod Holder care  
   instructions.• The brewer may need to be descaled. If you have repeated  
   the descale procedure on your brewer two times and it is      
   still only brewing a partial cup, contact Customer Service.
Brewer Does Not Have Power or Shuts Off
• Make sure that the power button has been turned on. 
•  Plug brewer into its own grounded outlet. If the electric 
circuit is overloaded with other appliances, your brewer may 
not function properly. The brewer should be operated on its 
own circuit, separate from other appliances.
• For energy savings, the brewer automatically turns off        
   5 minutes after the last brew. Press the power button to  
   restart.
•  If the brewer still doesn’t have power, contact Customer 
Service.
Helpful Hints
Water quality varies greatly. If you notice an undesirable 
taste in your beverage (such as chlorine or mineral tastes), 
we recommend using bottled or filtered water. Do not use 
distilled water. 
Service
Beyond these recommended cleaning and maintenance 
procedures, this brewer is not user serviceable. For service, 
please refer to the Warranty section of this guide.
Storage
Empty the water reservoir before storing or transporting 
and take care to ensure that you store your brewer in a 
safe and frost-free environment. When you prepare to use 
it after storage, we recommend rinsing the water reservoir 
with fresh water and descaling the brewer as detailed in the 
Descaling your Brewer section.
If you plan to move your brewer to a different location, turn 
the brewer off, unplug it, and empty the water reservoir. 
If your brewer has been in an environment below freezing, 
please be sure to let it warm to room temperature for at 
least 2 hours before using.Have Questions? 
We’re here to help. Visit support.keurig.com for  
step-by-step videos on cleaning, descaling, and more.
Still Need Help? 
Give us a call at  
1-866-901-BREW (2739)Click or Call!
LIMITED ONE YEAR WARRANTY
Keurig Green Mountain, Inc. (Keurig) warrants that your brewer will 
be free of defects in materials or workmanship under normal home 
use for one year from the date of purchase. It is recommended 
that you register your brewer on keurig.com/new so that your 
purchase information will be stored in our system. Keurig will, at its 
option, repair or replace a defective brewer without charge upon its 
receipt of proof of the date of purchase. If a replacement brewer is 
necessary to service this warranty, the replacement brewer may be 
new or reconditioned. If a replacement brewer is sent, a new limited 
one year warranty will be applied to the replacement brewer.
This warranty only applies to brewers operated in the United States 
and Canada. This warranty gives you specific legal rights, and you 
may also have other rights that vary from state to state and, in the 
case of Canada, from province to province.
Only the use of Keurig® K-Cup® brand pods and accessories will 
guarantee the proper functioning and lifetime of your Keurig® 
brewer. Any damage to or malfunction of your brewer resulting 
from the use of non-Keurig® pods and accessories may not be 
covered by this warranty or may result in a service fee if the damage 
or malfunction is determined to be caused by such use.
WHAT IS NOT COVERED BY THE LIMITED WARRANTY?
THIS WARRANTY DOES NOT COVER CONSEQUENTIAL OR 
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES SUCH AS PROPERTY DAMAGE AND 
DOES NOT COVER INCIDENTAL COSTS AND EXPENSES 
RESULTING FROM ANY BREACH OF THIS WARRANTY, EVEN IF 
FORESEEABLE. Some states or provinces do not allow the exclusion 
or limitations of incidental or consequential damages, so the above 
limitation or exclusion may not apply to you depending on the state 
or province of purchase.Nor does this warranty cover damages caused by use of non-Keurig® 
pods or accessories, services performed by anyone other than 
Keurig or its authorized service providers, use of parts other than 
genuine Keurig® parts, or external causes such as abuse, misuse, 
inappropriate power supply, or acts of God.
OTHER LIMITATIONS
THIS WARRANTY IS EXCLUSIVE AND IS IN LIEU OF ANY 
OTHER EXPRESS WARRANTY, WHETHER WRITTEN OR ORAL. 
IN ADDITION, KEURIG HEREBY SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMS 
ALL OTHER WARRANTIES WITH RESPECT TO YOUR 
KEURIG® BREWER, INCLUDING ANY IMPLIED WARRANTY 
OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PARTICULAR 
PURPOSE. Some states or provinces do not allow disclaimers 
of such implied warranties or limitations on how long an implied 
warranty lasts, so the above limitation may not apply to you 
depending on the state or the province of purchase.
HOW DO YOU OBTAIN WARRANTY SERVICE?
Keurig® brewers are high-quality appliances and, with proper care, 
are intended to provide years of satisfying performance. However, 
should the need arise for warranty servicing, simply call Keurig 
Customer Service at our toll free phone number 1.866.901.BREW 
(2739). Please do not return your brewer for servicing without first 
speaking to Keurig Customer Service to obtain a Return Materials 
Authorization (RMA) number. Keurig® brewers returned without a 
RMA number will be returned to the sender without servicing.Warranty
B
AC
D
E
F
GIHA.   Handle
B.   K-Cup® Pod Holder (B  
 and C are the K-Cup®  
 Pod Holder Assembly)
C.   Funnel
D.   K-Cup® Pod Assembly  
 Housing
E.   Drip Tray Plate
F.   Drip Tray
G.   Drip Tray Base
H.   Water Reservoir Lid
I.  Water Reservoir
For replacement parts, please visit www. keurig.comSINGLE SERVE COFFEE MAKERK•Supreme™
Coffeehouse taste  
in your own home.
FIND YOUR PERFECT POD 
With over 75 brands and hundreds
of varieties, find your match at
keurig.com/new
DC0000006047 REV A
