 
User  Manual
Version  1.0
Table of Contents
Get started 6
What's in the box 6
Charge your tracker 7
Set up Charge 5 8
See your data in the Fitbit app 8
Unlock Fitbit Premium 9
Wear Charge 5 10
Placement  for all-day wear vs. exercise 10
Fasten the band 11
Handedness 12
Wear and care tips 13
Change  the band 13
Remove  a band 13
Attach a band 14
Basics 15
Navigate  Charge 5 15
Basic navigation 15
Quick settings 16
Adjust settings 18
Display 18
Quiet modes 19
Other settings 20
Check battery level 20
Set up device lock 21
Adjust always- on display 21
Turn off the screen 22
Apps and Clock Faces 23
Change  the clock face 23
Open apps 23
2
Notifications  from your phone 25
Set up notifications 25
See incoming  notifications 25
Manage  notifications 26
Turn off notifications 26
Answer  or reject phone calls 27
Respond  to messages  (Android  phones) 28
Timekeeping 29
Use the Alarms app 29
Dismiss  or snooze an alarm 29
Use the Timers app 30
Activity  and Wellness 31
See your stats 31
Track a daily activity goal 31
Choose a goal 32
Track your hourly activity 32
Track your sleep 32
Set a sleep goal 33
Learn about your sleep habits 33
Manage  stress 33
Use the EDA Scan app 33
Check your stress management  score 34
Advanced  health metrics 35
Exercise  and Heart Health 36
Track your exercise  automatically 36
Track and analyze  exercise  with the Exercise  app 36
Phone GPS requirements 37
Customize  your exercise  settings 38
Check your workout  summary 40
Check your heart rate 40
Custom  heart-rate zones 42
Receive  heart-rate notifications 43
View your cardio fitness score 44
3
Share your activity 44
Fitbit Pay 45
Use credit and debit cards 45
Set up Fitbit Pay 45
Make purchases 46
Change  your default card 47
Pay for transit 47
Update,  Restart,  and Erase 48
Update Charge 5 48
Restart Charge 5 48
Erase Charge 5 49
Troubleshooting 50
Heart-rate signal missing 50
GPS signal missing 50
Other issues 51
General  Info and Specifications 52
Sensors  and Components 52
Materials 52
Wireless  technology 52
Haptic feedback 52
Battery 53
Memory 53
Display 53
Band size 53
Environmental  conditions 54
Learn more 54
Return policy and warranty 54
Regulatory  and Safety Notices 55
USA: Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC) statement 55
Canada: Industry  Canada  (IC) statement 56
European  Union (EU) 57
Argentina 59
4
Australia  and New Zealand 59
Belarus 59
Customs  Union 60
Indonesia 60
Israel 60
Japan 60
Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia 61
Mexico 61
Morocco 61
Nigeria 62
Oman 62
Philippines 62
Serbia 62
Singapore 63
South Korea 63
Taiwan 63
United Arab Emirates 66
United Kingdom 67
Vietnam 67
About the Battery 67
IP Rating 68
Safety Statement 68
Regulatory  Markings 68
5
Get started
Meet Fitbit Charge 5, our most advanced  health and fitness tracker that helps you 
keep a pulse on your stress, physical  readiness,  heart health, and overall well-being.
Take a moment  to review our complete  safety information  at fitbit.com/safety .  
Charge 5 is not intended  to provide  medical  or scientific  data.
What's in the box
Your Charge 5 box includes:
Tracker  with small band
(color and material  varies)Charging  cable Additional  large band
The detachable  bands on Charge 5 come in a variety of colors and materials,  sold 
separately.
6
Charge your tracker 
A fully-charged  Charge 5 has a battery life of up to 7 days. Battery life and charge 
cycles vary with use and other factors; actual results will vary.
To charge Charge 5:
 1. Plug the charging  cable into the USB port on your computer,  a UL-certified  
USB wall charger,  or another  low-energy charging  device.
 2. Hold the other end of the charging  cable near the port on the back of the 
tracker until it attaches  magnetically.  Make sure the pins on the charging  cable 
align with the port on the back of your tracker. 
 
Charging  fully takes about 1-2 hours. While Charge 5 charges,  double- tap the screen 
to turn it on and check the battery level. Swipe right on the battery screen to use 
Charge 5. A fully charged  tracker shows a solid battery icon.
7
Set up Charge 5
Set up Charge 5 with the Fitbit app. The Fitbit app is compatible  with most popular  
phones.  See fitbit.com/devices  to check if your phone is compatible.
To get started:
 1. Download  the Fitbit app: 
 lApple App Store for  iPhones  
 lGoogle Play Store for Android  phones
 2. Install the app, and open it.
 lIf you already have a Fitbit account,  log in to your account   
 tap the 
Today tab  
  your profile picture  
 Set Up a Device. 
 lIf you don't have a Fitbit account,  tap Join Fitbit to be guided through  a 
series of questions  to create a Fitbit account.
 3. Continue  to follow the on-screen instructions  to connect  Charge 5 to your 
account.  
When you're done with setup, read through  the guide to learn more about your new 
tracker and then explore the Fitbit app.
For more information,  see the related help article.
See your data in the Fitbit app
Open the Fitbit app on your phone to view your activity, health metrics,  and sleep 
data; log food and water; participate  in challenges;  and more. 
8
Unlock Fitbit Premium
Fitbit Premium  is your personalized  resource  in the Fitbit app that helps you stay 
active, sleep well, and manage  stress. A Premium  subscription  includes  programs  
tailored  to your health and fitness goals, personalized  insights,  hundreds  of 
workouts  from fitness brands, guided meditations,  and more. 
Charge 5 includes  a 6-month Fitbit Premium  membership  for eligible customers  in 
certain countries.
For more information,  see the related help article.
9
Wear Charge 5
Wear Charge 5 around your wrist. If you need to attach a different  size band, or if 
you purchased  another  band, see the instructions   in "Change  the band" on page 13. 
Placement  for all-day wear vs. exercise
When you're not exercising,  wear Charge 5 a finger's width above your wrist bone.
In general,  it's always important  to give your wrist a break on a regular basis by 
removing  your tracker for around an hour after extended  wear. We recommend  
removing  your tracker while you shower.  Although  you can shower while wearing  
your tracker, not doing so reduces  the potential  for exposure  to soaps, shampoos,  
and conditioners,  which can cause long-term damage  to your tracker and may 
cause skin irritation.
For optimized  heart-rate tracking  while exercising:
 lDuring a workout,  experiment  with wearing  your tracker a bit higher on your 
wrist  for an improved  fit. Many exercises,  such as bike riding or weight lifting, 
cause you to bend your wrist frequently,  which could interfere  with the heart-
rate signal if the tracker is lower on your wrist.
10
 lWear your tracker on top of your wrist, and make sure the back of the device 
is in contact  with your skin.
 lConsider  tightening  your band before a workout  and loosening  it when you’re 
done. The band should be snug but not constricting  (a tight band restricts  
blood flow, potentially  affecting  the heart-rate signal).
Fasten the band
 1. Place Charge 5 around your wrist.
 2. Slide the bottom band  through  the first loop in the top band.
11
 3. Tighten  the band until it fits comfortably,  and press the peg through  one of 
the holes in the band.
 4. Slide the loose end of the band through  the second loop until it lies flat on 
your wrist. Make sure the band isn’t too tight. Wear the band loosely enough 
that it can move back and forth on your wrist.
Handedness
For greater accuracy,  you must specify whether  you wear Charge 5 on your 
dominant  or non-dominant  hand. Your dominant  hand is the one you use for writing 
and eating. To start, the Wrist setting is set to non-dominant.  If you wear Charge 5 
on your dominant  hand, change the Wrist setting in the Fitbit app:
From the Today tab 
 in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture  
 Charge 5 tile  
 Wrist  
 Dominant .
12
Wear and care tips
 lClean your band and wrist regularly  with a soap-free cleanser.
 lIf your tracker gets wet, remove  and dry it completely  after your activity.
 lTake your tracker off from time to time.
Change  the band
Charge 5 comes with a small band attached  and an additional  large, bottom band in 
the box. Both the  top and bottom bands can be swapped  with accessory  bands, 
sold separately  on fitbit.com . For band measurements,  see "Band size" on page 53 .
Remove  a band
 1. Turn over Charge 5 and find the band latches.
 2. To release the latch, use your fingernail  to press the flat button toward the 
band.
13
 3. Gently pull the band away from the tracker to release it.
 4. Repeat on the other side.
Attach a band
To attach a band, press it into the end of the tracker until you hear a click and it 
snaps into place. The band with the loops and peg attaches  to the top of the 
tracker.
14
Basics
Learn how to manage  settings,  set a personal  PIN code, navigate  the screen, and 
check the battery level.
Navigate  Charge 5
Charge 5 has a color AMOLED  touchscreen  display.
Navigate  Charge 5 by tapping  the screen and swiping  side to side and up and down. 
To preserve  battery,  the tracker’s screen turns off when not in use.
Basic navigation
The home screen is the clock.
 lFirmly tap the screen twice or turn your wrist to wake Charge 5.
 lSwipe down from the top of the screen to access quick settings , the Payments  
app 
, and the Settings  app 
. While in quick settings,  swipe right to 
return to the clock screen.
 lSwipe up to see your daily stats. To return to the clock screen, swipe right.
 lSwipe left and right to see the apps on your tracker. 
 lSwipe right to go back to a previous  screen. Firmly double- tap the screen to 
return to the clock screen. 
15
Quick settings
For a faster way to access certain settings,  swipe down from the clock screen. Tap  a 
setting to adjust it. When you turn off a setting, the icon appears  dim with a line 
through  it.
16
Payments   
Make contactless  payments  from your wrist with Fitbit 
Pay.
DND mode  
 When the do not disturb  setting is on: 
 lNotifications,  goal celebrations,  and reminders  
are muted. 
 lThe do not disturb icon illuminates  
 in quick 
settings.
You can't turn on the do not disturb setting  and sleep 
mode at the same time.
Sleep mode 
When the sleep mode setting is on: 
 lNotifications,  goal celebrations,  and reminders  
are muted. 
 lThe screen's  brightness  is set to dim.
 lThe screen stays dark when you turn your wrist. 
To wake Charge 5, firmly tap the screen twice.
 lThe sleep mode icon illuminates  
  in quick 
settings.
Sleep mode turns off automatically  when you set a 
sleep schedule.  For more information,  see "Adjust 
settings"  on the next page
You can't turn on the do not disturb setting and sleep 
mode at the same time.
Screen wake 
 When you set screen wake to Auto 
, the screen 
turns on each time you turn your wrist.
When you  set screen wake to Manual 
, firmly tap 
the screen twice to turn it on.
Water lock 
 Turn on the water lock setting when you're in water, for 
17
example  showering  or swimming,  to prevent  your 
screen from activating.  When water lock is on, your 
screen locks, and the water lock icon appears  at the 
bottom.  Notifications  and alarms still appear on your 
tracker,  but you must unlock your screen to interact  
with them.
To turn on water lock,  tap swipe down from the clock 
screen 
 tap Water Lock 
 firmly tap your screen 
twice. To turn off water lock, double- tap your screen 
again.
Note that water lock turns on automatically  when you 
start a swim in the Exercise  app 
.
Settings  app 
 Tap the Settings  app 
 to open it. For more 
information,  see "Adjust settings"  below.
Adjust settings
Manage  basic settings  in the Settings  app 
. Swipe down from the clock screen 
and tap the Settings  app 
 to open it. Tap a setting to adjust it. Swipe to see the 
full list of settings.
Display
Brightness Change  the screen's  brightness.
Screen 
wakeChange  whether  the screen turns on when you turn your wrist.
Screen 
timeoutAdjust the amount  of time before the screen turns off or switches  to 
the always- on display clock face.
Always- on 
displayTurn always- on display on or off. For more information,  see "Adjust 
always- on display"  on page 21.
18
Quiet modes
Exercise  
focusTurn off notifications  while using the Exercise  app 
.
Do not 
disturbTurn off all notifications.
Sleep 
modeAdjust sleep mode 
settings,  including  setting a schedule  for the 
mode to automatically  turn on and off.
To set a schedule:  
 1. Open the Settings  app  and tap Quiet modes  
 Sleep Mode  
 Schedule   
 Interval.
 2. Tap the start or end time to adjust when the mode turns on and 
off. Swipe up or down to change the time, and tap the time to 
select it. Sleep mode automatically  turns off at the time you 
schedule,  even if you manually  turned it on. 
19
Other settings
Heart rate Turn heart-rate tracking  on or off.
Heart zone 
notificationsTurn the heart-zone notifications  that you receive during everyday  
activity on or off. For more information,  see the related help article.
Vibrations Adjust your tracker's vibration  strength.
GPS Choose the GPS mode. For more information,  see the related help 
article.
Device Info View your tracker's regulatory  information  and activation  date, 
which is the day your tracker's warranty  begins. The activation  date 
is the day you set up your device.  
Tap Device Info
 System Info to see the activation  date.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Restart 
deviceTap Restart device
  Restart to restart your tracker.
Check battery level
From the clock face, swipe up. The battery level is at the top of the screen.
If your tracker's battery is low (fewer than 24 hours remaining),  the battery 
indicator  turns red. If your tracker's battery is critically  low (fewer than 4 hours 
remaining),    a warning  appears  on the clock face and the  battery indicator  flashes.
When the battery is low:
20
 lIf you’re tracking  an exercise  with GPS, GPS tracking  turns off
 lAlways- on display is turned off
 lYou can't use quick replies
 lYou won't receive notifications  from your phone
Charge Charge 5 to use or adjust these features.
Set up device lock
To help keep your tracker secure, turn on device lock in the Fitbit app, which 
prompts  you to enter a personal  4-digit PIN code  to unlock your tracker. If you set 
up Fitbit Pay to make contactless  payments  from your tracker, device lock is turned 
on automatically  and you're required  to set a code. If you don't use Fitbit Pay, 
device lock is optional.
Turn on device lock or reset your PIN code  in the Fitbit app:
From the Today tab 
 in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture  
 Charge 5 tile  
 Device Lock.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Adjust always- on display
Turn on always- on display to show the time on your tracker, even when you're not 
interacting  with the screen.
21
To turn always- on display on or off:
 1. Swipe down from the clock face to access quick settings.
 2. Tap the Settings  app 
 
Display settings
 Always- on display. 
 3. Tap Always- on display to turn the setting on or off. To  set the display to 
automatically  turn off during certain hours, tap Off-hours. 
Note that turning on this feature impacts  your tracker's battery life. When always-
on display is turned on, Charge 5 requires  more frequent  charging.
Clock faces without  an always- on display mode use a default always- on display 
clock face.
Always- on display  automatically  turns off when your tracker's battery is critically  
low.
For more information,   see the related help article.
Turn off the screen
To turn off your tracker's screen when not in use, briefly cover the tracker face with 
your opposite  hand or turn your wrist away from your body.
Note that if you turn on the always- on display setting, the screen won't turn off.
22
Apps and Clock Faces
Learn how to change your clock face and access apps on Charge 5. 
Change  the clock face
The Fitbit  Clock Gallery offers a variety of clock faces to personalize  your tracker.
 1. From the Today tab 
 in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture  
 Charge 5 
tile.
 2. Tap Clock Faces.
 3. Browse the available  clock faces. Tap a clock face to see a detailed  view.
 4. Tap Install to add the clock face to Charge 5.
Open apps
From the clock face, swipe left and right to see the apps installed  on your tracker. 
Swipe up or tap an app to open it. Swipe right to return to a previous  screen, or 
double tap  to return to the clock screen.
23
24
Notifications  from your phone
Charge 5 can show call, text, calendar,  and app notifications  from your phone to 
keep you informed.  Keep your tracker within 30 feet of your phone to receive 
notifications.  
Set up notifications
Check that Bluetooth  on your phone is on and that your phone can receive 
notifications  (often under Settings   
 Notifications).  Then  set up notifications:
 1. From the Today tab 
 in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture  
 Charge 5 
tile.
 2. Tap Notifications . 
 3. Follow the on-screen instructions  to pair your tracker if you haven't already.   
Call, text, and calendar  notifications  are turned on automatically.
 4. To turn on notifications  from apps installed  on your phone, including  Fitbit and 
WhatsApp,  tap App Notifications  and turn on the notifications  you want to 
see.
Note that if you have an iPhone, Charge 5 shows notifications  from all calendars  
synced to the Calendar  app. If you have an Android  phone, Charge 5 shows 
calendar  notifications  from the calendar  app you chose during setup.
For more information,  see the related help article.
See incoming  notifications
A notification  causes your tracker to vibrate. Tap the notification  to expand the 
message.  
25
If you don't read the notification  when it arrives, you can check it later in the 
Notifications  app 
. Swipe right or left to the Notifications  app 
, then swipe 
up to open it.  Your tracker shows the first 250 characters  of the notification.  Check 
your phone for the full message.
Manage  notifications
Charge 5 stores up to 10 notifications,  after which the oldest are replaced  as you 
receive new ones. 
Manage  notifications  in the Notifications  app 
:
 lSwipe up to scroll through  your notifications,  and tap any notification  to 
expand it.
 lTo delete a notification,  tap to expand it, then swipe to the bottom and tap 
Clear. 
 lTo delete all notifications  at once, swipe up until you reach the end of your 
notifications  and tap Clear All.
 lTo exit the notifications  screen, swipe right.
Turn off notifications
Turn off certain notifications  in the Fitbit app, or turn off all notifications  in quick 
settings  on Charge 5. When you turn off all notifications,  your tracker won't vibrate 
and the screen won't turn on when your phone receives  a notification.
To turn off certain notifications:
26
 1. From the Today tab 
 in the Fitbit app on your phone, tap your profile 
picture  
 Charge 5 tile  
 Notifications.
 2. Turn off the notifications  you no longer want to receive on your tracker.
To turn off all notifications:
 1. From the clock face, swipe down to access quick settings.
 2. Turn on DND Mode  
. All notifications  and reminders  are turned off. 
Note that if you use the do not disturb setting on your phone, you don't receive 
notifications  on your tracker until you turn off this setting.
Answer or reject phone calls
If paired to an iPhone or Android  phone, Charge 5 lets you accept or reject 
incoming  phone calls.
To accept a call, tap the green phone icon on your tracker's screen. Note that you 
can't speak into the tracker—accepting  a phone call answers  the call on your nearby 
phone. To reject a call, tap the red phone icon to send the caller to voicemail.
The caller's name appears  if that person is in your contacts  list; otherwise  you see a 
phone number.
27
Respond  to messages  (Android  phones)
Respond  directly  to text messages  and notifications  from certain apps on your 
tracker with preset quick replies. Keep your phone nearby with the Fitbit app 
running  in the background  to respond  to messages  from your tracker.
To respond  to a message:
 1. Open the notification  you want to respond  to.
 2. Choose how to reply to the message:
 lTap the text icon 
 to respond  to a message  from a list of quick replies.
 lTap the emoji icon 
 to respond  to the message  with an emoji.
For more information,  including  how to customize  quick replies, see the related help 
article.
28
Timekeeping
Alarms vibrate to wake or alert you at a time you set. Set up to 8 alarms to occur 
once or on multiple  days of the week. You can also time events with the stopwatch  
or set a countdown  timer.
Use the Alarms app
Set one-time or recurring  alarms with the Alarms app 
. When an alarm goes off, 
your tracker vibrates.  
When setting an alarm, turn on Smart Wake to allow your tracker to find the best 
time to wake you starting  30 minutes  before the alarm time you set. It avoids 
waking you during deep sleep so you're more likely to wake up feeling refreshed.  If 
Smart Wake can’t find the best time to wake you, your alarm alerts you at the set 
time.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Dismiss or snooze an alarm
When an alarm goes off, your tracker vibrates.  To dismiss the alarm, swipe up from 
the bottom of the screen and tap the dismiss icon 
. To snooze the alarm for 9 
minutes,  swipe down from the top of the screen.
Snooze the alarm as many times as you want. Charge 5 automatically  goes into 
snooze mode if you ignore the alarm for more than 1 minute.
29
Use the Timers app
Time events with the stopwatch  or set a countdown  timer with the Timer app 
 
on your tracker. You can run the stopwatch  and countdown  timer at the same time. 
If always- on display is on, the screen continues  to display the stopwatch  or 
countdown  timer until it ends or you exit the app.
For more information,  see the related help article.
30
Activity  and Wellness
Charge 5 continuously  tracks a variety of stats whenever  you wear it. Data 
automatically  syncs with the Fitbit app throughout  the day.
See your stats
Swipe up from the clock face to see your daily stats, including:
Core stats Steps taken today, distance  covered,  calories  burned,   and 
Active Zone Minutes
Heart rate Current  heart rate and heart-rate zone, and resting heart rate
Exercise Number  of days you met your exercise  goal this week 
Sleep Sleep duration
Hourly activity The number  of hours today you met your hourly activity goal
Menstrual  health Information  on the current stage of your menstrual  cycle, if 
applicable
Oxygen  
Saturation  
(Today app only)Your most recent resting SpO2 average  and range
If you set a goal in the Fitbit app, a ring shows your progress  toward that goal. 
Find your complete  history and other information   detected  by your tracker in the 
Fitbit app. 
Track a daily activity goal
Charge 5 tracks your progress  toward a daily activity goal of your choice. When you 
reach your goal, your tracker vibrates  and shows a celebration.   
31
Choose a goal
Set a goal to help you get started on your health and fitness journey.  To begin, your 
goal is to take 10,000 steps per day. Choose to change the number  of steps, or pick 
a different  activity goal depending  on your device.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Track progress  toward your goal on Charge 5.  For more information,  see "See your 
stats" on the previous  page.
Track your hourly activity
Charge 5 helps you stay active throughout  the day by keeping  track of when you're 
stationary  and reminding  you to move. 
Reminders  nudge you to walk at least 250 steps each hour. You feel a vibration  and 
see a reminder  on your screen at 10 minutes  before the hour if you haven't walked 
250 steps. When you meet the 250-step goal after receiving  the reminder,  you feel 
a second vibration  and see a congratulatory  message.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Track your sleep
Wear Charge 5 to bed to automatically  track basic stats about your sleep, including  
your time asleep, sleep stages (time spent in REM, light sleep, and deep sleep), and 
sleep score (the quality of your sleep). 
32
Charge 5 also tracks your estimated  oxygen variation  throughout  the night to help 
you uncover  potential  breathing  disturbances  and SpO2 levels, which estimate  the 
amount  of oxygen in your blood.
To see your sleep stats, sync your tracker when you wake up and check the Fitbit 
app, or swipe up from the clock face on your tracker.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Set a sleep goal
To start, you have a sleep goal of 8 hours of sleep per night. Customize  this goal to 
meet your needs.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Learn about your sleep habits
With a Fitbit Premium  subscription,   see more details about your sleep score and 
how you compare  to your peers, which can help you build a better sleep routine and 
wake up feeling refreshed.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Manage  stress
Track and manage  your stress with mindfulness  features.
Use the EDA Scan app
The EDA Scan app 
 on Charge 5 detects electrodermal  activity which may 
indicate  your body's response  to stress. Because  your sweat level is controlled  by 
the sympathetic  nervous  system,  these changes  can show meaningful  trends about 
how your body responds  to stress.
33
 1. On Charge 5, swipe left or right to the EDA Scan app 
 and tap to open it.
 2. To begin a scan the same length as your previous  scan, tap the play icon. To 
change the length of time for the scan, swipe up and tap Edit length
 tap 
your desired number  of minutes.  
 3. Gently hold the sides of your tracker with your thumb and index finger. 
 4. Remain still and keep your fingers on your tracker until the scan is complete.
 5. If you remove  your fingers, the scan pauses. To resume,  place your fingers 
back on the sides of your tracker.  To end the session,  tap End session. 
 6. When the scan is complete,  tap a mood to reflect on how you feel, or tap Skip.
 7. Swipe up to see the summary  of your scan, including  your number  of EDA 
responses,  heart rate at the start and end of the session,  and reflection  if you 
logged a reflection.  
 8. Tap Done to close the summary  screen.
 9. To see more details about your session,  open the Fitbit app on your phone. 
From the Today tab 
, tap the Mindfulness  tile 
    Your Journey .
For more information,  see the related help article.
Check your stress management  score
Based on your heart rate, exercise,  and sleep data, your stress management  score 
helps you see if your body is showing  signs of stress on a daily basis. The score 
ranges from 1 to 100, where a higher number  means your body is showing  fewer 
signs of physical  stress.  To see your daily stress management  score, wear your 
tracker to sleep, and open the Fitbit app on your phone the next morning.  From the 
Today tab 
, tap the Stress Management  tile.
Log how you feel throughout  the day to get a clearer picture of how your mind and 
body respond  to stress. With a Fitbit Premium  subscription,  see details about your 
score breakdown.
For more information,  see the related help article.
34
Advanced  health metrics
Know your body better with health metrics in the Fitbit app. This feature helps you 
view key metrics tracked  by your Fitbit device over time so that you can see trends 
and assess what’s changed.
Metrics include:
 lOxygen  saturation  (SpO2)
 lSkin temperature  variation
 lHeart-rate variability
 lResting  heart rate
 lBreathing  rate
Note: This feature is not intended  to diagnose  or treat any medical  condition  and 
should not be relied on for any medical  purposes.  It is intended  to provide  
information  that can help you manage  your well-being. If you have any concerns  
about your health, please talk to a healthcare  provider.  If you believe you are 
experiencing  a medical  emergency,  call emergency  services.
For more information,  see the related help article.
35
Exercise  and Heart Health
Automatically  track exercise  or track activity with the Exercise  app 
 to see real-
time stats and a post-workout  summary.
Check the Fitbit app to share your activity with friends and family, see how your 
overall fitness level compares  to your peers, and more.
Track your exercise  automatically
Charge 5 automatically  recognizes  and records  many high-movement  activities  
which are at least 15 minutes  long. See basic stats about your activity in the Fitbit 
app on your phone. From the Today tab 
, tap the Exercise  tile 
.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Track and analyze exercise  with the Exercise  app
Track specific  exercises  with the Exercise  app 
 on  Charge 5 to see real-time 
stats, including  heart-rate data, calories  burned,  elapsed  time, and a post-workout  
summary  on your wrist. For complete  workout  stats, and a workout  intensity  map if 
you used GPS, tap the Exercise  tile in the Fitbit app.
For more information  about tracking  an exercise  with GPS, see the related help 
article.
Dynamic  GPS on Charge 5 allows the tracker to set the GPS type at the start of the 
exercise.  Charge 5 attempts  to connect  to the GPS sensors  on your phone to 
preserve  battery life. If your phone isn’t nearby or moving,  Charge 5 uses built-in 
36
GPS. Manage  your GPS settings  in the Settings  app 
. For more information,  see 
the related help article.
Phone GPS requirements
Phone GPS  is available  for all supported  phones with GPS sensors.  For more 
information,  see the related help article.
 1. Turn on Bluetooth  and GPS on your phone.
 2. Make sure Charge 5 is paired to your phone.
 3. Make sure the Fitbit app has permission  to use GPS or location  services.
 4. Check that GPS  is turned on for the exercise.
 a. Open the Exercise  app  and swipe up to find an exercise.
 b. Tap the exercise,  then swipe up and make sure GPS is turned on.
 5. Make sure the GPS mode  on Charge 5 is set to Dynamic  or Phone GPS (open 
the Settings  app 
 
GPS 
 GPS Mode ).
 6. Keep your phone with you while you exercise.
To track an exercise:
 1. On Charge 5, swipe left or right to the Exercise  app 
 , then swipe up to find 
an exercise.  
 2. Tap the exercise  to choose it.  If the exercise  uses GPS, you can wait for the 
signal to connect,  or start the exercise  and GPS will  connect  when a signal is 
available.   Note that GPS can take a few minutes  to connect.  
 3. Tap the play icon 
 to begin the exercise,  or swipe up to choose an exercise  
goal or adjust the settings.  For more information  on the settings,  see 
"Customize  your exercise  settings"  on the next page.
 4. Tap the middle of the screen to scroll through  your real-time stats. To pause 
your workout,  swipe up and tap Pause 
.
 5. When you're done with your workout,  swipe up and tap Pause 
 Finish 
. Your workout  summary  appears.
 6. Swipe up and tap Done to close the summary  screen.
Notes:
37
 lIf you set an exercise  goal, your tracker alerts you when you’re halfway  to your 
goal and when you reach the goal.
 lIf the exercise  uses GPS, "GPS connecting  
..." appears  at the top of the 
screen. Charge 5 is connected  when the screen says "GPS connected  
." 
 lUse connected  GPS with your nearby phone for activities  with a longer 
duration,  such as golf or a hike, to ensure your full workout  is recorded  with 
GPS.
 lFor best results, make sure your tracker's battery is above 80% before you 
track an exercise  longer than 2 hours with built-in GPS.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Using built-in GPS impacts  your tracker's battery life. If you use GPS tracking  
regularly,  Charge 5 has a battery life of about 4 days.
Customize  your exercise  settings
Customize  settings  for each exercise  type on your device or in the Fitbit app. 
Change  or reorder exercise  shortcuts  in the Fitbit app. 
Settings  include:
38
Heart Zone 
NotificationsReceive  notifications  when you hit target heart-rate zones during 
your workout. For  more information,  see the related help article
Laps Receive  notifications  when you reach certain milestones  during 
your workout
GPS Track your route using GPS
Auto-Pause Automatically  pause a run when you stop moving
Run Detect Track runs automatically  without  opening  the Exercise  app
Always- on 
DisplayKeep the screen on during exercise
Pool Length Set the length of your pool
Unit Change  the unit of measurement  you use for pool length
Interval Adjust the move and rest intervals  used during interval training
 
To customize  the settings  for each exercise  type on your tracker:
 1. Swipe to the Exercise  app 
 , then swipe up to find an exercise.  
 2. Tap the exercise  to choose it. 
 3. Swipe up through  the exercise  settings.  Tap a setting to adjust it.
 4. When you're done, swipe down until you see the play icon 
. 
To customize  certain exercise  settings  and change or reorder Exercise  app 
 
shortcuts  in the Fitbit app: 
 1. From the Today tab 
 in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture  
 Charge 5 
tile.
 2. Tap Exercise  Shortcuts .
 lTo add a new exercise  shortcut,  tap the + icon and select an exercise.  
 lTo remove  an exercise  shortcut,  swipe left on a shortcut.  
 lTo reorder an exercise  shortcut,  tap Edit (iPhones  only), and press and 
hold the menu icon 
, then drag it up or down.
39
 lTo customize  an exercise  setting, tap an exercise  and adjust your 
settings.
You can have up to 6 exercise  shortcuts  on Charge 5. 
For more information,  see the related help article. 
Check your workout  summary
After you complete  a workout,  Charge 5 shows a summary  of your stats.
Check the Exercise  tile in the Fitbit app to see additional  stats and a workout  
intensity  map if you used GPS. 
Check your heart rate
Charge 5 personalizes  your heart-rate zones using your heart rate reserve,  which is 
the difference  between  your maximum  heart rate and your resting heart rate. To 
help you target the training  intensity  of your choice, check your heart rate and 
heart-rate zone on your tracker during exercise.  Charge 5 notifies you when you 
enter a heart-rate zone.
40
Icon Zone Calculation Description
Below 
ZoneBelow 
40% of 
your heart 
rate 
reserveBelow the fat burn zone, your 
heart beats at a slower pace.
Fat Burn 
ZoneBetween  
40% and 
59% of 
your heart 
rate 
reserveIn the fat burn zone, you’re likely in 
a moderate  activity such as a brisk 
walk. Your heart rate and 
breathing  might be elevated,  but 
you can still carry on a 
conversation.  
Cardio 
ZoneBetween  
60% and 
84% of 
your heart 
rate 
reserveIn the cardio zone, you’re likely 
doing a vigorous  activity such as 
running  or spinning.   
Peak 
ZoneGreater  
than 85% of 
your heart 
rate 
reserveIn the peak zone, you’re likely 
doing a short, intense activity that 
improves  performance  and speed, 
such as sprinting  or high-intensity  
interval training.
41
Custom  heart-rate zones
Instead of using these heart-rate zones, you can create a custom zone in the Fitbit 
app to target a specific  heart-rate range.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Earn Active Zone Minutes  for time spent in the fat burn, cardio, or peak heart-rate 
zones. To help you maximize  your time, you earn 2 Active Zone Minutes  for each 
minute you’re in the cardio or peak zones.
1 minute in the fat burn zone = 1 Active Zone Minute
1 minute in the cardio or peak zones = 2 Active Zone Minutes
There are 2 ways Charge 5 notifies you about Active Zone Minutes:
 lA few moments  after you enter a different  heart-rate zone during your 
exercise  using the Exercise  app 
, so that you know how hard you’re 
working.  The number  of times your tracker vibrates  indicates  which zone 
you’re in:
1 buzz = fat burn zone
2 buzzes = cardio zone
3 buzzes = peak zone
 l7 minutes  after you enter a heart-rate zone throughout  the day (for example,  
during a brisk walk).
42
To start, your weekly goal is set to 150 Active Zone Minutes.  You’ll receive 
notifications  as you reach your goal.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Receive  heart-rate notifications
Stay informed  when Charge 5 detects that your heart rate is outside of your high or 
low thresholds  when you appear to be inactive  for at least 10 minutes.
 
To turn this feature off or adjust the thresholds:
 1. From the Today tab 
 in the Fitbit app on your phone, tap your profile 
picture  
 Charge 5 tile.
 2. In the Activity  & Wellness  section,  tap Heart Settings
  High & low heart rate.
 3. Turn High heart rate notification  or Low heart rate notification  on or off,  or tap 
Custom  to adjust the threshold.
View past heart-rate notifications,  log possible  symptoms  and causes, or delete 
notifications  in the Fitbit app. For more information,  see the related help article.
43
View your cardio fitness score
View your overall cardiovascular  fitness in the Fitbit app. See your cardio fitness 
score and cardio fitness level, which shows how you compare  to your peers. 
In the Fitbit app, tap the Heart-rate tile and swipe left on your heart-rate graph to 
see your detailed  cardio fitness stats.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Share your activity
After you complete  a workout,  open the Fitbit app to share your stats with friends 
and family.
For more information,  see the related help article.
44
Fitbit Pay
Charge 5 includes  a built-in NFC chip, which lets you use your credit and debit cards 
on your tracker.
Use credit and debit cards
Set up Fitbit Pay in the Wallet section of the Fitbit app, and use your tracker to 
make purchases  in stores that accept contactless  payments.
We’re always adding new locations  and card issuers to our list of partners.  To see if 
your payment  card works with Fitbit Pay, see fitbit.com/fitbit- pay/banks .
Set up Fitbit Pay
To use Fitbit Pay, add at least 1 credit or debit card from a participating  bank to the 
Wallet section of the Fitbit app. The Wallet is where you add and remove  payment  
cards, set a default card for your tracker, edit a payment  method,  and review recent 
purchases.
 1. From the Today tab 
 in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture  
 Charge 5 
tile.
 2. Tap the Wallet tile.
 3. Follow the on-screen instructions  to add a payment  card. In some cases, your 
bank might require additional  verification.  If you're adding a card for the first 
time, you might be prompted  to set a 4-digit PIN code for your tracker. Note 
that you also need passcode  protection  enabled  for your phone.
 4. After you add a card, follow the on-screen instructions  to turn on notifications  
for your phone (if you haven't already done so) to complete  the setup.
You can add up to 5 payment  cards to the Wallet and choose which card to set as 
the default payment  option.
45
Make purchases
Note: To make contactless  payments  with Charge 5 in Australia,  follow the 
instructions  below for all card types. If prompted  to enter a PIN code, enter your 4-
digit tracker PIN code (not the PIN code for your card). For more information  about 
setting a PIN code, see the related help article.
Make purchases  using Fitbit Pay at any store that accepts  contactless  payments.  To 
determine  if the store accepts  Fitbit Pay, look for the symbol below on the payment  
terminal:
All customers,  including  those in Australia: 
 1. Swipe down from the clock face and tap  Payments  
. 
 2. If prompted,  enter your 4-digit tracker PIN code.  Your default card appears  on 
the screen.
 3. To pay with your default card, hold your wrist near the payment  terminal.  To 
pay with a different  card, swipe to find the card you want to use, and hold 
your wrist near the payment  terminal.
When the payment  succeeds,  your tracker vibrates  and you see a confirmation  on 
the screen.
46
If the payment  terminal  doesn't recognize  Fitbit Pay, make sure the tracker face is 
near the reader and that the cashier knows you're using a contactless  payment.
For added security,  you must wear Charge 5 on your wrist to use Fitbit Pay.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Change  your default card
 1. From the Today tab 
 in the Fitbit app, tap your profile picture  
 Charge 5 
tile.
 2. Tap  the Wallet tile.
 3. Find the card you want to set as the default option.
 4. Tap Set as Default on Charge 5.
Pay for transit
Use Fitbit Pay to tap on and off at transit readers that accept contactless  credit or 
debit card payments.  To pay with your tracker, follow the steps listed in "Use credit 
and debit cards" on page 45 .
Pay with the same card on your Fitbit tracker when you tap the transit reader at the 
start and end of your trip. Make sure your device is charged  before beginning  your 
trip.
47
Update,  Restart,  and Erase
Some troubleshooting  steps may require you to restart your tracker, while erasing it 
is useful if you want to give Charge 5 to another  person. Update your tracker to 
receive the latest firmware.
Update Charge 5
Update your tracker to get the latest feature enhancements  and product  updates.
When an update is available,  a notification  appears  in the Fitbit app. After you start 
the update,  follow the progress  bars on Charge 5 and in the Fitbit app until the 
update is complete.  Keep your tracker and phone close to each other during the 
update.
To update Charge 5, your tracker's battery must be at least 20% charged.  Updating  
Charge 5 may be demanding  on the battery.  We recommend  plugging  your tracker 
into the charger  before starting  an update.
For more information,  see the related help article.
Restart Charge 5
If you can’t sync Charge 5 or you have trouble with tracking  your stats or receiving  
notifications,   restart your tracker from your wrist: 
 1. Swipe down from the clock screen to find the Settings  app 
. 
 2. Open the Settings  app 
 Restart Device
  Restart.
If Charge 5 is unresponsive: 
 1. Connect  Charge 5 to the charging  cable.  For instructions,  see "Charge  your 
tracker " on page 7. 
48
 2. Press the button located on the flat end of the charger  3 times, pausing  for 1 
second between  presses.  Then wait 10 seconds  or until the Fitbit logo appears.  
Restarting  your tracker doesn't delete any data.
Erase Charge 5
If you want to give Charge 5 to another  person or wish to return it, first clear your 
personal  data:
 1. Swipe down from the clock screen to find the Settings  app 
. 
 2. Open the Settings  app 
 Device Info
 Clear User Data. 
 3. Swipe up, then press Hold 3 Sec for 3 seconds  and release. 
 4. When you see the Fitbit logo and Charge 5 vibrates,  your data is erased. 
49
Troubleshooting
If Charge 5 isn't working  properly,  see our troubleshooting  steps below.
Heart-rate signal missing
Charge 5 continuously  tracks your heart rate while you're exercising  and 
throughout  the day. If the heart-rate sensor on your tracker has difficulty  detecting  
a  signal, dashed lines appear.
If your tracker doesn't detect a heart-rate signal, make sure you're wearing  your 
tracker correctly,  either by moving it higher or lower on your wrist or by tightening  
or loosening  the band. Charge 5 should be in contact  with your skin. After holding 
your arm still and straight  for a short time, you should see your heart rate again. 
For more information,  see the related help article.
GPS signal missing
Environmental  factors including  tall buildings,  dense forest, steep hills, and thick 
cloud cover can interfere  with your tracker's ability to connect  to GPS satellites.  If 
your tracker is searching  for a GPS signal during an exercise,  you’ll see “ 
GPS connecting   
” appear at the top of the screen. If Charge 5 can't connect  to 
a GPS satellite,  the tracker stops trying to connect  until the next time you start a 
GPS exercise.  
50
For best results, wait for Charge 5 to find the signal before you start your workout.  
For more information,  see the related help article. 
Other issues
If you experience  any of the following  issues, restart your tracker:
 lWon't sync
 lWon't respond  to taps or swipes
 lWon't track steps or other data
 lWon't show notifications
For instructions,  see "Restart  Charge 5" on page 48 .
51
General  Info and Specifications
Sensors  and Components
Fitbit Charge 5 contains  the following  sensors  and motors:   
 l3-axis accelerometer,  which tracks motion patterns
 lBuilt-in GPS receiver  + GLONASS , which tracks your location  during a workout
 lOptical heart-rate tracker
 lMultipurpose  electrical  sensors  compatible  with the EDA Scan app
 lAmbient  light sensor
 lVibration  motor
Materials
The housing  on Charge 5 is made of anodized  aluminum  and surgical- grade 
stainless  steel. The band that comes with Charge 5 is made of a flexible,  durable  
silicone similar to that used in many sports watches.  While all stainless  steel and 
anodized  aluminum  can contain traces of nickel, which can cause an allergic 
reaction  in someone  with nickel sensitivity,  the amount  of nickel in all Fitbit 
products  meets the European  Union's stringent  Nickel Directive.  
Wireless  technology
Charge 5 contains  a Bluetooth  5.0 radio transceiver  and NFC chip .
Haptic feedback
Charge 5 contains  a vibration  motor for alarms, goals, notifications,  reminders,  and 
apps.
52
Battery
Charge 5 contains  a rechargeable  lithium- polymer  battery.
Memory
Charge 5 stores your data, including  daily stats, sleep information,  and exercise  
history, for 7 days. See your historical  data in the Fitbit app. 
Display
Charge 5 has a color AMOLED  display.
Band size
Band sizes are shown below. Note that accessory  bands sold separately  may vary 
slightly.
Small bandFits a wrist between  5.5 - 7.1 inches (140 mm - 180 mm) in 
circumference
Large 
bandFits a wrist between  7.1 - 8.7 inches (180 mm - 220 mm) in 
circumference
53
Environmental  conditions
Operating  temperature 14° to 113° F
(-10° to 45° C)
Non-operating  temperature -4° to  14° F 
(-20° to -10° C)
113° to 140°F
(45° to 60° C)
Water resistance Water resistant  up to 50 meters
Maximum  operating  altitude 28,000 feet
(8,534 m)
Learn more
To learn more about your tracker, how to track your progress  in the Fitbit app, and 
how to build healthy habits with Fitbit Premium,  visit help.fitbit.com .
Return policy and warranty
Find warranty  information  and the fitbit.com  return policy  on our website .
54
Regulatory  and Safety Notices
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for certain regions can also be viewed on 
your device.  To view the content:
Settings  
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
USA: Federal  Communications  Commission  (FCC) 
statement
Model FB421
FCC ID: XRAFB421
Notice to the User:  The FCC ID can also be viewed on your device. To view the 
content:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
Supplier's  Declaration  of Conformity
Unique Identifier:  FB421
Responsible  Party – U.S. Contact  Information
199 Fremont  Street, 14th Floor
San Francisco,  CA
94105
United States
877-623-4997
FCC Compliance  Statement  (for products  subject to Part 15)
This device complies  with Part 15 of the FCC Rules.
Operation  is subject to the following  two conditions:
55
 1. This device may not cause harmful  interference  and
 2. This device must accept any interference,  including  interference  that may 
cause undesired  operation  of the device.
FCC Warning
Changes  or modifications  not expressly  approved  by the party responsible  for 
compliance  could void the user’s authority  to operate  the equipment.
Note: This equipment  has been tested and found to comply with the limits for a 
Class B digital device, pursuant  to part 15 of the FCC Rules. These limits are 
designed  to provide  reasonable  protection  against harmful  interference  in a 
residential  installation.  This equipment  generates,  uses and can radiate radio 
frequency  energy and, if not installed  and used in accordance  with the instructions,  
may cause harmful  interference  to radio communications.  However,  there is no 
guarantee  that interference  will not occur in a particular  installation.  If this 
equipment  does cause harmful  interference  to radio or television  reception,  which 
can be determined  by turning the equipment  off and on, the user is encouraged  to 
try to correct the interference  by one or more of the following  measures:
 lReorient  or relocate  the receiving  antenna.
 lIncrease  the separation  between  the equipment  and receiver.
 lConnect  the equipment  into an outlet on a circuit different  from that to which 
the receiver  is connected.
 lConsult  the dealer or an experienced  radio/TV  technician  for help.
This device meets the FCC and IC requirements  for RF exposure  in public or 
uncontrolled  environments.
Canada: Industry  Canada (IC) statement
Model/Modèle  FB421
IC: 8542A-FB421
Notice to the User:  The IC ID can also be viewed on your device. To view the 
content:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
56
Avis à l'utilisateur:  L'ID de l'IC peut également  être consulté  sur votre appareil.  Pour 
voir le contenu:
Paramètres  
 Informations  sur l'appareil   
 Informations  réglementaires
This device meets the IC requirements  for RF exposure  in public or uncontrolled  
environments.
Cet appareil  est conforme  aux conditions  de la IC en matière  de RF dans des 
environnements  publics ou incontrôlée
IC Notice to Users English/French  in accordance  with current issue of RSS GEN:
This device complies  with Industry  Canada  license exempt  RSS standard (s).
Operation  is subject to the following  two conditions:
 1. this device may not cause interference,  and
 2. this device must accept any interference,  including  interference  that may 
cause undesired  operation  of the device.
Cet appareil  est conforme  avec Industrie  Canada  RSS standard  exempts  de licence 
(s). Son utilisation  est soumise  à Les deux conditions  suivantes:
 1. cet appareil  ne peut pas provoquer  d’interférences  et
 2. cet appareil  doit accepter  Toute interférence,  y compris  les interférences  qui 
peuvent  causer un mauvais  fonctionnement  du dispositif
European  Union (EU)
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for this region can also be viewed on your 
device. To view the content: 
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
Simplified  EU Declaration  of Conformity
57
Hereby,  Fitbit LLC declares  that the radio equipment  type Model FB421 is in 
compliance  with Directive  2014/53/EU.   The full text of the EU declaration  of 
conformity  is available  at the following  internet  address:   www.fitbit.com/safety
Vereinfachte  EU-Konformitätserklärung
Fitbit LLC erklärt hiermit, dass die Funkgerättypen  Modell FB421 die Richtlinie  
2014/53/EU  erfüllen.  Der vollständige  Wortlaut  der EU-Konformitätserklärungen  
kann unter folgender  Internetadresse  abgerufen  werden:  www.fitbit.com/safety
Declaración  UE de Conformidad  simplificada
Por la presente,  Fitbit LLC declara que el tipo de dispositivo  de radio Modelo FB421 
cumple con la Directiva  2014/53/UE.  El texto completo  de la declaración  de 
conformidad  de la UE está disponible  en la siguiente  dirección  de Internet:  
www.fitbit.com/safety
Déclaration  UE de conformité  simplifiée
Fitbit LLC déclare par la présente  que les modèles  d’appareils  radio FB421 sont 
conformes  à la Directive 2014/53/UE.  Les déclarations  UE de conformité  sont 
disponibles  dans leur intégralité  sur le site suivant :  www.fitbit.com/safety
Dichiarazione  di conformità  UE semplificata
Fitbit LLC dichiara  che il tipo di apparecchiatura  radio Modello  FB421 è conforme  
alla Direttiva  2014/53/UE.  Il testo completo  della dichiarazione  di conformità  UE è 
disponibile  al seguente  indirizzo  Internet:  www.fitbit.com/safety
58
Argentina  
C-26160
Australia  and New Zealand
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for this region can also be viewed on your 
device. To view the content:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
Belarus
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for this region can also be viewed on your 
device. To view the content:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
59
Customs  Union
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for this region can also be viewed on your 
device. To view the content:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
Indonesia
73244/SDPPI/2021  
3788
76114/SDPPI/2021  
3788
Israel
Japan
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for this region can also be viewed on your 
device. To view the content:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
201-210387
60
Kingdom  of Saudi Arabia
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for this region can also be viewed on your 
device. To view the content:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
Mexico
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for this region can also be viewed on your 
device. To view the content:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
La operación  de este equipo está sujeta a las siguientes  dos condiciones:
 1. Es posible que este equipo o dispositivo  no cause interferencia  perjudicial  y
 2. Este equipo o dispositivo  debe aceptar  cualquier  interferencia,  incluyendo  la 
que pueda causar su operación  no deseada
Morocco
61
AGREE PAR L’ANRT  MAROC
Numéro  d’agrément:  MR00029210ANRT2021
 Date d’agrément:  23/06/2021
Nigeria
Connection  and use of this communications  equipment  is permitted  by the Nigerian  
Communications  Commission.
Oman
TRA/TA- R/11836/21
D090258
Philippines
Type Accepted
No: ESD- RCE-2126831
Serbia
62
Singapore
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for this region can also be viewed on your 
device. To view the content:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
South Korea
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for this region can also be viewed on your 
device. To view the content:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
Taiwan
用戶注意： 某些地區的法規內容也可以在您的設備上查看。 要查看內容： 
設置  
 設備信息  
  法規信息
Translation:
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  can also be viewed on your device. 
Instructions  to view content  from your menu:
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
低功率警語:
 l取得審驗證明之低功率射頻器材， 非經核准， 公司、 商號或使用者均不得擅自變更
頻率、 加大功率或變更原設計之特性及功能。 
 l低功率射頻器材之使用不得影響飛航安全及干擾合法通信； 經發現有干擾現象時， 
應立即停用， 並改善至無干擾時方得繼續使用。 前述合法通信， 指依電信管理法規
定作業之無線電通信。 低功率射頻器材須忍受合法通信或工業、 科學及醫療用電
波輻射性電機設備之干擾。 
Translation:
63
Warning  Statement  for Low Power Radios:
 lWithout  permission  granted  by the NCC, no company,  enterprise,  or user is 
allowed  to change the frequency  of an approved  low power radio-frequency  
device, enhance  its transmitting  power or alter original characteristics  or 
performance.
 lThe use of low power RF devices  must not affect flight safety or interfere  with 
legal communications:  when interference  is found, it should be immediately  
stopped  and ameliorated  not to interfere  before continuing  to use it. The legal 
communications  mentioned  here refer to radio communications  operating  in 
accordance  with the provisions  of the Telecommunication  Law. Low power RF 
devices  need to bear with interference  from legal communications  or 
industrial,  scientific  and medical  radio wave radiating  equipment
電池警語： 
此裝置使用鋰電池。 
若未遵照下列準則， 則裝置內的鋰離子電池壽命可能會縮短或有損壞裝置、 發生火災、 
化學品灼傷、 電解液洩漏及／或受傷的風險。 
 l請勿拆解、 鑿孔或損壞裝置或電池。 
 l請勿取出或嘗試取出使用者不可自行更換的電池。 
 l請勿將電池曝露於火焰、 爆炸或其他危險中。 
 l請勿使用尖銳物品取出電池。 
Translation:
Battery warning:
This device uses a lithium- ion battery.
If the following  guidelines  are not followed,  the life of the lithium- ion battery in the 
device may be shortened  or there is a risk of damage  to the device, fire, chemical  
burn, electrolyte  leakage  and / or injury.
 lDo not disassemble,  puncture  or damage  the device or battery.
 lDo not remove  or try to remove  the battery that the user cannot replace.
 lDo not expose the battery to flames, explosions  or other hazards.
 lDo not use sharp objects to remove  the battery.
64
Vision Warning
使用過度恐傷害視力
警語
 l使用過度恐傷害視力
注意事項
 l使用30分鐘請休息10分鐘。 未滿2歲幼兒不看螢幕， 2歲以上每天看螢幕不要超過1
小時
Translation:
Excessive  use may damage  vision
Warning:
 lExcessive  use may damage  vision
Attention:
 lRest for 10 minutes  after every 30 minutes.
 lChildren  under 2 years old should stay away from this product.   Children  2 
years old or more should not see the screen for more than 1 hour a day.
65
Taiwan RoHS
United Arab Emirates
TRA – United Arab Emirates
Dealer ID:  DA35294/14
TA RTTE:  ER98025/21
Model: FB421
Type:  Wireless  Activity  Tracker
66
United Kingdom
Notice to the User: Regulatory  content  for this region can also be viewed on your 
device. To view the content: 
Settings   
 Device Info  
 Regulatory  Info 
Simplified  UK Declaration  of Conformity
Hereby,  Fitbit LLC declares  that the radio equipment  type Model FB421 is in 
compliance  with Radio Equipment  Regulations  2017. The full text of the UK 
declaration  of conformity  is available  at the following  internet  address:  
www.fitbit.com/legal/safety- instructions
Vietnam
About the Battery
This unit contains  a non-replaceable  internal lithium- ion battery.  The battery can 
burst or explode,  releasing  hazardous  chemicals.  To reduce the risk of fire or burns, 
do not disassemble,  crush, puncture  or dispose  of in fire or water. 
67
CAUTION :  Risk of explosion  if battery is replaced  by an incorrect  type.  Dispose  of 
used batteries  according  to the instructions.
 lThe battery must be recycled  or disposed  of properly
 lUse the battery only in the specified  equipment
 lDo not leave the battery in an extremely  high temperature  environment  that 
may result in an explosion  or the leakage  of flammable  liquid or gas
 lDo not subject battery to extremely  low air pressure  that may result in an 
explosion  or the leakage  of flammable  liquid or gas
IP Rating
Model FB421 has a water resistance  rating of IPX8 under IEC standard  60529, up to 
a depth of 50 meters.
Model FB421 has a dust ingress rating of IP6X under IEC standard  60529 which 
indicates  the device is dust-tight.
Please refer to the beginning  of this section for instructions  on how to access your 
product’s  IP rating.
Safety Statement
This equipment  has been tested to comply with safety certification  in accordance  
with the specifications  of:  IEC 60950-1:2005 + AMD1:2009  + AMD2:2013,  EN60950-
1:2006 + A11:2009  + A1:2010  + A12: 2011 + A2:2013,  IEC 62368-1: 2014, EN62368-
1:2014 + A11:2017,  BS EN62368- 1:2014 +A11:2017.
Regulatory  Markings
Device regulatory  markings  can be viewed on your device by removing  the band.  
Markings  are located in the band attach area.
68
Band Pocket View
69
 
©2021FitbitLLC.Allrightsreserved. FitbitandtheFitbitlogoaretrademarks
orregistered trademarks ofFitbitintheUSandothercountries. Amore
complete listofFitbittrademarks canbefoundattheFitbitTrademark List.
Third-partytrademarks mentioned aretheproperty oftheirrespective
