Before using iPhone, review the iPhone User Guide  at  
support.apple.com/guide/iphone . You can also download the  
guide from Apple Books (where available). Retain documentation  
for future reference.
Safety and Handling
See “Safety, handling, and support” in the iPhone User Guide .
Exposure to Radio Frequency
On iPhone, go to Settings > General > Legal & Regulatory >  
RF Exposure. Or go to apple.com/legal/rfexposure .
Battery and Charging
An iPhone battery should only be repaired by a trained technician to 
avoid battery damage, which could cause overheating, fire, or injury. 
Batteries should be recycled or disposed of separately from 
household waste and according to local environmental laws and 
guidelines. For information about Apple lithium-ion batteries and 
battery service and recycling, go to apple.com/batteries/
service-and-recycling . For information about charging, see 
“Important safety information” in the iPhone User Guide.
Lasers
The proximity sensor, the TrueDepth camera system, and the LiDAR 
Scanner contain one or more lasers. These laser systems may be 
disabled for safety reasons if the device is damaged or malfunctions. 
If you receive a notification on your iPhone that the laser system is 
disabled, you should always have it repaired by Apple or an 
authorized service provider. Improper repair, modification, or use  
of non-genuine Apple components in the laser systems may prevent 
the safety mechanisms from functioning properly, and could cause 
hazardous exposure and injury to eyes or skin.
Hearing Aid Compatibility (HAC)—U.S. only
iPhone is hearing aid compatible as determined by ANSI C63.19-2011. 
This standard has two ratings: M (for reduced radio-frequency 
interference to enable acoustic coupling) and T (for inductive 
coupling with hearing aids operating in telecoil mode) on a scale  
from 1-4, where 4 is most compatible. This iPhone is rated M3/T4. 
Note: the 2019 ANSI C63.19 standard does not use this rating system 
nor do any test standards exist for any wireless technologies that 
transmit above 6 GHz. Therefore, 5G NR mmWave frequency bands 
cannot be tested.
Compulsory FCC statement: This phone has been tested and certified 
for use with hearing aids for some of the wireless technologies that it 
uses. However, there may be some newer wireless technologies used 
in this phone that have not been tested yet for use with hearing aids. 
It is important to try the different features of this phone thoroughly 
and in different locations, using your hearing aid or cochlear implant, 
to determine if you hear any interfering noise. Consult your service 
provider or the manufacturer of this phone for information on hearing 
aid compatibility. If you have questions about return or exchange 
policies, consult your service provider or phone retailer.
Avoid Hearing Damage
To prevent possible hearing damage, do not listen at high volume 
levels for long periods. More information about sound and hearing  
is available online at apple.com/sound  and in “Important safety 
information” in the iPhone User Guide .
Medical Device Interference
iPhone contains magnets as well as components and/or radios that 
may interfere with medical devices. See “Important safety 
information” in the iPhone User Guide .
Regulatory
Regulatory certification information is available on-device. Go to 
Settings > General > Legal & Regulatory. Additional regulatory 
information is in “Safety, handling, and support” in the  
iPhone User Guide .
FCC and ISED Canada Compliance
This device complies with part 15 of the FCC Rules and ISED Canada 
licence-exempt RSS standard(s). Operation is subject to the following 
two conditions: (1) this device may not cause harmful interference, 
and (2) this device must accept any interference received, including 
interference that may cause undesired operation.
EU / UK Compliance
Apple Inc. hereby declares that this wireless device is in compliance 
with Directive 2014/53/EU and Radio Equipment Regulation 2017.  
A copy of the Declaration of Conformity is available at apple.com/
euro/compliance . Apple’s EU representative is Apple Distribution 
International Ltd., Hollyhill Industrial Estate, Cork, Ireland. Apple’s UK 
representative is Apple UK Ltd., 2 Furzeground Way, Stockley Park, 
Middlesex, UB11 1BB.
        
Use Restriction
This device is restricted to indoor use when operating in the 5150  
to 5350 MHz frequency range. This restriction applies in: AT, BE,  
BG, CH, CY, CZ, DE, DK, EE, EL, ES, FI, FR, HR, HU, IE, IS, IT, LI, LT,  
LU, LV, MT, NL, NO, PL, PT, RO, SE, SI, SK, TR, UA, UK(NI).
Disposal and Recycling Information
The symbol above means that according to local laws and regulations 
your product and/or its battery shall be disposed of separately from 
household waste. When this product reaches its end of life, take it  
to a collection point designated by local authorities. The separate 
collection and recycling of your product and/or its battery at the  
time of disposal will help conserve natural resources and ensure  
that it is recycled in a manner that protects human health and the 
environment. For information about Apple’s recycling program, 
recycling collection points, restricted substances, and other 
environmental initiatives, visit apple.com/environment .
Class 1 Laser Information
This device is classified as a Class 1 Laser product per IEC 60825-1 
Ed. 3. This device complies with 21 CFR 1040.10 and 1040.11, except 
for conformance with IEC 60825-1 Ed. 3., as described in Laser 
Notice No. 56, dated May 8, 2019. Caution: This device contains one 
or more lasers. Use other than as described in the user guide, repair, 
or disassembly may cause damage, which could result in hazardous 
exposure to infrared laser emissions that are not visible. This 
equipment should be serviced by Apple or an authorized  
service provider.
CLASS 1 LASER PRODUCT
Apple One-Year Limited Warranty Summary
Apple warrants the included hardware product and accessories 
against defects in materials and workmanship for one year from  
the date of original retail purchase. Apple does not warrant against 
normal wear and tear, nor damage caused by accident or abuse.  
To obtain service, call Apple or visit an Apple Store or an Apple 
Authorized Service Provider—available service options are dependent 
on the country in which service is requested and may be restricted to 
the original country of sale. Call charges and international shipping 
charges may apply, depending on the location. Subject to the full 
terms and detailed information on obtaining service available at  
apple.com/legal/warranty  and support.apple.com , if you submit a  
valid claim under this warranty, Apple will either repair, replace, or 
refund your hardware device at its own discretion. Warranty benefits 
are in addition to rights provided under local consumer laws. You may 
be required to furnish proof of purchase details when making a claim 
under this warranty.
For Australian Consumers: Our goods come with guarantees that 
cannot be excluded under the Australian Consumer Law. You are 
entitled to a replacement or refund for a major failure and for 
compensation for any other reasonably foreseeable loss or damage. 
You are also entitled to have the goods repaired or replaced if the 
goods fail to be of acceptable quality and the failure does not  
amount to a major failure. Apple Pty Ltd, PO Box A2629,  
Sydney South, NSW 1235. Tel: 133-622.

© 2022 Apple Inc. All rights reserved. Apple, the Apple logo, 
Apple Books, iPhone, and TrueDepth are trademarks of Apple Inc., 
registered in the U.S. and other countries and regions. Apple Store 
is a service mark of Apple Inc., registered in the U.S. and other 
countries and regions. Printed in XXXX.  034-05317-A
