User ManualG30P/G30
Original Instructions www.segway.com 
V1.0The manufacturer reserves the right to make changes to the product, release firmware 
updates, and update this manual at any time. Visit www.segway.com or check the App to 
download the latest user materials. You must install the App, activate your KickScooter, and 
obtain the latest updates and safety instructions.
Thanks for choosing the Ninebot KickScooter Max (hereinafter referred to as KickScooter)! 
Your KickScooter is a recreational product with mobile app, allowing you to connect with other riders.
Enjoy your ride and connect with riders worldwide!Contents Thanks for choosing the Ninebot KickScooter Max!
4 Assembling Y our KickScooter1 Riding Safety 
2 Packing List
3 Diagram
5 First Ride
6 Charging
7 Learning to Ride
8 Warnings
10 Maintenance
12 Certiﬁcations11 Speciﬁcations9 Folding and Carrying
13 T rademark and Legal Statement
14 Contact 02
04
05
06
07
08
08
10
14
15
1716
20
21
01
1 Riding Safety 
1. The KickScooter is a recreational product. Before mastering riding skills, you need to practice. Neither Ninebot Inc. 
(means Ninebot (Beijing) Tech Co., Ltd. and its subsidiaries and affiliates) nor Segway Inc. is responsible for any 
injuries or damage caused by a rider's inexperience or failure to follow the instructions in this document.
2. Please understand that you can reduce the risk by following all the instructions and warnings in this manual, but 
you cannot eliminate all the risks. Remember that whenever you ride the KickScooter you risk injury from loss of 
control, collisions, and falls. When entering into public spaces always comply with the local laws and regulations. 
As with other vehicles, faster speeds require longer braking distance. Sudden braking on low traction surfaces 
could lead to wheel slip, or falls. Be cautious and always keep a safe distance between you and other people or 
vehicles when riding. Be alert and slow down when entering unfamiliar areas.
3. Always wear a helmet when riding. Use an approved bicycle or skateboard helmet that fits properly with the chin 
strap in place, and provides protection for the back of your head.
4. Do not attempt your first ride in any area where you might encounter children, pedestrians, pets, vehicles, 
bicycles, or other obstacles and potential hazards.
5. Respect pedestrians by always yielding the right of way. Pass on the left whenever possible. When approaching a 
pedestrian from the front, stay to the right and slow down. Avoid startling pedestrians. When approaching from 
behind, announce yourself and slow down to walking speed when passing. Please obey local traffic laws and 
regulations if situation is different.
6. In places without laws comply with the safety guidelines outlined in this manual. Neither Ninebot Inc. nor Segway 
Inc. is responsible for any property damage, personal injury/death, accidents, or legal disputes caused by 
violations of the safety instructions.
7. Do not allow anyone to ride your KickScooter on his/her own unless they have carefully read this manual and 
followed the New Rider Tutorial in the App. The safety of new riders is your responsibility. Assist new riders until 
they are comfortable with the basic operation of the KickScooter. Make sure each new rider wears a helmet and 
other protective gear.
8. Before each ride check for loose fasteners and damaged components. If the KickScooter makes abnormal sounds 
or signals an alarm, immediately stop riding. Diagnose your KickScooter via the Segway-Ninebot App and call your 
dealer/distributor for service.9. Be alert! Scan both far ahead and in front of your KickScooter — your eyes are your best tool for safely avoiding 
obstacles and low traction surfaces (including, but not limited to, wet ground, loose sand, loose gravel, and ice).
10. To reduce risk of injury, you must read and follow all “CAUTION” and “WARNING” notices in this document. Do not 
ride at an unsafe speed. Under no circumstance should you ride on roads with motor vehicles. The manufacturer 
recommends riders be 14+ years old. Always follow these safety instructions:
A. People who should not ride the KickScooter include:
i. Anyone under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
ii. Anyone who suffers from disease that puts them at risk if they engage in strenuous physical activity.
iii. Anyone who has problems with balance or with motor skills that would interfere with their ability to maintain 
balance.
iv. Anyone whose weight is outside the stated limits (see Specifications).
v. Pregnant women.
B. Riders under the age of 18 years old should ride under adult supervision.
C. Comply with local laws and regulations when riding this product. Do not ride where prohibited by local laws.
D. To ride safely, you must be able to clearly see what is in front of you and you must be clearly visible to others.
E. Do not ride in the snow, in the rain, or on roads which are wet, muddy, icy, or that are slippery for any reason. 
Do not ride over obstacles (sand, loose gravel, or sticks). Doing so could result in a loss of balance or traction 
and could cause a fall.
11. Do not attempt to charge your KickScooter if, the charger, or the power outlet is wet.
12. As with any electronic device, use a surge protector when charging to help protect your KickScooter from damage 
due to power surges and voltage spikes. Only use the Segway supplied charger. Do not use a charger from any 
other different product models.
13. Use only Ninebot or Segway approved parts and accessories. Do not modify your KickScooter. Modifications to 
your KickScooter could interfere with the operation of the KickScooter, could result in serious injury and/or 
damage, and could void the Limited Warranty.
02 03
04 053 Diagram 2 Packing List
Dashboard & Power ButtonBattery 
CompartmentHub MotorBrake LightBuckleDashboard & Power ButtonElectronic Throttle
Rear FenderQuick Release Lever
KickstandFolding Mechanism
Front ForkStem
Drum BrakeCharge PortHandlebarBrake LeverBellSnap Hook
Headlight
Speedometer: Display the current speed of the KickScooter, as well as to display error codes.
Modes: Three modes available. "ECO" for Energy saving mode (smooth acceleration, suitable for beginners), "D" for Standard 
mode and "S" for Sport mode (powerful, only recommended for skilled riders).
Bluetooth: The icon indicates that the KickScooter has been successfully connected to the mobile device.
Error: The wrench icon indicates that the KickScooter has detected an error.
Battery Level: The battery power is indicated by 5 bars, each representing approximately 20% of a full battery.
Power Button: Press the button to turn the KickScooter on; and press and hold the button for 3 seconds to turn the KickScooter off. 
When the KickScooter is on, press the button to turn the headlight on/off, and double press to switch between modes.Pedestrian mode: Makes pushing the KickScooter easier.When unpacking your KickScooter, please verify that the above items are included in the package. If you are missing any 
components, please contact your dealer/distributor or nearest service center (see Contact in the user manual). After 
verifying that all components are present and in good condition, you can assemble your new KickScooter. 
Please retain the box and packaging materials in case you need to ship your KickScooter in the future. 
Remember to power off your KickScooter and unplug the power cord before assembling, mounting accessories, or 
cleaning the mainframe. AccessoriesUser Materials Assembled KickScooter
QUICK START USER MANUAL LIMITED WARRANTY
Power Cord
M5 Flathead Screw x 6 Hex Wrench
Battery Charger
(Sold Separately) Valve Stem Extension
06 074 Assembling Y our KickScooter
3. Install six screws (two on each side) 
with the included hex wrench.4. Verify that your KickScooter can be 
powered on and off.2. Firmly connect the wires inside the 
handle and the stem. Slide the handle 
onto the stem. Be aware of the correct 
orientation.
Headlight 
toward front1. Unfold the handlebar stem and fasten 
it. Then unfold the kickstand to 
support the KickScooter.5 First Ride      There are safety risks when learning to ride the KickScooter. You must read the 
Riding Safety via the App before your first ride. 
For your safety, your new KickScooter is not activated and will beep occasionally after 
Power ON. 
Until activated, the KickScooter maintains very low riding speed, and cannot be ridden 
with full function. Install the App on your mobile device (with Bluetooth 4.0 or above), 
connect to the KickScooter with Bluetooth, and follow the App instructions to activate 
your KickScooter and enjoy the full performance. 
Scan the QR code to download the App.
2 1Install the App and register/login. Power on the KickScooter. A blinking 
Bluetooth icon indicates the KickScooter is 
waiting for a connection. 
3
4Click “Vehicle”→ “Scan for Vehicle” to connect to 
your KickScooter. 
The KickScooter will beep when the connection 
is successful. The Bluetooth icon will stop 
blinking and remain illuminated. 
Follow the App instructions to active the KickScooter and learn how to ride safely.
You can now start to use your KickScooter, check the status with App, and interact with other 
users. Have fun!Vehicle Fans Moments Me DiscoverSegway-Ninebot App
21
08 09     WARNING
When hard braking, you risk serious injury due to loss of traction and falls. 
Maintain a moderate speed and look out for potential hazards.3. Put your other foot on the footrest to keep 
both feet stable. Press the throttle on the 
right hand to speed up when you are 
balanced.
Note, for your safety, the motor will not
engage until the KickScooter reaches 
1.86 mph (3 km/h)
4. Slow down by releasing the throttle; and 
brake by squeezing the brake lever.5. To turn, shift your body weight and 
turn the handle slightly.2. Stand on the footrest with one foot 
and push off with another foot to 
start gliding.
7 Learning to Ride
Wear an approved helmet and other protective 
gear to minimize any possible injury.1. Power on the KickScooter and check 
the power level indicator. Charge the 
KickScooter if the battery level is low.     WARNING
Do not charge if the charge port or power cord is wet. 
Do not charge or use your battery if it is damaged or see trace of water. 
Close the charge port cover when not charging.Close the charge 
port cover when 
finished.Open the charge 
port cover.Insert the 
charge plug.Charging step tips6 Charging
Charge port
10 11DO NOT press the throttle when 
walking with the KickScooter.
DO NOT carry heavy objects on 
the handlebar.DO NOT ride the KickScooter with 
only one foot.Avoid contacting obstacles with the 
tire/wheel.
Watch your head when 
passing through doorways.Do not keep your feet on the rear fender.DO NOT ride over speed bumps, thresholds, or other 
bumps at HIGH SPEED.8 Warnings
DO NOT ride the 
KickScooter in the rain.
DO NOT get wet. Failure to follow these instructions could lead to 
serious injury.     WARNING
12 13     WARNING
Always keep both hands on the handlebar or you risk serious injury due to loss of balance and falls.DO NOT rotate the handle violently 
while driving at high speed. DO NOT ride on public roads, 
motorways, or highways.
DO NOT ride through puddles or 
other bodies of water.The KickScooter is for one rider
only. Do not carry any passengers. 
Do not carry a child. Do not ride 
when pregnant.DO NOT take your hands off the 
handlebar while riding. Do not ride 
with one hand only.DO NOT touch the hub motor after 
riding because it can get hot.
DO NOT ride up and down stairs or jump 
over obstacles. Do not use mobile phone or wear 
earphones when operating the 
KickScooter. 
10 Maintenance
Cleaning and Storage
Use a soft, wet cloth to wipe the mainframe clean. Dirt hard to remove can be scrubbed with a toothbrush and 
toothpaste, then cleaned with a soft, wet cloth. 
NOTE
Do not wash your KickScooter with alcohol, gasoline, acetone, or other corrosive/volatile solvents. These substances 
may damage the appearance and internal structure of your KickScooter. Do not wash your KickScooter with a power 
washer or hose. 
        WARNING
Make sure the KickScooter is powered OFF, the power cord is unplugged, and the rubber cap on the charge port is 
tightly sealed before cleaning; otherwise you may damage the electronic components. 
Store your KickScooter in a cool, dry place. Do not store it outdoors for extended periods of time. Exposure to sunlight 
and temperature extremes (both hot and cold) will accelerate the aging process of the plastic components and may 
reduce battery life. 
Tire Pressure
Inflate tires to 32–37 psi. Inflate both tires equally.
Battery Pack Maintenance
Do not store or charge the battery at temperatures outside the stated limits (see Specifications). Do not puncture the 
battery. Refer to your local laws and regulations regarding battery recycling and/or disposal. 
A well maintained battery can perform well even after many miles of riding. Charge the battery after each ride and avoid 
draining the battery completely. When used at room temperature (70°F [22°C]) the battery range and performance is at 
its best; whereas using it at temperatures below 32°F (0°C) can decrease range and performance. Typically, at -4°F 
(-20°C) range can be half that of the same battery at 70°F (22°C). Battery range will recover when temperature rises. 
More details are available in the App. 
NOTE
Typically, a fully charged battery should retain power for 120-180 days. A low-power battery should retain power for 
30–60 days. Remember to charge the battery after each use. Completely draining the battery may cause permanent 
damage to the battery. Electronics inside the battery record the charge-discharge condition of the battery; damage 
caused by over-charging or under-charging will not be covered by the Limited Warranty. 
        WARNING
Do not attempt to disassemble the battery. Do not touch battery contacts. Do not dismantle or puncture the casing. 
Keep the battery contacts away from metal objects to prevent short circuit. Risk of fire and electric shock. No user 
serviceable parts. Do not charge or use your battery if it is damaged or see trace of water.
        WARNING
Do not ride when the ambient temperature is outside the machine operation temperature (see Specifications) because 
low/high temperature will limit the maximum power/torque. Doing so could cause personal injury or property damage 
due to slips or falls.
14 159 Folding and Carrying
When your KickScooter is folded up, lift it by the stem to carry.CarryingTurn off your KickScooter. Turn the 
safety hook counterclockwise and 
open the quick release lever.Folding
Align the snap hook and the 
buckle and hook them.Disengage the snap hook from 
the buckle. Fold the handlebar 
stem up, close the quick release 
lever and turn the safety hook 
clockwise.Safety Hook Snap Hook
2
1
For model: G30P
This product is certified to ANSI/CAN/UL-2272 by TUV Rheinland.
The battery complies with UN/DOT 38.3.
The battery complies with ANSI/UL 2271.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Compliance Statement for USA
This device complies with part 15 of the FCC rules. Operation is subject to the following two conditions: (1) This device 
may not cause harmful interference, and (2) this device must accept any interference received, including interference 
that may cause undesired operation.
NOTE
This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for a Class B digital device, pursuant to part 15 of 
the FCC Rules. These limits are designed to provide reasonable protection against harmful interference in a residential 
installation. This equipment generates, uses and can radiate radio frequency energy and, if not installed and used in 
accordance with the instructions, may cause harmful interference to radio communications. However, there is no 
guarantee that interference will not occur in a particular installation. If this equipment does cause harmful interference 
to radio or television reception, which can be determined by turning the equipment off and on, the user is encouraged to 
try to correct the interference by one or more of the following measures: 
— Reorient or relocate the receiving antenna.
— Increase the separation between the equipment and receiver. 
— Connect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from that to which the receiver is connected. 
— Consult the dealer or an experienced radio/TV technician for help.
This equipment complies with FCC radiation exposure limits set forth for an uncontrolled environment.
Industry Canada (IC) Compliance Statement for Canada
This device complies with Industry Canada license-exempt RSS standard (s). Operation is subject to the following two 
conditions: (1) this device may not cause interference, and (2) this device must accept any interference, including 
interference that may cause undesired operation of the device.
CAN ICES-3 (B)/NMB-3(B)
“Le présent appareil est conforme aux CNR d'Industrie Canada applicables aux appareils radio exempts de licence. 
L'exploitation est autorisée aux deux conditions suivantes : (1) l'appareil ne doit pas produire de brouillage, et (2) 
l'utilisateur de l'appareil doit accepter tout brouillage radioélectrique subi, même si le brouillage est susceptible d'en 
compromettre le fonctionnement."
Neither Segway Inc. nor Ninebot is responsible for any changes or modifications not expressly approved by Segway Inc. 
or Ninebot. Such modifications could void the user's authority to operate the equipment.
 FCC ID: 2ALS8-NB9676
 IC: 22636-NB967612 Certiﬁcations
16 1711 Speciﬁcations
Dimensions
Weight
Machine 
Parameters
Battery 
Motor
Charger
FeaturesBrake LightUnfold: Length x Width x Height
Fold: Length x Width x Height
Payload
Rider Recommended Age
Required Height 
Max. Speed
Typical Range [1] 
Max. Slope
Operating Temperature
Storage Temperature
IP Rating
Duration of ChargingTraversable Terrain
Max. Charging Voltage
Charging Temperature 32–104°F (0–40°C)
Nominal Capacity 
Battery Management System
Input Voltage
Output Voltage
Output CurrentNominal Voltage
Nominal Power
Output Power~ 45.9 × 18.6 × 47.4 in (1167 × 472 × 1203 mm)
~ 45.9 × 18.6 × 21.0 in (1167 × 472 × 534 mm)
66.1–220.5 lbs (30.0–100.0 kg)
Approx. 40.4 miles (65 km)
Approx. 20%
36 VDC14–104°F (-10–40°C)
-4–122°F (-20–50°C)
42 VDC
551 Wh
350 WOver-heating, short circuit, over-current and 
over-charge protection
Number Of Batteries 1
100–240V j 50/60Hz
42 VDC
2.9 A121 W14+ years
3’11”–6’6” (120–200 cm)
IPX5
~ 6 hasphalt/flat pavement; obstacles < 0.4 in (1 cm); 
gaps < 1.2 in (3 cm)Approx. 18.6 mph (30 km/h)           Approx. 15.5 mph (25 km/h)
LED rear light
Riding Modes Energy Saving mode, Standard mode and Sport modeNet Approx. 42.1 lbs (19.1 kg)G30P G30 Item
[1] Typical Range: tested while riding under full power, 165.3 lbs (75.0 kg) load, 77°F (25°C), 60% of max. speed on average on pavement.
For model: G30
Important WEEE information
WEEE Disposal and Recycling Information Correct Disposal of this product. This marking indicates that this product 
should not be disposal with other household wastes throughout the EU.
To prevent possible harm to the environment or human health from uncontrolled waste disposal, recycle it responsible 
to promote the sustainable reuse of materials resources. To return your used device, please use the return and 
collection systems or contact the retailer where the product was purchased. They can take this product for environmen-
tal safe recycling.
Battery recycling information for the European Union
Batteries or packaging for batteries are labeled in accordance with European Directive 2006/66/EC and amendment 
2013/56/EU concerning batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators. The Directive determines 
the framework for the return and recycling of used batteries and accumulators as applicable throughout the European 
Union. This label is applied to various batteries to indicate that the battery is not to be thrown away, but rather 
reclaimed upon end of life per this Directive.
In accordance with the European Directive 2006/66/EC and amendment 2013/56/EU, batteries and accumulators are 
labeled to indicate that they are to be collected separately and recycled at end of life. The label on the battery may also 
include a chemical symbol for the metal concerned in the battery (Pb for lead, Hg for mercury, and Cd for cadmium). 
Users of batteries and accumulators must not dispose of batteries and accumulators as unsorted municipal waste, but 
use the collection framework available to customers for the return, recycling, and treatment of batteries and 
accumulators. Customer participation is important to minimize any potential effects of batteries and accumulators on 
the environment and human health due to the potential presence of hazardous substances.
Before placing electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) in the waste collection stream or in waste collection facilities, 
the end user of equipment containing batteries and/or accumulators must remove those batteries and accumulators 
for separate collection.Restriction of Hazardous Substances (RoHS) Directive
This Ninebot (Changzhou) Tech Co., Ltd. product, with included parts (cables, cords, and so on) meets the 
requirements of Directive 2011/65/EU on the restriction of the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical 
and electronic equipment ( “RoHS recast”  or “RoHS 2” ).
Radio Equipment Directive
Segway Europe BV, Hogehilweg 8, 1101 CC Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
Hereby, [Ninebot (Changzhou) Tech Co., Ltd,] declares that the radio equipment type [G30] is in compliance with 
Directive 2014/53/EU.
Bluetooth
Max. RF PowerFrequency Band(s)
100mW2.4000–2.4835GHz
18 19
Ninebot is the registered trademark of Ninebot (Tianjin) Tech. Co., Ltd; Segway and the Rider Design are the registered 
trademarks of Segway Inc.; Android, Google Play are trademarks of Google Inc., App Store is a service mark of Apple 
Inc., The respective owners reserve the rights of their trademarks referred to in this manual.
The KickScooter is covered by relevant patents. For patent information go to http://www.segway.com.
We have attempted to include descriptions and instructions for all the functions of the KickScooter at the time of 
printing. However, due to constant improvement of product features and changes of design, your KickScooter may 
differ slightly from the one shown in this document. Visit the Apple App Store (iOS) or the Google Play Store (Android) 
to download and install the App. 
Please note that there are multiple Segway and Ninebot models with different functions, and some of the functions 
mentioned herein may not be applicable to your unit. The manufacturer reserves the right to change the design and 
functionality of the KickScooter product and documentation without prior notice. 
© 2019 Ninebot (Beijing) Tech Co. Ltd. All rights reserved.13 T rademark and Legal Statement
Contact us if you experience issues relating to riding, maintenance and safety, or errors/faults with your 
KickScooter.
Americas:
Segway Inc.
14 Technology Drive, Bedford, NH 03110, USA
Tel: 1-603-222-6000
Fax: 1-603-222-6001
Toll Free: 1-866-473-4929
E-mail Sales: customeroperation@segway.com
E-mail Service: technicalsupport@segway.com
Website: www.segway.com
Europe, Middle East and Africa:
Segway Europe B.V.
Hogehilweg 8, 1101CC Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Website: www.segway.com
Have your KickScooter serial number on hand when contacting Segway.
You can find your serial number on the underside of your KickScooter or in the App under More Settings –> Basic 
Information.14 Contact 
20 21
