For more information about Nintendo Switch, please visit the Nintendo Support website. 
https:/ /support.nintendo.com
MXAS-HEG-S-UKV-C6Manufacturer: Nintendo Co., Ltd., Kyoto 601-8501, Japan
EU authorised representative & importer:  
Nintendo of Europe SE, Goldsteinstrasse 235, 60528 Frankfurt, Germany
UK economic operator: Nintendo UK, Quadrant, 55-57 High Street, Windsor SL4 1LP , UKInserting a microSD cardTV mode (not applicable to Nintendo Switch Lite) 
Tabletop mode (not applicable to Nintendo Switch Lite) 
Nintendo Switch dock 
Nintendo Switch dock (with LAN port) 
Nintendo Switch 
Nintendo Switch – OLED Model
Nintendo Switch
Nintendo Switch LiteNintendo Switch –  
OLED ModelNintendo may change product specifications and update this information from time to time. The latest version of this document is 
available at https:/ /www.nintendo.com/eu/docs  (This service may not be available in some countries.)Nintendo Switch™ 
Nintendo Switch  
Nintendo Switch – OLED Model
Nintendo Switch Lite
Important Information
Using this Console
For explanation of the symbols and markings used on this product, see https:/ /www.nintendo.com/eu/docs
DECLARATION OF CONFORMITY
Hereby, Nintendo declares that the radio equipment type (Nintendo Switch/Nintendo Switch – OLED Model/
Nintendo Switch Lite/Joy-Con) is in compliance with Directive 2014/53/EU. The full text of the EU declaration of conformity is available at the following internet address: https:/ /www.nintendo.com/eu/docs
For UK: Hereby, Nintendo declares that the radio equipment type (Nintendo Switch/Nintendo Switch – OLED Model/  
Nintendo Switch Lite/Joy-Con) is in compliance with the relevant statutory requirements. The full text of the 
declar ation of conformity 
 is available at the following internet address: https:/ /www.nintendo.com/eu/docs
Statement of Compliance – Applicable to products sold in the UK only.
Pursuant to section 9(2) of the UK Product Security and Telecommunications Infrastructure Act 2022, Nintendo declares that its in-scope products meet the applicable security requirements for manufacturers set out in Schedule 1 of the UK Product Security and Telecommunications Infrastructure (Security Requirements for 
 Re
levant Connectable Products) Regulations 2023. Please see Nintendo’s full Statement of Compliance at  
https:/ /www.nintendo.com/en-gb/Legal-information/Product-Security-2474043.html
The Bluetooth® word mark and logos are registered trademarks owned by Bluetooth SIG, Inc. and any use of such marks by Nintendo 
is under license. Other trademarks and trade names are those of their respective owners.
© Nintendo. Trademarks are property of their respective owners. Nintendo Switch and Joy-Con are trademarks of Nintendo.Support Information
2 3 PLEASE NOTE 
In this document, the terms "Nintendo Switch", "console" and "Nintendo Switch console" also refer to the 
Nintendo Switch Lite system, unless otherwise stated. Any references to the Joy-Con™ controllers, to multiple batteries and to the vibration feature do not apply to the Nintendo Switch Lite system.
Health and Safety Information
Please read and observe the health and safety information. Failure to do so could result in injury or damage.  
Adults should supervise the use of this product by children.
 WARNING – Seizures
  Some people (about 1 in 4000) may ha ve seizures or blackouts triggered by light flashes or patterns, 
and this may occur while they are watching TV or playing video games, even if they have never had a seizure 
 before. Any
one who has ever experienced seizures, loss of awareness or any other symptom 
linked to an epileptic condition should consult a doctor before playing video games.
  Stop playing and consult a doctor if you have any  unusual sympt oms, such as: convulsions, eye or 
 muscle twitching, loss of awareness, alter
ed vision, involuntary movements, or disorientation.
 To reduce the likelihood of a seizure when playing video games:
 • Do not play if y
ou are tired or need sleep.
•  Play in a well-lit r
oom.
 • T
ake a break of 10 to 15 minutes every hour.
 WARNING – Eye Strain, Motion Sickness and Repetitive Motion Injuries
 Avoid excessively long play sessions. 
 Take a break of 10 to 15 minutes every hour, even if you don’t think you need it.
 Stop playing if you experience any of these symptoms:
•  
 If your e
yes become tired or sore while playing, or if you feel dizzy, nauseated or tired;
•  
  If your hands, wrists, or arms become tir
ed or sore while playing, or if you feel tingling, numbness, 
burning or  stiffness or  other discomfort.
  If any of these symptoms persist, consult a doct
or.
 WARNING – Pregnancy and Medical Conditions
 Consult a doctor befor e playing games that may require physical activity if:
•  
 You ar
e pregnant;
•  
 You suff
er from heart, respiratory, back, joint or orthopaedic problems;
•  You ha
ve high blood pressure;
  • Your doct
or has instructed you to restrict your physical activity;
  • You ha
ve any other medical condition that may be aggravated by physical activity.
 WARNING – Batteries
  Stop using if a battery is leaking. 
If batter
y fluid comes into contact with your eyes, immediately rinse your eyes with plenty of water and 
 consult a doctor
. If any fluid leaks on your hands, wash them thoroughly with water. Carefully wipe the 
fluid from the  exterior of the device with a cloth.
  The console and Joy-Con controllers each contain a rechargeable lithium-ion battery. Do not replace the 
batteries y
ourself. The batteries must be removed and replaced by a qualified professional. Please contact 
 Nintendo Cust
omer Support for more information.
 WARNING – Electrical Safety
  Use the Nintendo Switch AC adapter (H AC-002) or a compatible AC adapter to charge the console.  
For power requirements, see the section “Power Requirements and EU Common Charger Information”.
  Observe the following precautions when using the Nintendo Switch AC adapter (HAC-002):
•  Connect the AC adapter t
o the correct voltage (AC 100 - 240V).
•  Do not use voltage tr
ansformers or plugs that deliver reduced amounts of electricity.
•  The AC adapter should be plugged int
o a nearby, easily accessible socket.
•  The AC adapter is for indoor use only
.  If you hear a strange noise, see smoke or smell something strange, unplug the AC adapter from the 
sock
et and contact Nintendo Customer Support.
 Do not expose devices t o fire, microwaves, direct sunlight, high or extremely low temperatures.
  Do not let devices come int o contact with liquid and do not use them with wet or oily hands. 
If liquid gets inside, stop using and contact Nintendo Customer Support.
  Do not expose devices t o excessive force.  
Do not pull on cables and do not twist them too tightly.
 Do not touch device connectors with your fingers or metal objects.
 Do not touch the AC adapter or connected devices while charging during a thunderstorm.
 Use only compatible accessories that hav e been approved for use in your country.
  Do not disassemble or try t o repair devices. 
If devices are damaged, stop using them and contact Nintendo Customer Support. Do not touch 
 damaged areas. A
void contact with any leaking fluid.
 WARNING – General
  Keep this console, its accessories and packaging materials away from young children and pets.  
Small par
ts such as game cards, microSD cards and packaging items may be accidentally ingested. 
The cables can coil around the neck.
   Do not use this console within 15 centimetr es of a cardiac pacemaker while using wireless communication. 
If you have a pacemaker or other implanted medical device, first consult a doctor.
  Wireless communication may not be allowed in certain places such as aeroplanes or hospitals.  
Please follow r
espective regulations.
  
   Do not use headphones to listen at high v olume levels for long periods due to high sound 
pressure and hearing damage risk. 
  Keep the v
olume at a level at which you can hear your surroundings. Consult a doctor if you experience 
symptoms such as buzzing in your ears.
  Stop playing if you are holding the console or the controllers while charging and they become too hot, 
as this ma
y lead to skin burns.
  Persons who have an injury or disorder involving their fingers, hands or arms should not use the vibration 
f
eature.
CAREFUL USAGE
  Do not place the console in humid areas or ar eas where the temperature can suddenly change.  
If condensation forms, turn the power off and wait until the water dr oplets have evaporated.
 Do not use in dusty or smoky areas. 
  Do not cover the console’s air intakes or vents  
while pla
ying to avoid overheating. 
  If devices become dirty, wipe them with a soft,  
dr
y cloth. Avoid using thinner or other solvents.
 Be aware of your surroundings while playing.
  Make sure to charge the built-in batteries at  
least once e
very six months. If the batteries are  
not used for an extended period of time, it may  become 
 impossible to char
ge them.
  To minimise the risk of image retention or screen  
burn-in occurring on the Nintendo Switch console 
 
OLED screen (HEG-001 only), do not turn off the  
console's default sleep mode settings and take care  to not display the same image on the OLED screen for extended periods of time.
  The Nintendo Switch console OLED screen (HEG-001 only) is covered with a film layer designed to 
pr
event fragments scattering in the event of damage. Do not peel it off.
Please make sure you read the Health and Safety Information page on the Nintendo Switch console once it has been set up. You can access this information from SUPPORT in 
 (System Settings) on 
the HOME Menu. 
Nintendo Switch
Nintendo Switch – OLED ModelNintendo Switch Lite
4 5IMPORTANT INFORMATION FOR PARENTS
Parental Controls
Nintendo Switch offers a variety of exciting features. However, as a parent, you might want to restrict certain 
things which you deem unsuitable for children. We have prepared special steps to enable you to make Nintendo Switch safe for your family.
Nintendo Switch Parental Controls are available on the console itself and can also be controlled by an app on 
your smart device. During the initial setup of your console, you can select how you would like to set Parental Controls. Follow the on-screen instructions to finish setting Parental Controls.
On the console itself, you can use a PIN to set and change your desired Parental Controls settings. Your PIN can 
also be used to temporarily disable Parental Controls if you should wish to do so.
You can also change your settings at any time – even when you are away from home – using the 
 dedicated app.
Purchase Restr
ictions in Nintendo eShop
In order to restrict Nintendo eShop purchases, you must associate your child’s Nintendo Account with your 
Nintendo Account. Access your Nintendo Account on a smart device or PC to create an account for your child or associate an existing account with yours and set restrictions as you deem appropriate in the Nintendo 
Account settings.
 https:/ /accounts.nintendo.com
Using the Joy-Con Controllers (not applicable to Nintendo Switch Lite) 
Charge and pair controllers before using them for the first time. You can charge and pair controllers by  attaching 
them dir
ectly to the console or using the Joy-Con charging grip (HAC-012) (sold separately).  
To charge the controllers fully when they are attached to the console, ensure that the console is charging at the 
same time.
When playing with a Joy-Con detached from the console, make sure to use a Joy-Con strap accessory. To attach a Joy-Con strap accessory, match the + or – Button on the controller with the same symbol on the accessory. Slide the Joy-Con strap accessory onto the controller and lock it 
 using the slide lock. 
Then, put on and tighten the wrist strap. Hold the 
controller securely and do not let go of it. Allow  adequate
 room around you during 
gameplay. When you are done playing,  release the s
lide lock before detaching the 
accessory from the Joy-Con.
When attaching a Joy-Con to the console or attaching a Joy-Con strap  ac
cessory, 
make sure that you orientate the Joy-Con  correctly
 and slide it into place until you 
hear a clicking sound. When detaching a Joy-Con from the console or another device,  
make sure that you hold the button on the back and slide upwards.
How to Activate and Deactivate Wireless Network Ports
This product has two available wireless network ports, Wi-Fi (internet) and Bluetooth® *.
Play modes   TV mode   Tabletop mode    Handheld mode **
Wi-Fi Active / OFF Active / OFF Active / OFF
Activating Wi-FiGo to Internet in   (System Settings) on the HOME Menu and proceed to set 
up a connection.
Deactivating Wi-FiStart  (System Settings) from the HOME Menu in handheld mode, then set 
Flight Mode to On with Wi-Fi set to Off.
Bluetooth
Always Active***Active / OFF Active / OFF
Activating BluetoothGo to Flight Mode in  (System Settings) on the HOME 
Menu and proceed to set Flight Mode to Off. Or, with the 
flight mode function still enabled, set Bluetooth to On.
Deactivating BluetoothStart  (System Settings) from the HOME Menu, then 
set Flight Mode to On with Bluetooth set to Off.
*  The Bluet ooth network port is not available for Nintendo Switch Lite.
**  TV and tablet
op modes are not applicable to Nintendo Switch Lite. Only handheld mode is available.
***  The Bluet
ooth network port in TV mode is always active, because the console will always be reactivated using a controller paired 
via Bluetooth.Disposal of this Product
Do not dispose of this product or built-in batteries in household waste.   For details see https:/ /www.nintendo.com/eu/docs
The battery should be removed by a qualified professional. Visit https:/ /www.nintendo.com/eu/battery  
for more information.
Warranty
 Warranty UK and Ireland  [2 40925/UKV-HW]
24-MONTH MANUFACTURER'S WARRANTY –  
CONSOLES IN THE NINTENDO SWITCH™ FAMIL Y
This warranty covers Nintendo Switch consoles, Nintendo Switch – OLED Model consoles and 
 Nintendo Switch Lite systems
 (the "Nintendo console "), including the original built-in software 
 included with the res
pective Nintendo console at the time of purchase (the "Nintendo Operating 
 So
ftware ") and any controllers included within the console packaging (the "Nintendo Controllers"). 
In this warranty, the Nintendo console, the Nintendo Operating Software and the Nintendo Controllers 
are referred to together as the " Product ".
Subject to the terms and exclusions below, Nintendo of Europe SE, Goldsteinstrasse 235, 60528 Frankfurt, Germany ("Nintendo") warrants to the original consumer purchasing the Product in the United Kingdom, any country of the European Economic Area (excluding Spain and Portugal) or Switzerland ("you ") 
that, for a period of 24 months from the date of the purchase of the Product by you, the Product will be free from defects in materials and workmanship.
EXCLUSIONS
This warranty does not cover:
  software (other than the Nintendo Operating Software) or games (whether included with the Product 
at the time of pur
chase or not);
  accessories, peripherals or other items that are intended for use with the Product but are not manufactur
ed by or for Nintendo (whether included with the Product at the time of purchase or not);
  the Product if it has been resold, or used for rental or commercial purposes;
  defects in the Product that are caused by accidental damage, your and/or any third party's negligence, unr
easonable use, modification, use with products not supplied, licensed or authorised for use with 
the Product by Nintendo (including, but not limited to, non-licensed game enhancements, copier devices, adapters, power supplies or non-licensed accessories), computer viruses or connecting to the internet or other forms of electronic communication, use of the Product otherwise than in accordance with the respective instructions, or any other cause unrelated to defects in material and workmanship;
  defects in the Product that are caused by the use of faulty, damaged or leaking batteries or battery packs, 
or any other use of batteries or battery packs not in accordance with the respective instructions;
  gradual decrease over time in the capacity and performance of batteries and battery packs for the Pr
oduct (which, for the avoidance of doubt, will not be deemed to be a defect in material or 
workmanship of the Product);
  the Product if it has been opened, modified or repaired by any person or company other than Nintendo or 
its authorised partners, or if the Product has its serial number altered, defaced or removed;
  loss of any data that has been loaded onto or stored on the Product by any person or company other than Nintendo or its authorised par
tners;
  loss of data or any other content, such as software, as a result of formatting the memory of the Pr
oduct (or the microSD card or any other external storage device being used with the Product); 
or
  loss of data or any other content as a result of deleting a Nintendo Account registered or linked to the Pr
oduct.
HOW TO MAKE A CLAIM
To make a valid claim under this warranty, you must:
  notify Nintendo of the defect in the Product within 24 months of the date of the purchase of the 
Pr
oduct by you, and 
  return the Product to Nintendo within 30 days of notifying Nintendo of that defect.
T
o make a claim, please contact Nintendo Customer Support via support.nintendo.com
Before sending the Product to Nintendo Customer Support, you should remove or delete any private or confidential files or data.
By sending the Product to Nintendo you accept and agree that Nintendo will not be responsible for 
any loss, deletion or corruption of your files or data that has not been deleted or removed. Nintendo strongly recommends that you make a backup copy of any data that you do not remove or delete. Please note that, depending on the type of repair, data or other content stored in the memory of the Product may be deleted, and you may not be able to read data or other content saved to your microSD card or to any other external storage device, or import it back onto the Product following such repair.
6 7When sending the Product to Nintendo Customer Support, please:
1. 
 use the original packagin
g where possible;
2. 
 pro
vide a description of the defect;
3. 
 attach a copy of y
our proof of purchase, which indicates the date of purchase of the Product.
If, having inspected the Product, Nintendo accepts that the Product is defective, Nintendo will (at its 
sole discretion) either repair or replace the part causing the defect, or replace the relevant element of the Product without charge.
If the above 24-month warranty period has expired at the time the defect is notified to Nintendo or if 
the defect is not covered by this warranty, Nintendo may still be prepared to repair or replace the part causing the defect or replace the relevant element of the Product (at its sole discretion). For further information or, in particular, details of any charges for such services, please contact Nintendo 
 Customer Suppor
t via support.nintendo.com
This manufacturer's warranty does not affect any statutory rights which you may have under 
 consumer
 protection legislation as the purchaser of goods. The benefits described here are in 
 addition to tho
se rights.
Nintendo Switch Operating frequency band(s) Maximum radio-frequency power
Bluetooth 2402-2480MHz 3dBm
Wi-Fi2412-2472MHz / 5180-5250MHz / 5250-5320  
MHz (for indoor use only)* / 5500-5700MHz19dBm / 15dBm / 15dBm
Nintendo Switch – 
OLED ModelOperating frequency band(s) Maximum radio-frequency power
Bluetooth 2402-2480MHz 2dBm
Wi-Fi2412-2472MHz / 5180-5250MHz / 5250-5320  
MHz (for indoor use only)* / 5500-5700MHz15dBm / 7.5dBm / 7.5dBm
Joy-Con (L) Operating frequency band(s) Maximum radio-frequency power
Bluetooth 2402-2480MHz 4dBm
Joy-Con (R) Operating frequency band(s) Maximum  
radio-frequency powerMaximum  
field strength
Bluetooth 2402-2480MHz 4dBm –
NFC 13.56MHz – -6dBµA/m 
Nintendo Switch Lite Operating frequency band(s) Maximum  
radio-frequency powerMaximum  
field strength
Bluetooth 2402-2480MHz 2dBm –
Wi-Fi2412-2472MHz / 5180-5250  
MHz / 5250-5320MHz (for indoor  
use only)* / 5500-5700MHz19dBm / 15dBm / 15dBm –
NFC 13.56MHz – -1dBµA/mTechnical SpecificationsEcodesign Information for the Nintendo Switch AC Adapter
Commercial registration number of EU authorised  representativeHRB Nr. 135709 
Model identifier HAC-002(UKV)
Input voltage AC 100-240V
Input AC frequency 50/60Hz
Output voltage * DC 5.0V DC 15.0V
Output current 1.5A 2.6A
Output power 7.5W 39.0W
Average active efficiency 76.8% 88.5%
Efficiency at low load (10%) – 83.0%
No-load power consumption 0.08W 0.08W
*  The A C Adapter (HAC-002(UKV)) has two types of DC output power, and the output voltage is automatically changed depending on 
the connected device.
Product Ecodesign Information:  
Information concerning this product’s energy efficiency and resource efficiency is available at  
https:/ /nintendo.com/eu/switch-ecodesign
Warning concerning changing/deactivating the power management functions
Auto-Sleep:  If you increase the time or select "Never", the console will consume more energy.
Maintain Wired Connection in Sleep Mode (Nintendo Switch – OLED Model only): If this option is enabled and the console uses a wired internet connection, downloads will start immediately even when the console is in sleep mode, but the console will consume more energy.
Power Requirements and EU Common Charger Information
Nintendo Switch (HAC-001(-01)) *
The power delivered by the charger must be between min 2.5 watts required by the radio 
equipment, and max 10 watts in order to achieve the maximum charging speed.
Nintendo Switch – OLED Model (HEG-001) *
The power delivered by the charger must be between min 2.5 watts required by the radio equipment, and max 14 watts in order to achieve the maximum charging speed.
Nintendo Switch Lite (HDH-001) *
The power delivered by the charger must be between min 2.5 watts required by the radio equipment, and max 9 watts in order to achieve the maximum charging speed.
*  TV mode  (not applicable to Nintendo Switch Lite) requires output power of 39 watts. This is higher than the power requirements for 
charging given above. All models support USB PD fast charging and are capable of being recharged by means of wired charging at 
voltages up to 15 volts.
* This restriction applies in the following countries:
Austria (AT), Belgium (BE), Bulgaria (BG), Croatia (HR), Cyprus (CY),  
Czech Republic (CZ), Denmark (DK), Estonia (EE), Finland (FI), France (FR),  
Germany (DE), Greece (EL), Hungary (HU), Ireland (IE), Italy (IT), Latvia (LV), 
Lithuania (L T), Luxembourg (LU), Malta (MT), Netherlands (NL), Poland (PL), 
Portugal (PT), Romania (RO), Slovakia (SK), Slovenia (SI), Spain (ES),  
Sweden (SE), Switzerland (CH) and United Kingdom (Northern Ireland) (UK(NI)).
