j8   Enhanced  
  robot     
 
            Auto Empt y          dock      
Owner's Guide
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        1Safety information
Important safety information
This owner’s guide includes information for Regulatory Model(s): Robot: RVE-Y2 | Dock: ADJ-Ny (y=1-3) | Battery: ABL-H, 
ABL-F, ABL-D2Ax, ABL-D2Bx (x = 1 or 2) | Robot Radio Module: 6233E-UUB 
SAVE THESE INSTRUCTIONS
WARNING:  When using an electrical appliance, basic precautions should always be followed, including the following:
READ ALL INSTRUCTIONS
WARNING:  to reduce the risk of injury or damage, read and follow the safety precautions when setting up, using, and maintaining your robot.
This appliance is not intended for use by persons (including children) with reduced physical, sensory or mental capabilities, or lack of 
experience and knowledge, unless they have been given supervision or instruction concerning use of the appliance by a person responsible 
for their safety. Children should be supervised to ensure that they do not play with the appliance. 
This is the safety alert symbol. It is used to alert you to potential physical injury hazards.
Obey all safety messages that follow this symbol to avoid possible injury or death.
Risk of electric shock For indoor use only Rated power output, d.c. Read operator’s manual General symbol for recycling
Risk of fire Class II equipment Rated power input, d.c.Keep out of 
reach of childrenSeparate Supply Unit
Caution Class III equipment Rated power input, a.c.
EN2        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comWARNING:  Indicates a hazardous situation that, if not avoided, could result 
in death or serious injury. 
CAUTION:  Indicates a hazardous situation that, if not avoided, could result 
in minor or moderate injury. 
NOTICE:  Indicates a hazardous situation that, if not avoided, could result in 
property damage. 
GENERAL
WARNING  
• This product comes with a region approved power supply cord and is 
designed to be plugged into a standard household AC power outlet only. 
Do not use any other power supply cord or power strip. For replacement 
cords, please contact Customer Care to ensure proper selection of 
country specific power supply cord.
• Do not disassemble or open this product other than instructed in 
the Owner’s Guide. There are no user serviceable parts inside. Refer 
servicing to qualified service personnel.
• Risk of electric shock, use indoors in dry location only.
• Do not handle this product with wet hands. 
• Do not use unauthorized chargers. Use of an unauthorized charger 
could cause the battery to generate heat, smoke, catch fire, or explode.
• This product is not a toy. Small children and pets should be supervised 
when the product is operating. 
• Do not sit or stand on this product.
• Store and operate this product in room temperature environments only.
• If the room to be cleaned contains a balcony, a physical barrier 
should be used to prevent robot access to the balcony and ensure 
safe operation.
• Clean cliff sensors for buildup.
• If the room to be cleaned contains equipment, such as a stove, fan, 
space heater, or humidifier, remove the equipment before operation. 
There is a risk of injury, accident or malfunction if the robot comes in 
contact and pushes the equipment.• This robot is intended for dry floor use only. Do not use this device to pick 
up spills. Do not allow your robot or dock to become wet.
CAUTION 
• Do not operate the robot in areas with exposed electrical outlets in the 
floor.  
• Do not use this device to pick up sharp objects, glass, or anything that is 
burning or smoking.
• Be aware that the robot moves on its own. Take care when walking 
in the area that the robot is operating in to avoid stepping on it or 
tripping over it.
•  If the device passes over a power cord and drags it, there is a chance an 
object could be pulled off a table or shelf. Before using this device, pick 
up objects like clothing, loose papers, pull cords for blinds or curtains, 
power cords, and any fragile objects. Extinguish candles. Shut off 
space heaters.
• Perform the required maintenance per the Owner’s Guide to ensure safe 
operation of the robot and dock.
NOTICE
• Do not place anything on top of your robot or dock.
•  The failure to maintain cleanliness of charger contacts could result in 
loss of ability for the robot to charge the battery.
• Before running your robot on carpets or rugs, ensure that the carpets 
or rugs are compatible with vacuums using bars or brushes. Using your 
robot on a carpet or rug that is not compatible could result in damage 
to your carpet or rug. Contact your carpet or rug manufacturer with 
questions on compatibility.
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        3CLEANING SOLUTION
WARNING 
• Household cleaning products are safe when used and stored according 
to the instructions on the label. Always be sure to read and follow the 
directions carefully.
• Only use authorised cleaning solutions found on answers.irobot.com/s/
roomba-combo-cleanser.
• For cleaning solution warnings, please refer to the outer box and 
solution bottle.
Keep away from children
Keep away from eyes. If product gets into eyes rinse 
thoroughly with water.
Rinse hands after use
AUTOEMPTY DOCK
WARNING  
• Do not use if the cord or plug is damaged. If appliance is not working as 
it should, has been dropped, damaged, left outdoors or dropped into 
water, return it to a service centre. 
• Always disconnect your robot from the dock before cleaning  
or maintaining it.
• Do not use the dock as a step.
• Do not put any object into openings. Do not use with any opening 
blocked; keep free of dust, lint, hair and anything that may reduce  
air flow. 
• To properly maintain your dock, do not place foreign objects inside and 
ensure that it is clear of debris.• In order to avoid a hazard due to inadvertent resetting of the thermal 
cut-out, this appliance must not be supplied through an external 
switching device, such as a timer, or connected to a circuit that is 
regularly switched on and off by the utility.
• Do not allow liquids to get on or into the dock.
• Do not pour any liquids into the device and do not immerse in water.
• Do not use outdoors or on wet surfaces. 
• Do not allow to be used as a toy. Close attention is necessary when used 
by or near children.
• Use only as described in this manual.
• To reduce the risk of electric shock, unplug your dock before cleaning.
• Keep the dock and power cord away from heated surfaces.
NOTICE
• Product may not be used with any type of power converter. Use of power 
converters will immediately void the warranty.
• If you live in an area prone to electrical storms, it is recommended that 
you use additional surge protection. Your dock may be protected with a 
surge protector in the event of severe electrical storms.
• Do not use without dust bag and/or filters in place.
BATTERY
WARNING 
• Do not open, crush, heat above 176°F: 80°C, or incinerate. Follow the 
Owner’s Guide instructions for proper use, maintenance, handling, 
and disposal.
• Do not short-circuit the battery by allowing metal objects to contact 
battery terminals or immerse in liquid. Do not subject batteries to 
mechanical shock.
• Lithium ion batteries and products that contain lithium ion batteries are 
subject to stringent transportation regulations. If you need to ship this 
product (with the battery included) for service, travel or any other reason, 
EN4        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comyou must see the Troubleshooting section of your manual or contact 
customer care for shipping instructions.
• Periodically inspect the battery pack for any sign of damage or leakage. 
Do not charge damaged or leaking battery packs, do not allow the 
liquid to come in contact with skin or eyes. If contact has been made, 
wash the affected area with copious amounts of water and seek medical 
advice. Place the battery in a sealed plastic bag and recycle or dispose 
of safely according to local environmental regulations, or return it to your 
local authorized iRobot Service Center for disposal.
CAUTION 
• Battery usage by children should be supervised. Seek medical advice 
immediately if a cell or a battery has been swallowed.
NOTICE  
• The battery pack must be removed from the robot before recycling 
or disposal.
• For best results, only use the iRobot Lithium Ion Battery that comes with 
the robot. 
• Do not use non-rechargeable batteries. Use only the rechargeable 
battery supplied with the product. For replacement, purchase identical 
iRobot battery or contact iRobot Customer Care for alternative 
battery options.
• Always charge and remove the battery from your robot and accessories 
before long-term storage.
This symbol on the battery indicates that the battery must not be disposed 
of with unsorted common municipal waste. As the end-user, it is your 
responsibility to dispose of the end-of-life battery in your appliance in an 
environmentally sensitive manner as follows:
(1) returning it to the distributor/dealer from whom you purchased the 
product; or
(2) depositing it in a designated collection point.The separate collection and recycling of end-of-life batteries at the time 
of disposal will help to conserve natural resources and to ensure that it is 
recycled in a manner that protects human health and the environment. 
For more information, please contact your local recycling office or the 
dealer from whom you originally purchased the product. Failure to properly 
dispose of end-of-life batteries may result in the negative potential effects 
on the environment and human health due to the substances in the 
batteries and accumulators.
For battery recycling go to call2recycle.org  or call 1-800-822-8837.
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        5Getting started
1 Position the AutoEmpty dock
Good Wi-Fi® Coverage
1.5 ft (0.5 m) 
both sides4 ft (1.2 m) 
from stairs
4 ft (1.2 m) in front0.3 m (1 ft) above
NOTE:  Position your dock on hard surface flooring. Do not place it in 
direct sunlight. Ensure the area around the dock is free of clutter to 
improve docking performance.
WARNING:  To prevent the risk of your robot falling down stairs, ensure 
that your dock is placed at least 4 feet (1.2 meters) away from stairs.2 Plug in the dock
Plug the power cord into the dock, then into the wall. Wrap the cord back so it 
won’t get in the way of the robot as it comes and goes.
EN6        F or more information, visit global.irobot.com3 Wake up the robot
Place your robot on the AutoEmpty dock by lining up the metal charging contacts. 
After a few minutes, a sound will let you know it’s awake.
NOTE:  Your robot comes with a partial charge, but we recommend 
that you charge the robot for 3 hours prior to starting the first 
cleaning job.
If the light ring is swirling white, the robot is not ready and is 
still waking up.4 Download the iRobot Home App
Scan the QR code with the camera on your mobile device or find the iRobot Home 
App in your app store. 
• Follow step-by-step instructions to set up your robot.
• Set an automatic cleaning schedule and customize cleaning preferences.
• Create smart maps to tell your robot where and when to clean.
• Access to tips, tricks, and answers to commonly asked questions.
IMPORTANT:  Read enclosed safety information guide first before 
using your robot.
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        7About your robot
Top view Bottom view
1 Clean button
2 Wall follow sensor
3 Camera
4 Edge-sweeping brush1 Multi-Surface Brushes
2 Caster Wheel
3 Cliff Sensor
4 Charging Contacts
5 Bin Release Button6 Brush Caps
7 Floor Tracking Sensor
8 Brush Frame Release Tab
9 Dust Bin & Filter
EN8        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comAbout your Combo™ bin
Top view Bottom view
1 Filter
2 Dust bin
3 Water tank
4 Mopping pad5 Dust bin door
6 Tank cap
7 Pad plate1 Pad attachments
2 Wick cap3 Pad track
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        9About your dock
Front view Back view
1 Canister Lid
2 Exhaust Vent
3 IR Window
4 Charging Contacts
5 Wheel Wells6 Pull Tab
7 LED Indicator
8 Visual Docking Target
9 Debris Evacuation Port1 Cord Wrap
EN10        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comTop view Bottom view
1 Bag Storage Compartment
2 Blower Cover3 Bag Guide Rails
4 Bag Presence Sensor
5 Debris Evacuation Tube1 Debris Evacuation Tube
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        11Charging
Light Ring: Charging in progress
Sweeping white : charging
• Percentage charged is indicated by the size of the 
solid white
• For example, if half the light ring is solid, it’s 
50% charged
Pulsing red: charging, low battery
Light Ring: Charging complete
Solid white: fully charged
Pulsing white at rear: fully charged and asleep
Charging during a cleaning job
You robot will return to the AutoEmpty dock whenever it needs to recharge. 
Once the robot is sufficiently charged, it will then resume the cleaning job where 
it left off.Standby mode
The robot uses a small amount of power whenever it is on the dock. You can put 
the robot in a further-reduced power state when not in use. For instructions and 
more details on this Reduced Power Standby Mode, refer to the FAQ page on 
our website.
Storing your robot
For long-term storage, turn off the robot by removing it from the dock and holding 
down the clean button for 3 seconds with one wheel off the ground. Store the 
robot in a cool, dry place.
EN12        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comCleaning
Clean button controls
Tap to Start / Pause / Resume a job
Hold for 2-5 seconds to end a job and send the robot 
back to its dock
Light Ring: Cleaning
Sweeping red toward rear: robot bin needs to 
be emptied
Blue marching forward:  robot seeking dock
Flashing blue: Dirt Detect™ mode engagedCleaning pattern
Once your robot creates a map of your home, it will automatically explore and 
clean in neat rows, avoiding obstacles by using its front-facing camera. 
IMPORTANT:  The robot is unable to navigate in complete darkness. 
Turn on lights or open blinds to help the robot navigate. 
You robot will return to the dock at the end of a cleaning job and whenever it 
needs to empty the bin or recharge. Once complete, it will resume the cleaning 
job where it left off.
Your robot is able to recognize and avoid objects. However, it is still 
recommended to remove excess obstacles before cleaning.
After 90 minutes of inactivity off the dock, the robot will automatically end its 
cleaning job. If you are unsure if the robot is finished or paused, visit the iRobot 
Home App to check on its status.
Dirt Detect™
When your robot detects an especially dirty area, it will engage Dirt Detect™ 
mode, moving in a forward/backward motion to clean the area more thoroughly. 
The light ring indicator will flash blue when Dirt Detect™ mode is engaged.
Vacuuming
Starting a vaccum only cleaning job from your robot
1 Install the dust bin (not the Combo bin)
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        132 Place on the floor and press the clean button on the robot.
Vacuuming and mopping
Your robot is able to both vacuum and mop at the same time when the Combo™ 
bin is installed.
IMPORTANT:  Do not flip the robot over with the Combo Bin installed. 
The product starts wicking as soon as water is put into the tank
After completing your mopping and vacuum cleaning job, make sure 
to empty the robot bin water tank and replace the mopping pad.
Only certain cleaning solutions can be safely used with your robot. 
A full list of compatible cleaning solutions can be found on http://
answers.irobot.com/s/roomba-combo-cleanser  or by visiting 
the app. Please do not use other cleaning solutions or bleach-
based products.
Starting a vacuum and mop cleaning job from your robot
1 Install the mopping pad. Slide the pad down over the track. Press the pad to 
the plate to attach.  2 Fill the Combo™ bin with water. You may also use a compatible 
cleaning solution.  
3 Remove the Dust Bin from the robot, and install the Combo™bin.  
NOTE:  If you start a cleaning job from off the dock, the robot will still 
end its job on the dock. If it can’t find its dock, it will end wherever it 
started in your home.
EN14        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comEmptying the bin
Emptying the bin from your robot
When your robot senses that its bin needs to be emptied, the light ring indicator 
will illuminate in a red sweeping motion toward the rear.
1 Press bin release button to remove bin.  
2 Open bin door to empty bin.  3 Place bin back in the robot.  
Emptying the bin from your dock
While cleaning, your robot will automatically return to the dock to empty its bin. 
Once complete, it will resume the cleaning job where it left off.
NOTE:  If you place your robot on the dock by hand, it will not empty 
automatically. In this case, use the iRobot Home App or hold the 
clean button down for 2-5 seconds.
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        15Care and maintenance for your robot
To keep your robot at optimal performance, make sure you periodically perform the following basic care & 
maintenance. There are additional instructional videos in the iRobot Home App. If you notice the robot picking 
up less debris from your floor, empty the bin, clean the filter, and clean the brushes.
Part Care Frequency Replacement Frequency* 
Bin Empty bin as needed -
FilterClean once a week (twice a week if 
you have a pet). Do not washEvery 3-6 months
Edge-sweeping brushClean once a month (twice a month 
if you have a pet)Every 3-6 months
Front caster wheel Clean every 2 weeks or as needed -
Multi-surface brushClean once a month (twice a month 
if you have a pet)Every 6-12 months
Full bin sensor Clean every 2 weeks or as needed -
Charging contacts Clean once a month or as needed -
Sensors Clean once a month or as needed -
Camera window Clean and inspect on ce a month -
Mopping pad Clean after a mopping job After 30 washes
Wick caps - Replace if dirty or shows wear
*  Replacement frequency may vary. Parts should be replaced if visible wear appears. If you think you need a replacement part, 
please contact iRobot Customer Care for more information.Washing the bin
1 Release the bin, remove the filter, and open 
the bin door.
2 Rinse the dust bin and water tank using 
warm water.  
3 Make sure bin is completely dry. Reinsert filter 
and place bin back in the robot.
IMPORTANT:  The bin is not dishwasher 
safe. Do not wash the filter. Remove the 
filter before washing the bin. 
EN16        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comCleaning the filter
1 Remove the bin. Remove the filter by grasping 
both ends and pulling out.  
2 Remove debris by tapping the filter against your 
trash container.  
3 Reinsert filter with ridged grips facing out. Place 
bin back in the robot.
NOTE:  The robot will not run if the filter 
is not installed correctly. Replace the 
filter every two months.Cleaning the Edge-Sweeping Brush
1  Use a coin or small screwdriver to remove 
the screw holding the Edge-Sweeping 
Brush in place.
2  Pull to remove the Edge-Sweeping Brush. 
Remove any hair or debris, then reinstall 
the brush.  Cleaning the front caster wheel
1 Pull firmly on the front wheel module to remove it 
from the robot.
2  Pull firmly on the wheel to remove it from its 
housing (see illustration below).
3 Remove any debris from inside the wheel cavity.
4 Reinstall all parts when finished. Make sure the 
wheel clicks back into place.  
Wheel Axle
Housing
IMPORTANT:  A front wheel clogged with 
hair and debris could result in damage 
to your floor. If the wheel is not spinning 
freely after you have cleaned it, please 
contact Customer Care.
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        17Cleaning the Multi-Surface Brushes
1 Pinch the brush frame release tab, lift the tab, 
and remove any obstructions.  
2 Remove the brushes from the robot. Remove the 
brush caps from the ends of the brushes. Remove 
any hair or debris that has collected beneath the 
caps. Reinstall the brush caps.  
3 Remove any hair or debris from the square 
and hexagonal pegs on the opposite side of 
the brushes.  4 Remove the bin from the robot and clear any 
debris from the vacuum path.  
5 Reinstall the brushes in the robot. Match the 
shape of the brush pegs with the shape of the 
brush icons in the cleaning head module.  
Cleaning the Full Bin Sensors
1 Remove and empty the bin.
2 Wipe the inner sensors with a clean, dry cloth.  
3 Wipe the bin door with a clean, dry cloth.  
Closed Door
Open Door
EN18        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comCleaning the Sensors, Camera Window and Charging Contacts
Wipe sensors, camera window, and charging contacts with a clean, dry cloth.
CHARGING CONTACTS  
CAMERA WINDOW  SENSORS  
IMPORTANT:  Do not spray cleaning 
solution or water onto the sensors or 
sensor openings.Cleaning the Mopping Pad
HAND WASHING
Thoroughly wash the pad with warm water.
MACHINE WASHING
Wash using the warm cycle, then air dry. Do not 
tumble dry. Do not wash with delicates.
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        19Replacing the Wick Cap
1 Remove pad plate.  
2 Remove the wick cap by pulling on the side 
rubber tab.  
3 Replace with a new wick cap, pressing firmly 
into place to create a tight seal to preven t 
leaking.
4 Reintall pad plate.
EN20        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comCare and maintenance for your dock
To keep your AutoEmpty dock running at peak performance, perform the procedures on the following pages.
Part Care Frequency Replacement Frequency* 
Charging contacts Once every month -
Sensors, IR window, Visual 
docking targetClean once a month -
Bags -Bags should be replaced when 
prompted by the LED indicator or the 
iRobot Home app
Blower Cover 
inside canisterOnce every month (remove debris 
from blower cover)
*  Replacement frequency may vary. Parts should be replaced if visible wear appears. If you think you need a replacement part, 
please contact iRobot Customer Care for more information.Cleaning the charging contacts, IR 
window, and visual docking target
Inspect the components to make sure that they are 
clear of debris. Wipe with a clean, dry cloth.  
IMPORTANT:  Do not spray cleaning 
solution or water onto the sensors or 
sensor openings.
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        21Replacing the bag
1 Lift up on the canister lid to open.  
2 Pull up on the card to remove the bag from the 
canister. Discard the used bag.  3 Install a new bag, sliding the plastic card into 
the guide rails. This will seal the bag so dust and 
debris cannot escape.  
4 Press down on the lid making sure that it is 
completely closed.
IMPORTANT:  To achieve optimal 
performance with your robot and dock, 
clean and/or replace your robot’s 
filter as needed.
 Removing Debris from Blower Cover
Inspect blower cover for any lint or debris build-up, 
and wipe with a clean dry cloth to remove.  
EN22        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comTroubleshooting your robot
Your robot will tell you something is wrong by playing an audio alert and turning 
the light ring indicator red. Press the clean button for details. Check the iRobot 
Home App for further support.
Red light ring
Low battery. Please charge.BATTERY SAFETY & SHIPPING
For best results, only use the iRobot Lithium Ion Battery that comes with your robot.
WARNING:  Lithium ion batteries and products that contain lithium 
ion batteries are subject to stringent transportation regulations. If 
you need to ship this product for service, travel or any other reason, 
you MUST follow the below shipping instructions.
• Battery MUST be turned off before shipping.
• Turn off the battery by removing the robot from the charging station and 
holding down the clean button for 3 seconds with one wheel off the ground. All 
indicators will turn off.
• Package the robot securely for shipping.
If you need further assistance, contact our Customer Care team or visit  http://
global.irobot.com .
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        23Troubleshooting your dock
Your AutoEmpty dock will tell you if something is wrong via an LED indicator on 
the front of the canister and through the iRobot Home App . If the dock is not 
performing as expected, check the iRobot Home app for errors.
LED indicator Common error How to fix
Solid redBag 
full or missing1. Replace bag if it is full or missing.
2. Make sure that the bag is 
securely inserted.
3. If problem persists, remove any 
debris from the port on the bottom 
of your robot and dock.
Blinking redThere is a 
leak or a clog 
in the dock 
evacuation path1. Make sure that the canister lid is 
pushed down and firmly sealed. 
Hold the clean button on your robot 
down for 2-5 seconds to manually 
empty the bin.
2. Remove any debris from the port on 
the bottom of your robot and dock.
3. Unplug the dock from the wall. 
Place it on its side and inspect the 
debris evacuation tube for debris. If 
necessary, remove the tube to clear 
any debris.
This product has been equipped with a thermal protector designed to protect 
against damage due to overheating. If the protector operates, the motor will 
stop running. If this happens, unplug the unit, allow it to cool for 30 minutes, clear 
any obstructions from the evacuation port and evacuation tube, then plug the 
unit back in. 
EN24        F or more information, visit global.irobot.comRegulatory information
FCC SUPPLIER’S DECLARATION OF CONFORMITY
iRobot Corporation  Roomba Combo®  Enhanced robot model: RVE-Y2
Contains FCC ID: 2AATL-6233E-UUB and contains IC: 12425A-6233EUUB
This device complies with part 15 of the FCC Rules and CAN ICES-003(B) / 
NMB-003(B).
Operation is subject to the following two conditions: (1) This device may not cause 
harmful interference, and (2) This device must accept any interference received, 
including interference that may cause undesired operation.
This device complies with Industry Canada license-exempt RSS standard(s). 
Operation is subject to the following two conditions: (1) This device may not 
cause interference, and (2) This device must accept any interference, including 
interference that may cause undesired operation of the device.
Changes or modifications not expressly approved by iRobot Corporation could 
void the user’s authority to operate the equipment. 
• This equipment has been tested and found to comply with the limits for 
a Class B digital device, pursuant to part 15 of the FCC Rules as well as 
CAN ICES-003(B) / NMB-003(B) Rules. These limits are designed to provide 
reasonable protection against harmful interference in a residential installation. 
This equipment generates, uses and can radiate radio frequency energy and, if 
not installed and used in accordance with the instructions, may cause harmful 
interference to radio communications. However, there is no guarantee that 
interference to radio communication will not occur in a particular installation. 
If this equipment does cause harmful interference to radio or television 
reception, which can be determined by turning the equipment off and on, the 
user is encouraged to try to correct the interference by one or more of the 
following measures:
• Reorient or relocate the receiving antenna.
• Increase the separation between the equipment and receiver.•  Connect the equipment into an outlet on a circuit different from that to 
which the receiver is connected.
•  Consult the dealer or an experienced radio/TV technician for help.
•  Under Industry Canada regulations, this radio transmitter may only operate 
using an antenna of a type and maximum (or lesser) gain approved for the 
transmitter by Industry Canada. To reduce potential radio interference to other 
users, the antenna type and its gain should be so chosen that the equivalent 
isotropically radiated power (e.i.r.p.) is not more than the necessary for 
successful communication.
•  FCC Radiation Exposure Statement: This product complies with FCC §2.1091(b) 
for mobile device RF exposure limits, set forth for an uncontrolled environment 
and is safe for the intended operation as described in this manual. Per FCC 
requirements, maintain a distance of more than 8 inches (20 cm) between any 
person and the host device (Roomba robot).
•  ISED Radiation Exposure Statement: This product complies with the Canadian 
Standard RSS-102 for mobile device RF exposure limits, set forth for an 
uncontrolled environment and is safe for the intended operation as described 
in this manual. Per ISED requirements, maintain a distance of more than 8 
inches (20 cm) between any person and the robot.
iRobot Corporation, 8 Crosby Drive, Bedford, MA 01730 USA
https://global. irobot.com
For battery recycling go to call2recycle.org or call 
1-800-822-8837.
EN Roomba Combo® j8 Enhanced robot + AutoEmpty dock Owner’s Guide        25©2024 iRobot Corporation, 8 Crosby Drive, Bedford, MA 01730 USA. All rights reserved. iRobot 
and Roomba are registered trademarks of iRobot Corporation. Dirt Detect is a trademark of 
the iRobot Corporation. Wi-Fi and the Wi-Fi logo are registered trademarks of Wi-Fi Alliance. 
Apple and App Store are trademarks of Apple Inc., registered in the U.S. and other countries. 
Google Play is a trademark of Google LLC.
Don't return to store. Let us help.
Download the iRobot Home app or visit global.irobot.com  for product support or to contact 
your local support center. If you need further assitance in the US & Canada, call the US 
Customer Care team at (877) 855-8593.iRobot USA Customer Care Hours
Monday to Friday, 9AM — 9PM Eastern Time
Saturday and Sunday 9AM — 6PM Eastern Time
WC# 4844123 vA
