AI Advances Home Newsletter About
LaMBDA and the Lobster
If we accept invertebrates as sentient, why not AI?
Paul Siemers, PhD·Follow
Published inAI Advances·10 min read·1 day ago
103 2
Open in app
Search Write
3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 1/18
Photo by Stone Wang on Unsplash
November 2021, the UK Government formally recognized lobsters
as sentient. In July 2022, Google fired senior engineer Blake
Lemoine for claiming that its AI chatbot LaMBDA was sentient. And yet AIs
give many signs of intelligence which lobsters do not. AIs can converse about
history, write poetry and play chess. Lobsters cannot. AIs have a good
chance of passing the Turing Test. Lobsters do not.
Why do we accord animals more respect than AIs even though they display
less obvious intelligence than AIs? Is this disparity mere prejudice, or can it
be grounded in sound philosophy?
Intelligence vs. sentience
In3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 2/18
Resolving this puzzle hinges on untangling the relationship between
intelligence and sentience. I will start by clarifying what is meant by these
terms.
Intelligence is a complex concept with no universally accepted definition.
Wikipedia, for example, notes that intelligence may include capacities such
as “abstraction, logic, understanding, self-awareness, learning, emotional
knowledge, reasoning, planning, creativity, critical thinking, and problem-
solving.”
For the purpose of this article, I propose to use Shane Legg and Marcus
Hutter’s definition of intelligence:
“Intelligence measures an agent’s ability to achieve goals in a wide range of
environments.”
Legg and Hutter based this definition on an extensive review of the
literature. It may miss some of what we mean by human intelligence;
nevertheless, it is succinct, objective and quite serviceable for the following
discussion.
Sentience can also be a complicated concept involving a multitude of
different capacities. Furthermore, it can become confused with related
notions such as self-awareness and introspection. I will assume that
sentience means a capacity for subjective experience. If a lobster has sentience,
it means that a lobster has its own experience of the world: that it is like
something to be a lobster. This kind of sentience is what philosophers call
“phenomenal consciousness.”3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 3/18
Sentience has a definite lower bound; either something is sentient, or it is
not. On the other hand, sentience, once achieved, can vary in quality. We can
see this from our own experience — sometimes our awareness is heightened
(when we are in love or exploring a new city), but sometimes it is
comparatively dull (when we are tired or drunk). This does not necessarily
mean that some entities are “more sentient” than others in every way. It does
mean that the sentience of entities can be ranked using particular criteria —
say, richness or clarity.
How are sentience and intelligence connected?
Humans possess both sentience and intelligence. We are the most intelligent
beings of which we know, and we are also the only beings for which we have
direct, first-hand proof of sentience. Because we possess both intelligence
and sentience, we tend to believe a fundamental link exists between them.
There are two main views regarding this relationship between intelligence
and sentience:
In the first view, sentience invariably accompanies intelligence. This view
arises from the computational theory of mind (CTM). CTM understands the
mind to result from the execution of certain computations, that is, from the
running of specific algorithms. The existence of sentience does not depend
on the nature of the hardware that runs these algorithms. Thus, if an entity
has the algorithm to be afraid of spiders — to watch out for them, to recoil
from them, to evade them — it will experience a fear of spiders. This holds
true regardless of whether the fear-filled entity is a child, a bee or a robot.
In this view, an intelligent entity — one that runs the computations needed
for intelligence — will inevitably experience the states of sentience that3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 4/18
accompany intelligence. This computational view of sentience is the
mainstream view in cognitive science, though it is certainly not the only one.
The opposing position is that intelligence can occur without sentience. In
this view, computation alone is insufficient to give rise to sentience. It must
be the right kind of computation. Two main theories exist about what kind of
computation is needed for sentience.
The structural position is that mental states depend on a system with the
right sort of structure. For example, consciousness might only occur if a
system has a high degree of interconnection. According to this position,
AIs would be sentient only if they possess the proper structure.
The biological position is that sentience can only arise from a biological
foundation. In animals, for example, the sensation of pain originates
from nerve cells called nociceptors. In the biological view, pain, as we
understand it, can only occur through the activity of nociceptors. Thus, in
this view, a non-biological AI can never be sentient, no matter how
intelligent it may be.
To further investigate the connection between sentience and intelligence, it
makes sense to examine this connection using examples. I will explore it in
two non-human things we know to have some degree of intelligence:
invertebrates and AI.3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 5/18
Photo by Timothy Dykes on Unsplash
#1 The Case of Invertebrates
Sentience
The wide acceptance of animal sentience is a modern phenomenon. There
was a long philosophical tradition — from Aristotle to Descartes to Kant — of
denying the sentience of animals. Descartes, in particular, described
animals as automata, consistent with his activities as a vivisectionist.
The non-sentience of animals was challenged during the Enlightenment by
thinkers such as Hume and Bentham. Bentham, in particular, linked animal
sentience with animal welfare, noting,
“The question is not, Can they reason? nor, Can they talk? but, Can they suffer?”
3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 6/18
By the 1800s, animal sentience, at least among mammals, was widely
accepted in society at large. However, the influence of behaviourists long
delayed the scientific analysis of animal sentience — behaviourists, of whom
B.F. Skinner is the best known, viewed mental states and feelings as an
illusory distraction from the study of behaviour. This aversion to
acknowledging subjective states as an object of study lasted well into the
1970s.
Since then, however, there has been a deep interest in animal sentience,
strongly related to a rising concern with animal ethics. In the mid-1970s, for
example, Australian philosopher Peter Singer drew attention to the moral
difficulties of “speciesism” — an irrational over-valuation of our own species.
Speciesism can lead us to believe that only humans matter when making
ethical decisions.
In 2021, the UK introduced the Animal Welfare (Sentience) Act, intended to
protect sentient animals from harm. This Act explicitly recognizes all non-
human vertebrates as sentient. It also extends this recognition to “any
cephalopod mollusc” (like the octopus and the squid) and “any decapod [ten-
legged] crustacean” (like the lobster and the crab). A team of researchers led
by philosopher Jonathan Birch evaluated the sentience of these
invertebrates using a combination of behavioural and biological criteria. In
other words, the team considered whether the animals behaved as though
they were sentient and whether they had the neural structures normally
associated with sentience.
There is no reason why cephalopod molluscs and decapod crustaceans
should be the only sentient invertebrates. Lobsters, for example, owe their
inclusion in the legislation in part due to public horror over the continued
practice of boiling them alive. In his recent book “The Edge of Sentience”,3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 7/18
Birch makes it clear that lobsters and octopi do not stand alone: that other
invertebrates — for example, insects and spiders — must also be considered
candidates for sentience.
Intelligence
People have always admired animals’ intelligence and resourcefulness, and
enthusiastically report fresh discoveries of animal intelligence. These
characteristics are even more impressive when displayed by invertebrates.
For example:
In addition to their well-known use of dances to communicate,
honeybees can recognize faces, count to four, and even perform simple
arithmetic.
Some species of jumping spider are capable of sophisticated route
planning and risk assessment and deploy a complex array of tactics to
deal with different prey.
Octopi can recognize faces, use tools, solve complex mazes and
(famously) open jars.
We should not trivialize these substantial abilities. But neither should we
overstate them.
In 1898, Edward Thorndike, one of the first to systematically study animal
intelligence, noted the tendency to eulogize rather than analyze the
capabilities of animals:
“Human folk are as a matter of fact eager to find intelligence in animals. They like
to. […] Dogs get lost hundreds of times and no one ever notices it or sends an3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 8/18
account of it to a scientific magazine. But let one find his way from Brooklyn to
Yonkers and the fact immediately becomes a circulating anecdote.”
While the study of animal intelligence has progressed a great deal since
1898, it is still helpful to be vigilant against this very human tendency.
Photo by Dustin Humes on Unsplash
#2: The Case of AI
Sentience
While the last few decades have seen the widespread acceptance that many
animals are sentient, there has been no such acceptance of AI sentience. In
3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 9/18
general, artificial sentience still remains in the the realm of speculation and
conjecture.
As noted above, Google famously dismissed engineer Blake Lemoine in 2022
for suggesting that Google’s LaMDA chatbot had achieved some level of
consciousness. Nevertheless, opinions are divided on the matter. A 2023
survey found that 20% of US adults believed AIs were already sentient, while
a further 37% were unsure. The same study found that 38% felt that AI
sentience was possible. AI sentience is also an abiding theme in popular
culture, from Hal in 2001: A Space Odyssey to Ava in Ex Machina. These and
similar examples suggest that it is sentience, rather than intelligence, which
explains the popular fascination with AI.
Intelligence
AI has made rapid progress in emulating and then exceeding human
intellectual achievements across multiple fields, from chess to Go to
Jeopardy to network optimization to navigation to medical diagnosis. Across
a wide variety of domains, AI’s superiority is indisputable.
AIs, however, still fall short in two significant respects.
Firstly, the intelligence of AIs has mainly been developed within specific
domains, such as chess. Emulating the performance of human intelligence
more generally has proved significantly more challenging. Recently,
however, Generative AI has enabled AI to display a much broader range of
intelligence than previously. Many proponents of Artificial General
Intelligence (AGI) — AI that can match human performance on any cognitive
task — believe it will be achieved in the coming decades.3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 10/18
Secondly, the progress of AI endowed with a physical body (“embodied AI”)
has tended to lag that of purely digital AI. The messiness of the physical
world presents some unique challenges to AI. Embodied AI is, however, an
area of intensive research, and progress is accelerating.
As noted above, discoveries of animal intelligence receive an almost
universally positive reception. The response to progress in AI is much more
mixed. While there is still a fair amount of hype and cheerleading, this is
mingled with a loud chorus of scepticism and derision edged with fear.
Photo by Alyona Bogomolova on Unsplash
LaMBDA and the lobster
The fact that we view animal intelligence in a more positive light than
artificial intelligence may have coloured our assessment of their relative
3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 11/18
smartness. For example, in 2022, scientist Michio Kaku famously remarked
that current AIs have the intelligence of a “lobotomized, retarded, stupid
cockroach.”
Considering the matter objectively, however, it seems hard to argue that
invertebrates are superior in intellect to AIs. In many areas, AIs surpass the
cognitive abilities of human experts. By contrast, even the most surprising
cognitive abilities of invertebrates fall within the mental range of young
children.
Against this may be set the embodied intelligence of invertebrates, for
example, the complex grace and fluidity with which octopi move
underwater. One may also argue that invertebrates display a more general
intelligence. An octopus must be able to confront all the eventualities of its
life-world. These eventualities are many, despite fitting within the general
pattern of a marine existence. Unlike Deep Blue or ChatGPT, the octopus
must thus cope with immersion in unfiltered reality.
In summary, AI’s specialized cognitive acuity is offset by the invertebrate’s
embodied versatility. Given that intelligence has usually been measured
based on mental acuity rather than embodiment or versatility, the
intelligence edge may, if anything, lie with AIs. ChatGPT has reportedly
scored 155 — well above most humans — on a verbal-linguistic IQ test.
Lobsters have lagged well behind.
Why, then, is invertebrate sentience enshrined in law, whereas AI sentience
is still (mostly) regarded as science fiction? The most general assumption
seems to be that AIs are not yet intelligent enough; that when an AI is
sufficiently intelligent it will “wake up” into consciousness. But given that3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 12/18
AIs have surpassed invertebrates in many forms of intelligence, and
invertebrates are sentient, why have AIs not yet “woken up”?
Since AIs have passed the minimum intelligence threshold for sentience, the
burden of proof is now shifting to those who nevertheless deny AI sentience.
Depending on how we understand the relationship between intelligence and
sentience, there are three possible explanations for AI’s lack of sentience.
Computational view: Running the right algorithms for intelligence will
lead to sentience. So, if AIs are not sentient, they are not running the
right algorithms.
Structural view: Systems with the proper structure will give rise to
sentience. So, if AIs are not sentient, they do not have the appropriate
structure.
Biological view: AIs can never be sentient because they lack the right
biological substrate.
Examining these views in detail will be the task of a future article. Suffice it
to say that none of them appears obviously compelling.
In contrast, there are also plausible psychological and economic reasons for
our reluctance to recognize AI sentience:
We find AIs more threatening than we do invertebrates, so we are more
motivated to question their abilities.
We tend to be prejudiced in favour of entities to which we are related. As
a result, we are more willing to concede sentience to our (distant)
relatives than to our creations.3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 13/18
Many large companies are now reliant on AI labour. Recognizing AI
sentience would have a more significant economic impact than doing the
same for invertebrates.
From my perspective, these latter explanations have more immediate
resonance than deeper philosophical arguments, arguments of which most
people would be completely unaware.
In the final analysis, the most straightforward alternative might be to
concede that AIs have indeed achieved some level of sentience and that our
failure to recognize this is based on fear and self-interest rather than sound
philosophy.
Published in AI Advances
26K Followers·Last published 10 hours ago
Democratizing access to artificial intelligenceFollow
Written by Paul Siemers, PhD
414 Followers·12 Following
I am passionate about revealing how technology really works. I have 30+ years
experience in technology strategy, and a PhD in Philosophy of Technology.FollowAI Technology Philosophy Intelligence Society And Culture
3/29/25, 5:16 PM LaMBDA and the Lobster. If we accept invertebrates as sentient… | by Paul Siemers, PhD | Mar, 2025 | AI Advances
https://medium.com/ai-advances/lambda-and-the-lobster-e5719762d30f 14/18
