Why I think a robot could take my
white-collar job
Ceda Verbakel·Follow
12 min read·3 days ago
50 1
Still from Spike Jonez’ movie “Her”Get unlimited access to the best of Medium for less than $1/week.Become a member
Open in app
Search Write
3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 1/15
Australian songwriter Tim Minchin recently gave an off-the-cuff critique of
AI in the arts that left me wondering. He asked the audience to consider an
artwork that at first looks like a large photograph, but on closer inspection,
is a painting rendered to look as though it is a photograph. There’s something
undeniably impressive about it. “What drove that person to do that?”, it
makes you wonder.
Now imagine the same painting, but this time computer generated to look
like a human painted it to photorealistic finish. We would never be anywhere
near as moved by the AI version because the fact that a human went to
lengths to imitate the photograph is precisely what is so compelling about
that human-made artwork. It tells us something about the artist, and
therefore, it tells us something about ourselves.
I’m not an artist, but I work in the technology sector as a “human-centered
strategist” and have the privilege of being able to take part in some of the
bigger creative decisions that get made when companies decide to employ
technology to solve problems, develop new products, reach new markets, or
improve employee experience. Minchin’s critique reminded me of the many
conversations I’ve observed amongst my colleagues, some of whom are
concerned for their own long-term job stability, just as many artists are.
I don’t think they’re wrong to be worried — we’ve all recently witnessed what
it’s like to completely rethink our assumptions of what technology is capable
of since the launch of ChatGPT, it’s copycats, and it’s as-impressive cousins.
Given people are falling in love with and becoming emotionally dependent
on these LLM’s (as anticipated and beautifully manifested in the movie
“Her”) it would be silly to cast aside the possibility that those same models
could eventually be capable of doing what we like to think is the very3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 2/15
“empathic”, “intelligent” and “creative” work that is “human-centered
innovation”.
Can robots research?
In case you’re not familiar with human-centered methods, one of the most
un-algorithmic types of research that we do involves dynamic, long-format
interviews with users of products and services, and sometimes even
contextual studies in people’s homes or workplaces. Then we take all the
detailed notes we’ve made, synthesize them into insights, themes, or any
other format that makes sense for the situation.
It’s obvious at this point, especially given how human-like LLM’s have
become, that a machine could plausibly conduct a very thorough interview,
and if you gave it a body, rolley-wheels, and an injection of relevant data to
train on, it could probably roll out into the field and conduct contextual
research too. That might sound ridiculous at first — but stay with me — the
idea of humans dating robots was also far-fetched a few months ago.
It might be tempting to argue that only human researchers would be able to
elicit the kinds of responses we would find useful or usable to the work that
we do — perhaps, that humans can empathize in a way that a robot couldn’t,
and therefore, would not be able to harvest responses from participants in
the same way. But we all know what it feels like to consult Google with our
deepest fears and most embarrassing maladies, and I suspect that same
comfort, anonymity, and willingness to be honest, would be felt by a
research participant harping on about their experiences and opinions to a
camera lens rather than having to look dead in the eyes of a fellow human
being they’ve just met.3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 3/15
Some of us researchers might be tempted to lean into our laurels and explain
that interviews aren’t about just listening to what participants say — it’s
listening for what they mean. That is, reading between the lines and being
able to probe with the next best question to ask because we as fellow
humans relate and can make intuitive inferences that a robot might not.
However, if you open up ChatGPT now and type in the following: “I am doing
a project for X type of company. Could you assume the role of me as an
interviewer, and pretend that I am a [insert research participant
demographics] who you are interviewing to find out more about me, and
specifically, find out ways in which the company could better serve me?
Please ask me one question at a time, and change your question based on the
answer I already gave. Ask me only 5 questions.”
I did it. Within 5 questions, the computer had enough information, despite
my brief, unforthcoming answers, to suggest a solution that I had recently
also presented to a real life client (after working on the very project I had
asked the machine to work on). That’s not to say the machines output was
equal to mine— there was a lot more to it — but it makes you wonder
whether, one day, it could be.
What about the other phases of human-centered processes? Synthesis of the
qualitative data is a no brainer, quite literally, for a machine. Ingesting and
synthesizing information is exactly what LLM’s are designed to do, at speeds
much faster than any human. Speeds fast enough to give us the same feeling
that European GO! Champion, Fan Hui, expressed when robots first beat him
in 2015 — defeat. Sure, some of the reasoning we do on projects requires a
range of inputs to come up with helpful insights (e.g. constraints on
technology, the organizations willingness to innovate etc.), but with enough
data and integrations flowing through whatever future AI platforms will exist
one day, I don’t doubt that it’s possible — or even probable — especially now3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 4/15
that DeepSeek and others are rapidly integrating the ability to reason (rather
than regurgitate reasoning) to their models.
Can robots com e up with good ideas?
So this brings us to the interventions — the ideas we (often together with our
clients) come up with to serve the humans we’ve interviewed and the clients
we’re working for. Given that machines are trained on everything that was or
is, can they truly come up with *new* ideas? The iPhone for example, was a
revolutionary innovation that required multiple shifts or trends to occur at
once for Steve Jobs and his team to “connect the dots” and invent the one-
button phone: Apple’s minimalist design aesthetic, development of multi-
touch capacitive touch screen technology, and the usability benefits of a
larger touch screen. Even if the words “phone with touch screen” had not
been uttered, let alone collected as training data, wouldn’t reason-mode not
make this kind of ideation possible for a machine to do? Could it have even
triangulated those data points faster?
While our culture rewards those, like Jobs, who come up with “great ideas” —
ideas are cheap — and the real art is in not just choosing the right ideas to
implement but in what combination, for who, and how exactly to implement
them. That is, to figure out the details. It’s all well and good to have come up
with the iPhone but clearly a conscious decision was made to keep *some*
buttons, for usability. So couldn’t that same research-robot take its first-blush
ideas back out to research participants, gather feedback, and continue
iterating until the ideas have legs? Really, really, good, fine-tuned, flying-off-
the-shelves legs? Not unlike the targeted content on my social media feed,
can’t my machine friends come up with perfect, perhaps even personalized,
product, service, and digital experiences for me if they spent enough time3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 5/15
with me and millions of others like me, sharpening its understanding of
what that target market values?
W ould we even need a hum an in the loop, eventually?
So if the key steps of the human-centered innovation process could be
automated, is that it for me? Can’t I just delegate the easy or boring bits to
ChatGPT? Doesn’t my work — which is about humans — need to be
completed in some small part by a human for it to be truly valuable? When I
get honest with myself, I realize that my clients probably find my work
valuable for reasons that don’t include that I made it, or any human really.
Ultimately, they want a recommendation about what to do next to solve
whatever problem it is they came to us to solve.
So if robots could, hypothetically, complete my work to the same standard (if
not better but definitely faster), could this hypothetical “automated
innovation factory” take my job?
I don’t doubt these new technologies will, and already have to some extent,
augmented the “innovation” workforce. When I’m scrolling social media and
see a carousel of products from Amazon, most of which are unusual or niche
or never-seen-before, I can’t help but think that some of them might not exist
at all — they are the physical product equivalent of vaporware — at least until
enough people click on it, or buy it, in which case the cunning on-demand
factory, possibly in Asia somewhere, will start to produce it. I guess, as the
cyberpunk author William Gibson once said — the future is already here, it’s
just not evenly distributed.
If that’s the case for the small stuff — kitchen doo-dads or button placement
on apps — what about the big stuff? What about clients who are experiencing3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 6/15
a more complicated problem like “we need more customers” or “we need to
cut costs”. One where the answer lies in untangling human conflict and
managing human egos, to arrive at a way forward that meets the needs of all
the various stakeholders and all the different user types?
I often walk away from these kinds of complicated multi-stakeholder and
multi-user projects thinking that it wasn’t the outputs or ideas that brought
the client value — it was that we were a neutral third party. We play the role
of “Innovation-Switzerland” so to speak and help cut through the internal
politics that naturally comes when humans get the privilege of dreaming up
an audacious new destination to aim for, and once aligned, collaborate on
the plan to get there. In other words, I like to think the value we bring is in
the process (which also happens to lead, much of the time, to valuable
outcomes).
It’s conceivable that an LLM, or perhaps multiple “robo-facilitators” with
complimentary roles, could guide a group of people through a fraught
human process. If regular old software can mediate interactions with
multiple different user types in real time, surely LLM’s could to. When I
think of the soft skills I draw on to do this kind of labor (e.g. process design,
stakeholder facilitation, conflict management etc.) I struggle to think of
something that a machine could not also eventually learn. I struggle to be
able to tell you how my “intuition” to do this kind of work wasn’t born from a
series of real-life lessons, like watching a client subtly grimace when you say
the wrong thing — that an LLM couldn’t also learn with the right training or
computer vision or both.
Ok but would people buy it?3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 7/15
Assuming this hypothetical robo-facilitator were feasible, it leads us to the
same questions we would ask of any proposed innovation — would it be
viable in the market? Would it help a company cut costs or even generate a
profit? I don’t think I’d even need to do a back of the envelope calculation to
guess it will eventually be cheaper to hire a hypothetical fleet of robot
researchers then it would be to send us humans out into the field, and that
the same could be said for robo-facilitators too.
Typists, for example, have become redundant because the advent of the
original human-computer interface — the keyboard — made it so that
everyone became typists, not just those who had been trained on
typewriters. In that way, technology didn’t make humans redundant per se, it
made other humans capable of doing the same work (documenting stuff in
administrative systems). Could a robo-facilitator whispering from an
earpiece coach a Chief Innovation Officer to support her team through a
process such that they don’t need the help of a “specialist” like me? Probably.
Will that significantly reduce the demand on human experts? Maybe.
Consider then, the checkout assistant at your local grocery store. These jobs
have been threatened by automation for years, yet they persist. This might
have something to do with the fact that stores require workers to also stack
shelves, and clean up spillages, and help customers locate vegan chicken
nuggets, and that the labor wage for humans to do these things, including
running the check-out line as default, is as affordable as fully automating
everything.
But I like to think it’s more than that. Unlike for example, the huge swaths of
factory workers whose jobs have been fully automated over the past fifty or
so years, checkout assistants are different. They have something in common
with hotel check-in clerks, bartenders and even tutors — their job involves3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 8/15
interacting with other humans — and for many “users” of their service, the
human is a valuable part of the experience. Human labor can feel like a
luxury, like a bellboy carrying your bags to your room, but it can also feel
like a necessity, like having a human deliver bad medical news. Is my
humanity necessary for the kind of work to be valued differently to that of an
automated counterpart? Even if we’re not making art, isn’t there something
about being a human that makes us an ideal interface for other humans no
matter how good robots get at emulating us? I like to think so.
Hannah Arendt’s distinction between labor, work, and action reminds us
that human effort carries cultural meaning beyond mere utility — it is an act
of preservation, creation, and relational exchange that ties individuals to
their communities and the shared world. Cory Doctorow’s concept of the
“enshittification of the internet” exemplifies this dynamic, where platforms
that once served participatory communities devolve into hollow profit-
machines, prioritizing advertisers and monetization at the expense of users.
This same hollowing-out has long been evident in our physical world
forever: PFAS pollutes our ecosystems, flipped homes create sterile profit-
maximizing spaces devoid of real people’s stories, and broken medical
systems prioritize billing codes over meaningful care.
If you think of all the examples in your own life where the value of an object
or interaction has eroded in this way, it becomes clear that the common
denominator isn’t the technology that made it possible — it’s unregulated
capitalism that made “transactions” the goal. Sure, robots can calculate, but
capitalism is calculated: economic value is the goal, and meaning-making is
secondary. Part of my job is helping organizations toe the line between these
two values, but it’s the client who pays my salary, not the users.3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 9/15
With the seemingly imminent arrival of AGI, we might want to wonder what
*are* the values we’re imbuing these machines? We have come to learn that
even seemingly ethically neutral software, like AirBnB and Uber, aren’t what
they seem, and have, in their own unique ways, both democratized access to
jobs but also monopolized industries. I recently saw an interview with a
troubled teen on social media, who exclaimed, “What do I know? What else
will I work for?” The “what” instead of “who” stopped me in my tracks — it
made me wonder if kids these don’t even recognize the humanity of their
own employers, because so many of them aren’t people at all — their apps.
Even if AI models never grow their own out-of-control intentions a la AGI,
technology will never truly center humans, so long as their design remains
in the hands of those who subscribe to capitalist incentives, myself included.
So what do we do about it?
What I do know is that the reason why I didn’t share the same concern with
my colleagues wasn’t because I didn’t believe in a future where a robot could
do (large parts of) my job. It was because it didn’t feel like it was in the hands
of us, at least from within the context of the technology consulting company
we work for, to solve the problems that will arise as our economies and
cultures evolve in response to rapid technological change. We do what we
can to help our clients make ethical decisions within our current political
systems as they stand, but ultimately the more effective levers are outside of
the corporate world.
Author and futurist Karl Schroeder recently wrote,“if we can’t predict
[technological advancement], we also can’t design.” That is, we can’t make
ethical decisions about how we implement technology before it’s already
here. With that in mind, it’s the business of government, as slow moving as it
is, to buffer those who need it with help as the world transitions, and to3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 10/15
incubate a society that is capable of coming up with new visions of our
collective futures, new structures of governance, new ways of understanding
and valuing “work” that respects the dignity of life no matter the color of
your collar.
I hope Minchin is right. Once we’ve survived our current technofascist era,
figured out how to power all the digital stuff sustainably, and maintain
societies so all humans can flourish with or without the requirement of
work, maybe then it’s ok if the robots take every job other than art. Maybe, if
art really is what sets us apart from our electrified friends, there could be a
future out there where art is the most valuable thing you can do with your
time.
More realistically, I am holding on to the hope that there’s something about
how I do my work that the robots either can’t do, or that my clients don’t
want them to do, hopefully forever, or at least until our policies and
economies catch up.
With that in mind, below are some organizations and initiatives I’ve come
across doing interesting work in this space — what else should I know about?
If, on the other hand, you’re reading this and wondering about your own
industry or company, and its ability to (ethically) surf the digital currents to
come, let’s chat.
World Economic Forum Reskilling Revolution
AI Now Institute
Aspen Institute Future of Work3/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 11/15
Written by Ceda Verbakel
6 Followers·39 Following
Researcher & Strategist in tech | currently consulting, previously in-house at
healthcare tech development & investmentFollow
Responses (1)
Ashley caceres Pagan
Márcio Siqueira
13 hours ago
excellent article, keep it up
ReplyAutomation Artificial Intelligence Human Centered Research Technology
Innovation
What are your thoughts?
23/29/25, 5:15 PM Why I think a robot could take my white-collar job | by Ceda Verbakel | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@helloceda/why-i-think-a-robot-could-take-my-white-collar-job-60c5940d07d5 12/15
