

Praise	for
W.	G.	S
EBALD	AND
	
A
USTERLITZ
	
“With	untraceable	swiftness	and	assurance,	W.	G.	Sebald’s	writing	conjures
from	the	details	and	sequences	of	daily	life,	and	their	circumstances	and
encounters,	from	apparent	chance	and	its	unsounded	calculus,	the	dimension	of
dream	and	a	sense	of	the	depth	of	time	that	makes	his	books,	one	by	one,
indispensable.	He	evokes	at	once	the	minutiae	and	the	vastness	of	individual
existence,	the	inconsolable	sorrow	of	history	and	the	scintillating	beauty	of	the
moment	and	its	ground	of	memory.	Each	book	seems	to	be	something	that	surely
was	impossible,	and	each	(upon	every	re-reading)	is	unique	and	astonishing.”
—W.	S.	M
ERWIN
	
“With	W.	G.	Sebald’s	haunting	new	book,	
Austerlitz
,	we	are	transported	to	a
memoryscape—a	twilight,	fogbound	world	of	half-remembered	images	and
ghosts	that	is	reminiscent	at	once	of	Ingmar	Bergman’s	
Wild	Strawberries
,
Kafka’s	troubled	fables	of	guilt	and	apprehension,	and,	of	course,	Proust’s
Remembrance	of	Things	Past	.…
	[
Austerlitz
]	serves	as	the	perfect	introduction	to
Mr.	Sebald’s	work	for	readers	unfamiliar	with	his	ouevre	while	standing	on	its
own	as	a	powerful	and	resonant	work	of	the	historical	imagination.”
—M
ICHIKO
	K
AKUTANI
,	
The	New	York	Times
	
“Sebald	stands	with	Primo	Levi	as	the	prime	speaker	of	the	Holocaust	and,	with
him,	the	prime	contradiction	of	Adorno’s	dictum	that	after	it,	there	can	be	no
art.”
—The	New	York	Times	Book	Review
	
“Sebald	is	the	Joyce	of	the	twenty-first	century.	His	tale	of	one	man’s	odyssey
through	the	dark	ages	of	European	history,	which	synthesizes	a	canon	of
Continental	thought	and	literature,	is	one	of	the	most	moving	and	true	fictions	on
the	postwar	world.”
—The	Times
	(London)
	
“W.	G.	Sebald	is	a	monster—a	gorgeous	and	unwaveringly	assured	writer,	a
bold	formal	innovator,	and	a	man	always	plunging	into	the	core	of	identity,
singular	and	national.	In	
Austerlitz
,	he’s	created	his	richest	and	most	emotionally
devastating	story.”
—D
AVE
	E
GGERS
	
“One	emerges	from	a	Sebald	novel	shaken,	seduced,	and	deeply	impressed.”
—A
NITA
	B
ROOKNER
	
“A	remarkable	writer—a	sort	of	Teutonic	Borges	domiciled	in	England.”
—S
EBASTIAN
	S
HAKESPEARE
	
“One	of	the	most	original	new	voices	to	have	come	out	of	Europe	in	recent
years.”
—P
AUL
	A
USTER
	
“If	you	thought	literary	modernism	was	dead,	guess	again.	The	spirit	of	such
masters	as	Kafka	and	Borges	lives	on	in	the	novels	of	W.	G.	Sebald.	For	Mr.
Sebald,	not	only	do	‘big	questions’	still	exist,	but	so	do	the	desire	and	the	will	to
answer	them.”
—
The	Wall	Street	Journal
	

Contents
	
Cover
Title	Page
Introduction
	
First	Page
About	the	Author
Copyright
	
INTRODUCTION
	
J
AMES
	W
OOD
In	the	summer	of	1967,	a	man	who	remains	unnamed	but	who	resembles	the
author	W.	G.	Sebald,	is	visiting	Belgium.	At	the	Centraal	Station	in	Antwerp,	he
sees	a	fellow	traveler,	with	fair,	curiously	wavy	hair,	who	is	wearing	heavy
walking	boots,	workman’s	trousers	made	of	blue	calico,	and	a	well-made	but
antiquated	jacket.	He	is	intently	studying	the	room	and	taking	notes.	This	is
Jacques	Austerlitz.	The	two	men	fall	into	conversation,	have	dinner	at	the	station
restaurant,	and	continue	to	talk	into	the	night.	Austerlitz	is	a	voluble	scholar—he
explains,	to	the	book’s	narrator,	about	the	slightly	grotesque	display	of	colonial
confidence	represented	by	Antwerp’s	Centraal	Station,	and	talks	generally	about
the	history	of	fortification.	It	is	often	our	mightiest	projects,	he	suggests,	that
most	obviously	betray	the	degree	of	our	insecurity.
Austerlitz	and	the	Sebald-like	narrator	meet	again—a	few	months	later,	in
Brussels;	then,	later	still,	on	the	promenade	at	Zeebrugge.	It	emerges	that
Jacques	Austerlitz	is	a	lecturer	at	an	institute	of	art	history	in	London,	and	that
his	scholarship	is	unconventional.	He	is	obsessed	with	monumental	public
buildings,	like	law	courts	and	prisons,	railway	stations	and	lunatic	asylums,	
and
his	investigations	have	swollen	beyond	any	reasonable	raison	d’etre,
“proliferating	in	his	hands	into	endless	preliminary	sketches	for	a	study,	based
entirely	on	his	own	views,	of	the	family	likeness	between	all	these	buildings.”
For	a	while,	the	narrator	visits	Austerlitz	regularly	in	London,	but	they	fall	out	of
touch	until	1996,	when	he	happens	to	meet	Austerlitz	again,	this	time	at
Liverpool	Street	Station.	Austerlitz	explains	that	only	recently	has	he	learned	the
story	of	his	life,	and	he	needs	the	kind	of	listener	that	the	narrator	had	been	in
Belgium,	thirty	years	before.
And	so	Austerlitz	begins	the	story	that	will	gradually	occupy	the	rest	of	the
book:	how	he	was	brought	up	in	a	small	town	in	Wales,	with	foster	parents;	how
he	discovered,	as	a	teenager,	that	his	true	name	was	not	Dafydd	Elias	but
Jacques	Austerlitz;	how	he	went	to	Oxford,	and	then	into	academic	life.	Though
clearly	a	refugee,	for	many	years	Austerlitz	was	unable	to	discover	the	precise
nature	and	contour	of	his	exile	until	experiencing	a	visionary	moment,	in	the	late
1980s,	in	the	Ladies’	Waiting	Room	of	Liverpool	Street	Station.	Standing
transfixed	for	perhaps	hours,	in	a	room	hitherto	unknown	to	him	(and	about	to	be
demolished,	to	enable	an	expansion	of	the	Victorian	station),	he	feels	as	if	the
space	contains	“all	the	hours	of	my	past	life,	all	the	suppressed	and	extinguished
fears	and	wishes	I	had	ever	entertained.”	He	suddenly	sees,	in	his	mind’s	eye,	his
foster	parents,	“but	also	the	boy	they	had	come	to	meet,”	and	he	realizes	that	he
must	have	arrived	at	this	station	a	half	century	ago.
It	is	not	until	the	spring	of	1993,	and	having	suffered	a	nervous	breakdown	in
the	meantime,	that	Austerlitz	has	another	visionary	experience,	this	time	in	a
Bloomsbury	bookshop.	The	bookseller	is	listening	to	the	radio,	which	features
two	women	
discussing	the	summer	of	1939,	when,	as	children,	they	had	come	on
the	ferry	
Prague
	to	England,	as	part	of	the	Kindertransport:	“only	then	did	I
know	beyond	any	doubt	that	these	fragments	of	memory	were	part	of	my	own
life	as	well,”	Austerlitz	tells	the	narrator.	The	mere	mention	of	the	name
“Prague”	impels	Austerlitz	to	the	Czech	capital,	where	he	eventually	discovers
his	old	nanny,	Vera	Ryšanová,	and	uncovers	the	stories	of	his	parents’
abbreviated	lives.	His	father,	Maximilian	Aychenwald,	escaped	the	Nazis	in
Prague	by	leaving	for	Paris;	but,	we	learn	at	the	end	of	the	book,	he	was
eventually	captured	and	interned	in	late	1942,	in	the	French	camp	of	Gurs,	in	the
foothills	of	the	Pyrenees.	His	mother,	Agáta	Austerlitz,	stayed	on	in	Prague,
insouciantly	confident	of	her	prospects,	but	was	rounded	up	and	sent	to	the
Terezín	ghetto	(better	known	by	its	German	name	of	Theresienstadt)	in
December	1942.	Of	the	final	destination	of	Maximilian	and	Agáta	we	are	not
told,	but	can	easily	infer	the	worst:	Vera	tells	us	only	that	Agáta	was	“sent	east”
from	Terezín,	in	September	1944.
This	short	recital,	poignant	though	its	content	is,	represents	a	kind	of
vandalism	to	Sebald’s	beautiful	novel,	and	I	offer	it	only	in	the	spirit	of
orientation.	It	leaves	out,	most	importantly,	all	the	ways	in	which	Sebald
contrives	
not
	to	offer	an	ordinary,	straightforward	recital.	For	what	is	so	delicate
is	how	Sebald	makes	Austerlitz’s	story	a	broken,	recessed	enigma,	whose
meaning	the	reader	must	impossibly	rescue.	Though	Austerlitz,	and	hence	the
reader	too,	is	involved	in	a	journey	of	detection,	the	book	really	represents	the
deliberate	frustration	of	detection,	the	perpetuation	of	an	enigma.	By	the	end	of
the	novel,	we	certainly	know	a	great	deal	about	Jacques	Austerlitz—about	the
tragic	turns	of	his	
life,	his	family	background,	about	his	obsessions	and	anxieties
and	breakdowns—but	it	can’t	be	said	that	we	really	know	him.	A	life	has	been
filled	in	for	us,	but	not	a	self.	He	remains	as	unknowable	at	the	end	as	he	was	at
the	beginning,	and	indeed	seems	to	quit	the	book	as	randomly	and	as
unexpectedly	as	he	entered	it.
Sebald	deliberately	layers	and	recesses	his	narrative,	so	that	Austerlitz	is
difficult	to	get	close	to.	He	tells	his	story	to	the	narrator,	who	then	tells	his	story
to	us,	thus	producing	the	book’s	distinctive	repetitive	tagging,	a	kind	of	parody
of	the	source-attribution	we	encounter	in	a	newspaper:	almost	every	page	has	a
“said	Austerlitz”	on	it,	and	sometimes	the	layers	of	narration	are	thicker	still,	as
in	the	following	phrase,	which	reports	a	story	of	Maximilian’s,	via	Vera
Ryšanová,	via	Austerlitz,	and	collapses	the	three	names:	“From	time	to	time,	so
Vera	recollected,	said	Austerlitz,	Maximilian	would	tell	the	tale	of	how	once,
after	a	trade	union	meeting	in	Treplitz	in	the	early	summer	of	1933	…”	Sebald
borrowed	this	habit	of	repetitive	attribution	from	the	Austrian	writer	Thomas
Bernhard,	who	also	influenced	Sebald’s	diction	of	extremism.	Almost	every
sentence	in	this	book	is	a	cunning	combination	of	the	quiet	and	the	loud:	“As
usual	when	I	go	down	to	London	on	my	own,”	the	narrator	tells	us	in	a	fairly
typical	passage,	“a	kind	of	dull	despair	stirred	within	me	in	that	December
morning.”	Or,	for	instance,	when	Austerlitz	describes	how	moths	die,	he	says
that	they	will	stay	where	they	are,	clinging	to	a	wall,	never	moving	“until	the	last
breath	is	out	of	their	bodies,	and	indeed	they	will	remain	in	the	place	where	they
came	to	grief	even	after	death.”	In	Thomas	Bernhard’s	work,	extremity	of
expression	is	indistinguishable	from	the	Austrian	author’s	comic,	ranting	rage,
and	his	tendency	to	circle	obsessively	around	madness	
and	suicide.	Sebald	takes
some	of	Bernhard’s	wildness	and	estranges	it—first,	by	muffling	it	in	an
exquisitely	courteous	syntax:	“Had	I	realized	at	the	time	that	for	Austerlitz
certain	moments	had	no	beginning	or	end,	while	on	the	other	hand	his	whole	life
had	sometimes	seemed	to	him	a	blank	point	without	duration,	I	would	probably
have	waited	more	patiently.”	Second,	Sebald	makes	his	diction	mysterious	by	a
process	of	deliberate	antiquarianism.	Notice	the	slightly	quaint,	Romantic	sound
of	those	phrases	about	the	moths:	“until	the	last	breath	is	out	of	their
bodies	…	the	place	where	they	came	to	grief	…”
In	all	his	fiction,	Sebald	works	this	archaic	strain	(sometimes	reminiscent	of
the	nineteenth-century	Austrian	writer	Adalbert	Stifter)	into	a	new,	strange,	and
seemingly	impossible	composite:	a	kind	of	mildly	agitated,	pensive
contemporary	Gothic.	His	characters	and	narrators	are	forever	finding
themselves,	like	travelers	of	old,	in	gloomy,	inimical	places	(East	London,
Norfolk)	where	“not	a	living	soul	stirred.”	Wherever	they	go,	they	are
accompanied	by	apprehensions	of	uneasiness,	dread,	and	menace.	In	
Austerlitz
,
this	uneasiness	amounts	to	a	Gothicism	of	the	past;	the	text	is	constantly	in
communion	with	the	ghosts	of	the	dead.	At	Liverpool	Street	Station,	Jacques
Austerlitz	feels	dread	at	the	thought	that	the	station	is	built	on	the	foundations	of
Bedlam,	the	famous	insane	asylum:	“I	felt	at	this	time,”	he	tells	the	narrator,	“as
if	the	dead	were	returning	from	their	exile	and	filling	the	twilight	around	me
with	their	strangely	slow	but	incessant	to-ing	and	fro-ing.”	In	Wales,	the	young
Jacques	had	occasionally	felt	the	presence	of	the	dead,	and	Evan	the	cobbler	had
told	the	boy	of	those	dead	who	had	been	“struck	down	by	fate	untimely,	who
knew	they	had	been	cheated	of	what	was	due	to	them	and	tried	to	return	
to	life.”
These	ghostly	returnees,	Evan	said,	could	be	seen	in	the	street:	“At	first	glance
they	seemed	to	be	normal	people,	but	when	you	looked	more	closely	their	faces
would	blur	or	flicker	slightly	at	the	edges.”	In	the	curiously	empty	village	of
Terezín,	not	far	from	Prague,	Austerlitz	seems	to	see	the	old	Jewish	ghetto,	as	if
the	dead	were	still	alive,	“crammed	into	those	buildings	and	basements	and
attics,	as	if	they	were	incessantly	going	up	and	down	the	stairs,	looking	out	of
the	windows,	moving	in	vast	numbers	through	the	streets	and	alleys,	and	even,	a
silent	assembly,	filling	the	entire	space	occupied	by	the	air,	hatched	with	gray	as
if	it	was	by	the	fine	rain.”
This	is	both	a	dream	of	survival	and	a	dread	of	it,	a	haunting.	To	bring	back
the	dead,	those	“struck	down	by	fate	untimely”—Jacques’	parents,	say,	or	the
imprisoned	victims	of	Theresienstadt—would	be	a	miraculous	resurrection,	a
reversal	of	history;	yet,	since	this	is	impossible,	the	dead	can	“return”	only	as
mute	witnesses,	judging	us	for	our	failure	to	save	them.	Those	resurrected	dead
at	Terezín,	standing	in	“silent	assembly,”	sound	very	much	like	a	large	court,
standing	in	judgment	against	us.	Perhaps,	then,	the	guilt	of	survival	arises	not
just	from	the	solitude	of	success	(the	“success”	of	having	been	lucky,	of	having
outlived	the	Nazis),	or	the	irrational	horror	that	one’s	survival	involved	someone
else’s	death	(an	irrationality	that	Primo	Levi	explores	in	his	work).	There	is	also
guilt	at	the	idea	that	the	dead	are	at	our	mercy,	that	we	can	choose	to	remember
or	forget	them.	This	is	finely	caught	by	Theodor	Adorno,	in	an	essay	on	Mahler,
written	in	1936:	“So	the	memory	is	the	only	help	that	is	left	to	them	[the	dead].
They	pass	away	into	it,	and	if	every	deceased	person	is	like	someone	who	was
murdered	by	the	living,	so	he	is	also	like	someone	
whose	life	they	must	save,
without	knowing	whether	the	effort	will	succeed.”
1
Saving	the	dead—that	is	the	paradoxically	impossible	project	of	
Austerlitz
,
and	it	is	both	Jacques	Austerlitz’s	quest,	and	W.	G.	Sebald’s	too.	This	book	is
like	the	antiques	shop	seen	by	Jacques	in	Terezín;	it	is	full	of	old	things,	many	of
them	reproduced	in	the	photographs	in	the	text:	buildings,	an	old	rucksack,
books	and	paper	records,	a	desk,	a	staircase,	a	messy	office,	a	porcelain	statue,
gravestones,	the	roots	of	trees,	a	stamp,	the	drawing	of	a	fortification.	The
photographs	of	these	old	things	are	themselves	old	things—the	kind	of	shabby,
discarded	picture	postcards	you	might	find	at	a	weekend	flea	market,	and	which
Sebald	greatly	enjoyed	collecting.	If	the	photograph	is	itself	an	old,	dead	thing,
then	what	of	the	people	caught—frozen—by	the	photograph?	(Flickering
slightly	at	the	edges,	as	Evan	the	cobbler	describes	the	dead.)	Aren’t	they	also
old,	dead	things?	That	is	why	Sebald	forces	together	animate	and	inanimate
objects	in	his	books,	and	it	is	why	the	inanimate	objects	greatly	overwhelm	the
animate	ones	in	
Austerlitz
.	Amidst	the	photographs	of	buildings	and	gravestones,
it	is	a	shock	to	come	upon	a	photograph	of	Wittgenstein’s	eyes,	or	a	photograph
of	the	rugby	team	at	Jacques’	school.	The	human	seems	to	have	been	reified—
turned	into	a	thing—by	time,	and	Sebald	knowingly	reserves	an	entire	page	for
his	shocking	photograph	of	skulls	in	mud	(supposedly,	skeletons	found	near
Broad	Street	Station	in	1984,	during	excavations).	Toward	becoming	these	old
things,	these	old	headstones	in	mud,	we	are	all	traveling.	
(In	the	north	of
England,	a	cemetery	used	to	be	called	a	“boneyard,”	the	phrase	somehow
conveying	the	sense	of	our	bones	as	mere	lumber	or	junk.)
Yet	some	are	traveling	faster	than	others,	and	with	more	doomed	inevitability,
and	there	is	surely	a	distinction	between,	on	the	one	hand,	the	photograph	of
Jacques’	rugby	team,	and	on	the	other,	the	photograph	of	Jacques’	mother	or	the
photograph	(itself	a	still	from	a	film)	of	the	imprisoned	inhabitants	of
Theresienstadt.	As	Roland	Barthes	rightly	says	in	his	book	
Camera	Lucida
,	a
book	with	which	
Austerlitz
	is	in	deep	dialogue,	photographs	shock	us	because
they	so	finally	represent	
what	has	been
.	We	look	at	most	old	photographs	and
we	think:	“that	person	is	going	to	die,	and	is	in	fact	now	dead.”	Barthes	calls
photographers	“agents	of	death,”	because	they	freeze	the	subject	and	the	moment
into	finitude.	Over	photographs,	he	writes,	we	shudder	as	over	a	catastrophe	that
has	already	occurred:	“Whether	or	not	the	subject	is	already	dead,	every
photograph	is	this	catastrophe.”
2
	This	effect	is	surely	heightened	when	we	look
at	photographs	of	victims	of	the	Nazis—whether	being	rounded	up,	or	just
walking	along	a	street	in	a	ghetto.	In	such	cases,	we	think:	“they	
know
	they	are
going	to	die,	and	they	are	certainly	already	dead,	and	there	is	nothing	we	can	do
about	it.”	As	the	stolid	rugby	players	do	not,	these	victims	seem	to	be	looking	at
us	(even	when	they	are	not	directly	looking	at	the	camera),	and	asking	us	to	
do
something.	This	is	what	gives	the	photograph	of	young	Jacques	(reproduced	on
the	cover	of	this	book)	a	particular	intensity.	The	boy	in	his	party	
cape,	with	the
wedge	of	unruly	fair	hair,	looks	out	at	the	camera	not	imploringly	but
confidently,	if	a	little	skeptically.	Yet	understandably,	Jacques	Austerlitz,
looking	at	this	photograph	of	himself,	from	a	time	when	he	was	still	in	Prague
and	still	had	parents	and	had	not	yet	been	put	on	the	train	to	London,	tells	the
narrator	that	he	feels	“the	piercing,	inquiring	gaze	of	the	page	boy	who	had	come
to	demand	his	dues,	who	was	waiting	in	the	gray	light	of	dawn	on	the	empty
field	for	me	to	accept	the	challenge	and	avert	the	misfortune	lying	ahead	of
him.”	Jacques	Austerlitz	was	rescued	by	the	Kindertransport,	and	thus	did
indeed	avert	the	misfortune	lying	ahead	of	him.	But	he	could	not	avert	the
misfortune	lying	ahead	of	his	parents,	and	so,	even	in	middle	age,	he	is	forever
frozen	in	the	attitude	of	that	picture,	always	waiting	to	avert	misfortune.	He	thus
resembles	the	little	porcelain	horseman	that	he	saw	in	the	window	of	the
antiques	shop	in	Terezín,	a	small	statue	of	a	man	rescuing	a	young	girl,	arrested
in	a	“moment	of	rescue,	perpetuated	but	forever	just	occurring.”	Is	Jacques
Austerlitz	the	rescuer,	or	the	one	awaiting	rescue?	Both,	surely.
There	is,	of	course,	a	further	dimension	to	Sebald’s	use	of	photographs:	they
are	fictional.	In	the	very	area	of	historical	writing	and	historical	memory	most
pledged	to	the	sanctity	of	accuracy,	of	testimony	and	fatal	fact,	Sebald	launches
his	audacious	campaign:	his	use	of	photographs	relies	on,	and	plays	off,	the
tradition	of	verity	and	reportage.	On	the	one	hand,	these	photographs	sear	us
with	the	promise	of	their	accuracy—as	Barthes	says,	photographs	are
astonishing	because	they	“attest	that	what	I	see	has	existed”:	“In	Photography,
the	presence	of	the	thing	(at	a	certain	past	moment)	is	never	metaphoric.”	We	are
lulled	into	
staring	at	these	photographs	and	saying	to	ourselves:	“There	is
Jacques	Austerlitz,	dressed	in	his	cape.	And	there	is	his	mother!”	We	say	this,	in
part	because	photographs	make	us	want	to	say	this,	but	also	because	Sebald
mixes	these	photographs	of	people	with	his	undeniably	accurate	and	veridical
photographs	of	buildings	(for	instance,	the	photograph	of	the	Breendonk	prison,
in	Belgium,	where	Jean	Améry	was	tortured	by	the	Nazis,	and	which	the	narrator
visits,	
is
	a	photograph	of	the	actual	building).	On	the	other	hand,	we	know,	in
our	heart	of	hearts	(and	perhaps	unwillingly?),	that	Jacques	Austerlitz	is	a
fictional	character,	and	that	therefore	the	photograph	of	the	little	boy	cannot	be	a
photograph	of	him.
Indeed,	in	this	book,	Sebald’s	photographs	of	humans	can	be	said	to	be
fictional	twice	over:	they	are	photographs	of	invented	characters;	and	they	are
often	photographs	of	actual	people	who	once	lived	but	who	are	now	lost	to
history.	Take	the	photograph	of	the	rugby	team,	with	Jacques	Austerlitz
supposedly	sitting	in	the	front	row,	at	the	far	right.	Who	are	these	young	men?
Where	did	Sebald	get	hold	of	this	faded	group	portrait?	And	is	it	likely	that	any
of	them	are	still	alive?	What	is	certain	is	that	they	have	passed	into	obscurity:	we
don’t	look	at	the	portrait	and	say	to	ourselves,	“There’s	the	young	Winston
Churchill,	in	the	middle	row.”	The	faces	are	unknown,	forgotten.	They	are,
precisely,	not	Wittgenstein’s	famous	eyes.	The	photograph	of	the	little	boy	in	his
cape	is	even	more	acute	in	its	poignancy.	I	have	read	reviews	of	this	book	that
suggest	it	is	a	photograph	of	the	young	Sebald—such	is	our	natural	desire,	I
suppose,	not	to	let	the	little	boy	pass	into	orphaned	anonymity.	But	the
photograph	is	not	of	the	young	Sebald;	it	can	be	found	in	Sebald’s	literary
archive	at	Marbach,	
outside	Stuttgart,	and	there	the	reader	finds	an	ordinary
photographic	postcard,	with,	on	the	reverse	side,	“Stockport:	30p”	written	in
ink.
3
	The	boy’s	identity	has	disappeared	(as	has	the	woman	whose	photograph	is
shown	as	Agáta,	the	boy’s	mother),	and	has	disappeared—it	might	be	said—
even	more	thoroughly	than	Hitler’s	victims,	since	they	at	least	belong	to	blessed
memory,	and	their	murders	cry	out	for	public	memorial,	while	the	boy	has
vanished	into	the	private	obscurity	and	ordinary	silence	that	will	befall	most	of
us.	In	Sebald’s	work,	then,	and	in	this	book	especially,	we	experience	a
vertiginous	relationship	to	a	select	number	of	photographs	of	humans—these
pictures	are	explicitly	part	of	the	story	that	we	are	reading,	which	is	about	saving
the	dead	(the	story	of	Jacques	Austerlitz),	and	they	are	also	part	of	a	larger	story
that	is	not	found	in	the	book	(or	only	by	implication),	which	is	
also
	about	saving
the	dead.	These	people	stare	at	us,	as	if	imploring	us	to	rescue	them	from	the
banal	amnesia	of	existence.	But	if	Jacques	Austerlitz	certainly	cannot	save	his
dead	parents,	then	we	certainly	cannot	save	the	little	boy.	To	“save”	him	would
mean	saving	every	person	who	dies,	would	mean	saving	everyone	who	has	ever
died	in	obscurity.	
This
,	I	think,	is	the	double	meaning	of	Sebald’s	words	about
the	boy:	it	is	Jacques	Austerlitz,	but	it	is	also	the	boy	from	Stockport	(as	it	were),
who	stares	out	at	us	asking	us	to	“avert	the	misfortune”	of	his	demise,	which	of
course	we	cannot	do.
If	the	little	boy	is	lost	to	us,	so	is	Austerlitz.	Like	his	photograph,	he	has	also
become	a	thing,	and	this	is	surely	part	of	the	enigma	of	his	curious	last	name.	He
has	a	Jewish	last	name,	which	can	indeed	be	found	in	Czech	and	Austrian
records;	as	Jacques	correctly	tells	us,	Fred	Astaire’s	father	was	born	with	the	last
name	of	Austerlitz	(“Fritz”	Austerlitz	was	born	in	Austria,	and	had	converted
from	Judaism	to	Catholicism).	But	Austerlitz	is	primarily	not	the	name	of	a
person	but	of	a	famous	battle,	and	of	a	well-known	Parisian	train	station.	The
name	is	unfortunate	for	Jacques,	because	its	historical	resonance	continually
pulls	us	away	from	his	Jewishness	(from	his	individuality),	and	towards	a	world-
historical	reference	that	has	nothing	much	to	do	with	him.	Imagine	a	novel	in
which	almost	every	page	featured	the	phrase	“Waterloo	said,”	or	“Agincourt
said.”	Sebald	plays	with	this	oddity	most	obviously	in	the	passage	when	the
young	Austerlitz	first	finds	out	his	true	surname,	at	school.	“What	does	it
mean?”	asks	Jacques,	and	the	headmaster	tells	him	that	it	is	a	small	place	in
Moravia,	site	of	a	famous	battle.	During	the	next	school	year,	the	battle	of
Austerlitz	is	indeed	discussed,	and	it	turns	out	to	be	one	of	the	set	pieces	of	Mr.
Hilary,	the	romantic	history	teacher	who	makes	such	an	impression	on	the	young
Jacques.	“Hilary	told	us,	said	Austerlitz,	how	at	seven	in	the	morning	the	peaks
of	the	highest	hills	emerged	from	the	mist	…	The	Russian	and	Austrian	troops
had	come	down	from	the	mountainsides	like	a	slow	avalanche.”	At	this	moment,
when	we	encounter	the	familiar	“said	Austerlitz,”	we	are	briefly	unsure	if	the
character	or	the	battle	itself	is	speaking.
Go	back,	for	a	minute,	to	the	headmaster’s	reply,	because	it	is	one	of	the	most
quietly	breathtaking	moments	in	the	novel,	and	
can	stand	as	an	emblem	of
Sebald’s	great	powers	of	reticence	and	understatement.	The	headmaster,	Mr.
Penrith-Smith	(a	nice	joke,	because	Penrith-Smith	combines	both	an	English
place	name	and	the	most	anonymous,	least	curious	surname	in	English),	has	told
Jacques	that	he	is	not	called	Dafydd	Elias	but	Jacques	Austerlitz.	Jacques	asks,
with	the	enforced	politeness	of	the	English	schoolboy,	“Excuse	me,	sir,	but	what
does	it	mean?”	To	which	Mr.	Penrith-Smith	replies:	“I	think	you	will	find	it	is	a
small	place	in	Moravia,	site	of	a	famous	battle,	you	know.”	And	that	is	all!	And
it	is	1949.	Jacques	asks	the	one	question	that	could	possibly	be	the	question	of
the	entire	novel,	and	the	headmaster	refers	him	only	to	the	famous	battle	of	1805
between	the	French	and	the	Austrians.	Consider	everything	that	is	omitted,	or
repressed,	from	this	reply.	The	headmaster	might	have	said	that	Austerlitz	is	a
Jewish	name,	and	that	Jacques	is	a	refugee	from	the	Nazis.	He	might,	with	the
help	of	Mr.	Hilary’s	expertise,	have	added	that	Austerlitz,	near	Brno	in	what	was
then	Czechoslovakia,	once	had	a	thriving	Jewish	population,	and	that	perhaps
Jacques’	name	derived	from	that	community.	He	might	have	mentioned	that	in
1941,	the	Germans	established	the	ghetto	of	Theresienstadt,	north	of	Prague
(named	after	Queen	Maria	Theresa,	who,	in	1745,	issued	an	edict	limiting	the
number	of	Jewish	families	in	Moravia),	and	that	the	remaining	Jews	of
Austerlitz	almost	certainly	perished	there,	or	later	in	Auschwitz,	to	which	place
most	of	the	inmates	of	Theresienstadt	were	eventually	taken.	He	might	have
added	that	Jacques’	parents	were	unlikely	to	be	alive.
But	Mr.	Penrith-Smith	says	none	of	this,	and	Jacques	Austerlitz	will	spend	the
rest	of	the	novel	trying	to	find	his	own	answer	to	his	own	question.	Instead,	the
headmaster’s	bland	reply	turns	
Jacques	into	the	public	past,	into	a	date.	What
does	it	mean?	And	the	answer	Jacques	receives	is,	in	effect:	“1805,	that’s	what	it
means.”	Of	all	the	rescues	that	the	novel	poses,	the	most	difficult	may	be	this
one:	to	restore	to	Jacques	Austerlitz	the	individuality	of	his	name	and
experience,	to	rescue	the	living	privacy	of	the	surname	“Austerlitz”	from	the
dead,	irrelevant	publicity	of	the	place	name	“Austerlitz.”	Jacques	should	not	be	a
battle,	nor	a	railway	station,	nor	a	thing.	Ultimately,	we	cannot	perform	this
rescue,	and	the	novel	does	not	let	us.	The	private	and	the	public	names	keep	on
intertwining,	and	herein	lies	the	power	of	the	novel’s	closing	pages.	We
helplessly	return	to	the	Gare	d’Austerlitz,	from	where	Jacques’	father	may	have
left	Paris.	In	the	new	Bibliothèque	Nationale,	Jacques	learns	that	the	very
building	rests	on	the	ruins	of	a	huge	wartime	warehouse,	where	the	Germans
“brought	all	the	loot	they	had	taken	from	the	homes	of	the	Jews	of	Paris.”	It	was
known	as	the	Austerlitz-Tolbiac	storage	depot.	Everything	our	civilization
produced	was	brought	here,	says	the	library	official,	and	often	pilfered	by
German	officers—ending	up	in,	say,	a	“Grunewald	villa”	in	Berlin.	This
knowledge	is	like	a	literalization	of	the	well-known	dictum	of	Walter
Benjamin’s,	that	there	is	no	document	of	civilization	which	is	not	at	the	same
time	a	document	of	barbarism.	Standing	on	the	ruins	of	history,	standing	both	in
and	on	top	of	history’s	depository,	Jacques	Austerlitz	is	joined	by	his	name	to
these	ruins:	and	again,	at	the	end	of	the	book,	as	at	the	beginning,	he	threatens	to
become	simply	part	of	the	rubble	of	history,	a	thing,	a	depository	of	facts	and
dates,	not	a	human	being.	And	throughout	the	novel,	present	but	never	spoken,
never	written—it	is	the	most	beautiful	act	of	Sebald’s	withholding—is	the	other
historical	name	that	
shadows	the	name	Austerlitz,	the	name	that	begins	and	ends
with	the	same	letters,	the	name	which	we	sometimes	misread	Austerlitz	as,	the
place	that	Agáta	Austerlitz	was	almost	certainly	“sent	east”	to	in	1944,	and	the
place	that	Maximilian	Aychenwald	was	almost	certainly	sent	to	from	the	French
camp	in	Gurs,	in	1942:	Auschwitz.
—Grunewald,	Berlin,	2011
J
AMES
	W
OOD
	is	a	staff	writer	at	
The	New	Yorker
	and	a	visiting	lecturer	in
English	and	American	literature	at	Harvard.	He	is	the	author	of	two	essay
collections,	
The	Broken	Estate
	and	
The	Irresponsible	Self
,	and	a	novel,	
The
Book	Against	God
.
	
1
.	“Marginalia	on	Mahler,”	in	Theodor	W.	Adorno,	
Essays	on	Music
,	ed.
Richard	Leppert	(Berkeley,	CA:	2002).
2
.	Roland	Barthes,	
Camera	Lucida
,	trans.	Richard	Howard	(New	York:	1981).
3
.	Deutsches	Literaturarchiv,	Marbach	am	Neckar.	Sebald	once	confided	to	me,
in	an	interview,	that	about	30	percent	of	the	photographs	in	
The	Emigrants
	had
an	entirely	fictitious	relationship	to	their	supposed	subjects.	Sebald,	for	instance,
wrote	the	farewell	note	that	Ambros	Adelwarth	writes	to	his	family,	and	then
took	the	photograph	himself.
	
I
n	the	second	half	of	the	1960s	I	traveled	repeatedly	from	England	to	Belgium,
partly	for	study	purposes,	partly	for	other	reasons	which	were	never	entirely
clear	to	me,	staying	sometimes	for	just	one	or	two	days,	sometimes	for	several
weeks.	On	one	of	these	Belgian	excursions	which,	as	it	seemed	to	me,	always
took	me	further	and	further	abroad,	I	came	on	a	glorious	early	summer’s	day	to
the	city	of	Antwerp,	known	to	me	previously	only	by	name.	Even	on	my	arrival,
as	the	train	rolled	slowly	over	the	viaduct	with	its	curious	pointed	turrets	on	both
sides	and	into	the	dark	station	concourse,	I	had	begun	to	feel	unwell,	and	this
sense	of	indisposition	persisted	for	the	whole	of	my	visit	to	Belgium	on	that
occasion.	I	still	remember	the	uncertainty	of	my	footsteps	as	I	walked	all	round
the	inner	city,	down	Jeruzalemstraat,	Nachtegaalstraat,	Pelikaanstraat,
Paradijsstraat,	Immerseelstraat,	and	many	other	streets	and	alleyways,	until	at
last,	plagued	by	a	headache	and	my	uneasy	thoughts,	I	took	refuge	in	the	zoo	by
the	Astridplein,	next	to	the	Centraal	Station,	waiting	for	the	pain	to	subside.	I	sat
there	on	a	bench	in	dappled	shade,	beside	an	aviary	full	of	brightly	feathered
finches	and	siskins	fluttering	about.	As	the	afternoon	drew	to	a	close	I	walked
through	the	park,	and	finally	
went	to	see	the	Nocturama,	which	had	first	been
opened	only	a	few	months	earlier.	It	was	some	time	before	my	eyes	became	used
to	its	artificial	dusk	and	I	could	make	out	different	animals	leading	their
sombrous	lives	behind	the	glass	by	the	light	of	a	pale	moon.	I	cannot	now	recall
exactly	what	creatures	I	saw	on	that	visit	to	the	Antwerp	Nocturama,	but	there
were	probably	bats	and	jerboas	from	Egypt	and	the	Gobi	Desert,	native
European	hedgehogs	and	owls,	Australian	opossums,	pine	martens,	dormice,	and
lemurs,	leaping	from	branch	to	branch,	darting	back	and	forth	over	the	grayish-
yellow	sandy	ground,	or	disappearing	into	a	bamboo	thicket.	The	only	animal
which	has	remained	lingering	in	my	memory	is	the	raccoon.	I	watched	it	for	a
long	time	as	it	sat	beside	a	little	stream	with	a	serious	expression	on	its	face,
washing	the	same	piece	of	apple	over	and	over	again,	as	if	it	hoped	that	all	this
washing,	which	went	far	beyond	any	reasonable	thoroughness,	would	help	it	to
escape	the	unreal	world	in	which	it	had	arrived,	so	to	speak,	through	no	fault	of
its	own.	Otherwise,	all	I	remember	of	the	denizens	of	the	Nocturama	is	that
several	of	them	had	strikingly	large	eyes,	and	
the	fixed,	inquiring	gaze	found	in
certain	painters	and	philosophers	who	seek	to	penetrate	the	darkness	which
surrounds	us	purely	by	means	of	looking	and	thinking.
	
	
	
I	believe	that	my	mind	also	dwelt	on	the	question	of	whether	the	electric	light
was	turned	on	for	the	creatures	in	the	Nocturama	when	real	night	fell	and	the	zoo
was	closed	to	the	public,	so	that	as	day	dawned	over	their	topsy-turvy	miniature
universe	they	could	fall	asleep	with	some	degree	of	reassurance.	Over	the	years,
images	of	the	interior	of	the	Nocturama	have	become	confused	in	my	mind	with
my	memories	of	the	
Salle	des	pas	perdus
,	as	it	is	called,	in	Antwerp	Centraal
Station.	If	I	try	to	conjure	up	a	picture	of	that	waiting	room	today	I	immediately
see	the	Nocturama,	and	if	I	think	of	the	Nocturama	the	waiting	room	springs	to
my	mind,	probably	because	when	I	left	the	zoo	that	afternoon	I	went	straight	into
the	station,	or	rather	first	stood	in	the	square	outside	it	for	some	time	to	look	up
at	the	façade	of	that	fantastical	building,	which	I	had	taken	in	only	vaguely	when
I	arrived	in	the	morning.	Now,	however,	I	saw	how	far	the	station	constructed
under	the	patronage	
of	King	Leopold	II	exceeded	its	purely	utilitarian	function,
and	I	marveled	at	the	verdigris-covered	Negro	boy	who,	for	a	century	now,	has
sat	upon	his	dromedary	on	an	oriel	turret	to	the	left	of	the	station	façade,	a
monument	to	the	world	of	the	animals	and	native	peoples	of	the	African
continent,	alone	against	the	Flemish	sky.	When	I	entered	the	great	hall	of	the
Centraal	Station	with	its	dome	arching	sixty	meters	high	above	it,	my	first
thought,	perhaps	triggered	by	my	visit	to	the	zoo	and	the	sight	of	the	dromedary,
was	that	this	magnificent	although	then	severely	dilapidated	foyer	ought	to	have
cages	for	lions	and	leopards	let	into	its	marble	niches,	and	aquaria	for	sharks,
octopuses,	and	crocodiles,	just	as	some	zoos,	conversely,	have	little	railway
trains	in	which	you	can,	so	to	speak,	travel	to	the	farthest	corners	of	the	earth.	It
was	probably	because	of	ideas	like	these,	occurring	to	me	almost	of	their	own
accord	there	in	Antwerp,	that	the	waiting	room	which,	I	know,	has	now	been
turned	into	a	staff	canteen	struck	me	as	another	Nocturama,	a	curious	confusion
which	may	of	course	have	been	the	result	of	the	sun’s	sinking	behind	the	city
rooftops	just	as	I	entered	the	room.	The	gleam	of	gold	and	silver	on	the	huge,
half-obscured	mirrors	on	the	wall	facing	the	windows	was	not	yet	entirely
extinguished	before	a	subterranean	twilight	filled	the	waiting	room,	where	a	few
travelers	sat	far	apart,	silent	and	motionless.	Like	the	creatures	in	the	Nocturama,
which	had	included	a	strikingly	large	number	of	dwarf	species—tiny	fennec
foxes,	spring-hares,	hamsters—the	railway	passengers	seemed	to	me	somehow
miniaturized,	whether	by	the	unusual	height	of	the	ceiling	or	because	of	the
gathering	dusk,	and	it	was	this,	I	suppose,	which	prompted	the	passing	
thought,
nonsensical	in	itself,	that	they	were	the	last	members	of	a	diminutive	race	which
had	perished	or	had	been	expelled	from	its	homeland,	and	that	because	they
alone	survived	they	wore	the	same	sorrowful	expression	as	the	creatures	in	the
zoo.	One	of	the	people	waiting	in	the	
Salle	des	pas	perdus
	was	Austerlitz,	a	man
who	then,	in	1967,	appeared	almost	youthful,	with	fair,	curiously	wavy	hair	of	a
kind	I	had	seen	elsewhere	only	on	the	German	hero	Siegfried	in	Fritz	Lang’s
Nibelungen
	film.	That	day	in	Antwerp,	as	on	all	our	later	meetings,	Austerlitz
wore	heavy	walking	boots	and	workman’s	trousers	made	of	faded	blue	calico,
together	with	a	tailor-made	but	long	outdated	suit	jacket.	Apart	from	these
externals	he	also	differed	from	the	other	travelers	in	being	the	only	one	who	was
not	staring	apathetically	into	space,	but	instead	was	occupied	in	making	notes
and	sketches	obviously	relating	to	the	room	where	we	were	both	sitting—a
magnificent	hall	more	suitable,	to	my	mind,	for	a	state	ceremony	than	as	a	place
to	wait	for	the	next	connection	to	Paris	or	Oostende—for	when	he	was	not
actually	writing	something	down	his	glance	often	dwelt	on	the	row	of	windows,
the	fluted	pilasters,	and	other	structural	details	of	the	waiting	room.	Once
Austerlitz	took	a	camera	out	of	his	rucksack,	an	old	Ensign	with	telescopic
bellows,	and	took	several	pictures	of	the	mirrors,	which	were	now	quite	dark,	but
so	far	I	have	been	unable	to	find	them	among	the	many	hundreds	of	pictures,
most	of	them	unsorted,	that	he	entrusted	to	me	soon	after	we	met	again	in	the
winter	of	1996.	When	I	finally	went	over	to	Austerlitz	with	a	question	about	his
obvious	interest	in	the	waiting	room,	he	was	not	at	all	surprised	by	my	
direct
approach	but	answered	me	at	once,	without	the	slightest	hesitation,	as	I	have
variously	found	since	that	solitary	travelers,	who	so	often	pass	days	on	end	in
uninterrupted	silence,	are	glad	to	be	spoken	to.	Now	and	then	they	are	even
ready	to	open	up	to	a	stranger	unreservedly	on	such	occasions,	although	that	was
not	the	case	with	Austerlitz	in	the	
Salle	des	pas	perdus
,	nor	did	he	subsequently
tell	me	very	much	about	his	origins	and	his	own	life.	Our	Antwerp
conversations,	as	he	sometimes	called	them	later,	turned	primarily	on
architectural	history,	in	accordance	with	his	own	astonishing	professional
expertise,	and	it	was	the	subject	we	discussed	that	evening	as	we	sat	together
until	nearly	midnight	in	the	restaurant	facing	the	waiting	room	on	the	other	side
of	the	great	domed	hall.	The	few	guests	still	lingering	at	that	late	hour	one	by
one	deserted	the	buffet,	which	was	constructed	like	a	mirror	image	of	the	waiting
room,	until	we	were	left	alone	with	a	solitary	man	drinking	Fernet	and	the
barmaid,	who	sat	enthroned	on	a	stool	behind	the	counter,	legs	crossed,	filing	her
nails	with	complete	devotion	and	concentration.	Austerlitz	commented	in
passing	of	this	lady,	whose	peroxide-blond	hair	was	piled	up	into	a	sort	of	bird’s
nest,	that	she	was	the	goddess	of	time	past.	And	on	the	wall	behind	her,	under
the	lion	crest	of	the	kingdom	of	Belgium,	there	was	indeed	a	mighty	clock,	the
dominating	feature	of	the	buffet,	with	a	hand	some	six	feet	long	traveling	round
a	dial	which	had	once	been	gilded,	but	was	now	blackened	by	railway	soot	and
tobacco	smoke.	During	the	pauses	in	our	conversation	we	both	noticed	what	an
endless	length	of	time	went	by	before	another	minute	had	passed,	
and	how
alarming	seemed	the	movement	of	that	hand,	which	resembled	a	sword	of
justice,	even	though	we	were	expecting	it	every	time	it	jerked	forward,	slicing
off	the	next	one-sixtieth	of	an	hour	from	the	future	and	coming	to	a	halt	with
such	a	menacing	quiver	that	one’s	heart	almost	stopped.	Towards	the	end	of	the
nineteenth	century,	Austerlitz	began,	in	reply	to	my	questions	about	the	history
of	the	building	of	Antwerp	station,	when	Belgium,	a	little	patch	of	yellowish
gray	barely	visible	on	the	map	of	the	world,	spread	its	sphere	of	influence	to	the
African	continent	with	its	colonial	enterprises,	when	deals	of	huge	proportions
were	done	on	the	capital	markets	and	raw-materials	exchanges	of	Brussels,	and
the	citizens	of	Belgium,	full	of	boundless	optimism,	believed	that	their	country,
which	had	been	subject	so	long	to	foreign	rule	and	was	divided	and	disunited	in
itself,	was	about	to	become	a	great	new	economic	power—at	that	time,	now	so
long	ago	although	it	determines	our	lives	to	this	day,	it	was	the	personal	wish	of
King	Leopold,	under	whose	auspices	such	apparently	inexorable	progress	was
being	made,	that	the	money	suddenly	and	abundantly	available	should	be	used	to
erect	public	buildings	which	would	bring	international	renown	to	his	aspiring
state.	One	of	the	projects	thus	initiated	by	the	highest	authority	in	the	land	was
the	central	station	of	the	Flemish	metropolis,	where	we	were	sitting	now,	said
Austerlitz;	designed	by	Louis	Delacenserie,	it	was	inaugurated	in	the	summer	of
1905,	after	ten	years	of	planning	and	building,	in	the	presence	of	the	King
himself.	The	model	Leopold	had	recommended	to	his	architects	was	the	new
railway	station	of	Lucerne,	where	he	had	
been	particularly	struck	by	the	concept
of	the	dome,
*
	so	dramatically	exceeding	the	usual	modest	height	of	railway
buildings,	a	concept	realized	by	Delacenserie	in	his	own	design,	which	was
inspired	by	the	Pantheon	in	Rome,	in	such	stupendous	fashion	that	even	today,
said	Austerlitz,	exactly	as	the	architect	intended,	when	we	step	into	the	entrance
hall	we	are	seized	by	a	sense	of	being	beyond	the	profane,	in	a	cathedral
consecrated	to	international	traffic	and	trade.	Delacenserie	borrowed	the	main
elements	of	his	monumental	structure	from	the	palaces	of	the	Italian
Renaissance,	but	he	also	struck	Byzantine	and	Moorish	notes,	and	perhaps	when
I	arrived,	said	Austerlitz,	I	myself	had	noticed	the	round	gray	and	white	granite
turrets,	the	sole	purpose	of	which	was	to	arouse	medieval	associations	in	the
minds	of	railway	passengers.	However	laughable	in	itself,	Delacenserie’s
eclecticism,	uniting	past	and	future	in	the	Centraal	Station	with	its	marble
stairway	in	the	foyer	and	the	steel	and	glass	roof	spanning	the	platforms,	was	in
fact	a	logical	stylistic	approach	to	the	new	epoch,	said	Austerlitz,	and	it	was	also
appropriate,	he	continued,	that	in	Antwerp	Station	the	elevated	level	from	which
the	gods	looked	down	on	visitors	to	the	Roman	Pantheon	should	display,	in
hierarchical	order,	the	deities	of	the	nineteenth	century—mining,	
industry,
transport,	trade,	and	capital.	For	halfway	up	the	walls	of	the	entrance	hall,	as	I
must	have	noticed,	there	were	stone	escutcheons	bearing	symbolic	sheaves	of
corn,	crossed	hammers,	winged	wheels,	and	so	on,	with	the	heraldic	motif	of	the
beehive	standing	not,	as	one	might	at	first	think,	for	nature	made	serviceable	to
mankind,	or	even	industrious	labor	as	a	social	good,	but	symbolizing	the
principle	of	capital	accumulation.
	
	
	
And	Time,	said	Austerlitz,	represented	by	the	hands	and	dial	of	the	clock,	reigns
supreme	among	these	emblems.	The	clock	is	placed	above	the	only	baroque
element	in	the	entire	ensemble,	the	cruciform	stairway	which	leads	from	the
foyer	to	the	platforms,	just	where	the	image	of	the	emperor	stood	in	the
Pantheon	in	a	line	directly	prolonged	from	the	portal;	as	governor	of	a	new
omnipotence	it	was	set	even	above	the	royal	coat	of	arms	and	the	motto
Endracht	maakt	macht
.	The	movements	of	all	travelers	could	be	surveyed	from
the	central	position	occupied	by	the	clock	in	Antwerp	Station,	and	conversely	all
travelers	had	to	look	up	at	the	clock	and	were	obliged	to	adjust	their	activities	to
its	demands.	In	fact,	said	Austerlitz,	until	the	railway	timetables	were
synchronized	the	clocks	of	Lille	and	Liège	did	not	keep	the	same	time	as	the
clocks	of	Ghent	and	Antwerp,	and	not	until	they	were	all	standardized	around
the	middle	of	the	nineteenth	century	did	time	truly	reign	supreme.	It	was	only	by
following	the	course	time	prescribed	that	we	could	hasten	through	the	gigantic
spaces	separating	us	from	each	other.	And	indeed,	said	Austerlitz	after	a	while,
to	this	day	there	is	something	illusionistic	and	illusory	about	the	relationship	of
time	and	space	as	we	experience	it	in	traveling,	which	is	why	whenever	we	come
home	from	elsewhere	we	never	feel	quite	sure	if	we	have	really	been	abroad.
From	the	first	I	was	astonished	by	the	way	Austerlitz	put	his	ideas	
together	as	he
talked,	forming	perfectly	balanced	sentences	out	of	whatever	occurred	to	him,	so
to	speak,	and	the	way	in	which,	in	his	mind,	the	passing	on	of	his	knowledge
seemed	to	become	a	gradual	approach	to	a	kind	of	historical	metaphysic,
bringing	remembered	events	back	to	life.	I	shall	never	forget	how	he	concluded
his	comments	on	the	manufacture	of	the	tall	waiting-room	mirrors	by	wondering,
glancing	up	once	more	at	their	dimly	shimmering	surfaces	as	he	left,	
combien
des	ouvriers	périrent,	lors	de	la	manufacture	de	tels	miroirs,	de	malignes	et
funestes	affectations	à	la	suite	de	l’inhalation	de	vapeurs	de	mercure	et	de
cyanide
.	And	just	as	Austerlitz	had	broken	off	with	these	words	that	first
evening,	so	he	continued	his	observations	the	following	day,	for	which	we	had
arranged	a	meeting	on	the	promenade	beside	the	Schelde.	Pointing	to	the	broad
river	sparkling	in	the	morning	sun,	he	spoke	of	a	picture	painted	by	Lucas	van
Valckenborch	towards	the	end	of	the	sixteenth	century	during	what	is	now	called
the	Little	Ice	Age,	showing	the	frozen	Schelde	from	the	opposite	bank,	with	the
city	of	Antwerp	very	dark	beyond	it	and	a	strip	of	flat	countryside	stretching
towards	the	sea.	A	shower	of	snow	is	falling	from	the	lowering	sky	above	the
tower	of	the	cathedral	of	Our	Lady,	and	out	on	the	river	now	before	us	some	four
hundred	years	later,	said	Austerlitz,	the	people	of	Antwerp	are	amusing
themselves	on	the	ice,	the	common	folk	in	coats	of	earthy	brown	colors,	persons
of	greater	distinction	in	black	cloaks	with	white	lace	ruffs	round	their	necks.	In
the	foreground,	close	to	the	right-hand	edge	of	the	picture,	a	lady	has	just	fallen.
She	wears	a	canary-yellow	dress,	and	the	cavalier	bending	over	her	in	concern	is
clad	in	red	breeches,	very	conspicuous	in	the	pallid	light.	Looking	at	the	river
now,	thinking	of	that	painting	and	its	tiny	figures,	said	Austerlitz,	I	feel	as	if	the
moment	depicted	by	
Lucas	van	Valckenborch	had	never	come	to	an	end,	as	if
the	canary-yellow	lady	had	only	just	fallen	over	or	swooned,	as	if	the	black
velvet	hood	had	only	this	moment	dropped	away	from	her	head,	as	if	the	little
accident,	which	no	doubt	goes	unnoticed	by	most	viewers,	were	always
happening	over	and	over	again,	and	nothing	and	no	one	could	ever	remedy	it.	On
that	day,	after	we	had	left	our	viewing	point	on	the	promenade	to	stroll	through
the	inner	city,	Austerlitz	spoke	at	length	about	the	marks	of	pain	which,	as	he
said	he	well	knew,	trace	countless	fine	lines	through	history.	In	his	studies	of
railway	architecture,	he	said	when	we	were	sitting	in	a	bistro	in	the	Glove
Market	later	that	afternoon,	tired	from	our	wandering	through	the	city,	he	could
never	quite	shake	off	thoughts	of	the	agony	of	leave-taking	and	the	fear	of
foreign	places,	although	such	ideas	were	not	part	of	architectural	history	proper.
Yet,	he	said,	it	is	often	our	mightiest	projects	that	most	obviously	betray	the
degree	of	our	insecurity.	The	construction	of	fortifications,	for	instance—and
Antwerp	was	an	outstanding	example	of	that	craft—clearly	showed	how	we	feel
obliged	to	keep	surrounding	ourselves	with	defenses,	built	in	successive	phases
as	a	precaution	against	any	incursion	by	enemy	powers,	until	the	idea	of
concentric	rings	making	their	way	steadily	outward	comes	up	against	its	natural
limits.	If	we	study	the	development	of	fortifications	from	Floriani,	da	Capri,	and
Sanmicheli,	by	way	of	Rusenstein,	Burgsdorff,	Coehoorn,	and	Klengel,	and	so	to
Vauban	and	Montalembert,	it	is	amazing,	said	Austerlitz,	to	see	the	persistence
with	which	generations	of	masters	of	the	art	of	military	architecture,	for	all	their
undoubtedly	outstanding	gifts,	clung	to	what	we	can	easily	see	today	was	a
fundamentally	wrong-headed	idea:	the	notion	that	by	designing	an	ideal	tracé
with	blunt	bastions	
and	ravelins	projecting	well	beyond	it,	allowing	the	cannon
of	the	fortress	to	cover	the	entire	operational	area	outside	the	walls,	you	could
make	a	city	as	secure	as	anything	in	the	world	can	ever	be.	No	one	today,	said
Austerlitz,	has	the	faintest	idea	of	the	boundless	amount	of	theoretical	writings
on	the	building	of	fortifications,	of	the	fantastic	nature	of	the	geometric,
trigonometric,	and	logistical	calculations	they	record,	of	the	inflated	excesses	of
the	professional	vocabulary	of	fortification	and	siegecraft,	no	one	now
understands	its	simplest	terms,	
escarpe
	and	
courtine,	faussebraie,	réduit
,	and
glacis
,	yet	even	from	our	present	standpoint	we	can	see	that	towards	the	end	of
the	seventeenth	century	the	star-shaped	dodecagon	behind	trenches	had	finally
crystallized,	out	of	the	various	available	systems,	as	the	preferred	ground	plan:	a
kind	of	ideal	typical	pattern	derived	from	the	Golden	Section,	which	indeed,	as
study	of	the	intricately	sketched	plans	of	such	fortified	complexes	as	those	of
Coevorden,	Neuf-Brisach,	and	Saarlouis	will	show,	immediately	strikes	the
layman	as	an	emblem	both	of	absolute	power	and	of	the	ingenuity	the	engineers
put	to	the	service	of	that	power.
	
	
In	the	practice	of	warfare,	however,	the	star-shaped	fortresses	which	were	being
built	and	improved	everywhere	during	the	eighteenth	century	did	not	answer
their	purpose,	for	intent	as	everyone	was	on	that	pattern,	it	had	been	forgotten
that	the	largest	fortifications	will	naturally	attract	the	largest	enemy	forces,	and
that	the	more	you	entrench	yourself	the	more	you	must	remain	on	the	defensive,
so	that	in	the	end	you	might	find	yourself	in	a	place	fortified	in	every	possible
way,	watching	helplessly	while	the	enemy	troops,	moving	on	to	their	own	choice
of	terrain	elsewhere,	simply	ignored	their	adversaries’	fortresses,	which	had
become	positive	arsenals	of	weaponry,	bristling	with	cannon	and	overcrowded
with	men.	The	frequent	result,	said	Austerlitz,	of	resorting	to	measures	of
fortification	marked	in	general	by	a	tendency	towards	paranoid	elaboration	was
that	you	drew	attention	to	your	weakest	point,	practically	inviting	the	enemy	to
attack	it,	not	to	mention	the	fact	that	as	architectural	plans	for	fortifications
became	increasingly	complex,	the	time	it	took	to	build	them	increased	as	well,
and	with	it	the	probability	that	as	soon	as	they	were	finished,	if	not	before,	they
would	have	been	overtaken	by	further	developments,	both	in	artillery	and	in
strategic	planning,	which	took	account	of	the	growing	realization	that	everything
was	decided	in	movement,	not	in	a	state	of	rest.	And	if	the	defensive	power	of	a
fortress	really	was	put	to	the	test,	then	as	a	rule,	and	after	the	squandering	of
enormous	quantities	of	war	material,	the	outcome	remained	more	or	less
undecided.	There	could	not	be	a	clearer	illustration	of	this	anywhere,	said
Austerlitz,	than	here	in	Antwerp,	where	in	1832,	as	haggling	over	parts	of
Belgian	territory	went	on	even	after	the	new	kingdom	had	been	founded,	the
citadel,	built	by	Pacciolo	and	further	fortified	with	a	ring	of	outworks	by	the
Duke	of	Wellington,	was	besieged	for	three	weeks	by	a	French	army	of	fifty
thousand	men.	In	mid-December,	from	their	base	in	the	fort	of	Montebello,
which	they	had	already	taken,	the	French	succeeded	in	storming	the	half-ruined
outwork	of	the	St.	Laurent	lunette	and	advancing	to	a	position	immediately
beneath	the	walls	with	their	breaching	batteries.	The	siege	of	Antwerp,	which
was	unsurpassed	in	the	history	of	warfare,	at	least	for	some	years,	both	in	terms
of	expenditure	and	vehemence,	said	Austerlitz,	reached	its	memorable
culmination	when	some	seventy	thousand	thousand-pound	shells	were	fired	at
the	citadel	from	the	huge	mortars	invented	by	Colonel	Pairhans,	destroying
everything	without	trace	except	for	a	couple	of	casemates.	The	old	Dutch
general	Baron	de	Chassé,	commander	of	the	pile	of	rubble	which	was	all	that
remained	of	the	fortress,	had	already	had	the	mines	laid	to	blow	himself	up,
along	with	that	monument	to	his	loyalty	and	heroic	courage,	when	word	from	his
king	with	permission	to	surrender	reached	him	just	in	time.	Although	the	whole
insanity	of	fortification	and	siegecraft	was	clearly	revealed	in	the	taking	of
Antwerp,	said	Austerlitz,	the	only	conclusion	anyone	drew	from	it,	incredibly,
was	that	the	defenses	surrounding	the	city	must	be	rebuilt	even	more	strongly
than	before,	and	moved	further	out.	In	1859,	accordingly,	the	old	citadel	and
most	of	the	outer	forts	were	leveled	and	work	began	on	the	construction	of	a	new
enceinte
	ten	miles	long,	with	eight	forts	situated	over	half	an	hour’s	march	away
from	it,	a	project	which	proved	inadequate	after	less	than	twenty	years	because
of	the	longer	range	of	modern	guns	and	the	increasingly	destructive	power	of
explosives,	so	that,	in	obedience	to	the	same	old	logic,	
construction	now	began
on	yet	another	ring	of	fifteen	heavily	fortified	outworks	six	to	nine	miles	away
from	the	
enceinte
.	During	the	thirty	years	or	more	it	took	to	build	this	complex
the	question	arose,	as	was	only	to	be	expected,	said	Austerlitz,	of	whether	the
expansion	of	Antwerp	beyond	the	old	city	boundaries	through	its	rapid	industrial
and	commercial	development	did	not	mean	that	the	line	of	forts	ought	to	be
moved	yet	another	three	miles	further	out,	which	would	actually	have	made	it
over	thirty	miles	long,	bringing	it	within	sight	of	the	outskirts	of	Mechelen,	with
the	result	that	the	entire	Belgian	army	would	have	been	insufficient	to	garrison
the	fortifications.	So,	said	Austerlitz,	they	just	went	on	working	to	complete	the
system	already	under	construction,	although	they	knew	it	was	now	far	from
being	able	to	meet	the	actual	requirements.	The	last	link	in	the	chain	was	the
fortress	of	Breendonk,	said	Austerlitz,	a	fort	completed	just	before	the	outbreak
of	the	First	World	War	in	which,	within	a	few	months,	it	proved	completely
useless	for	the	defense	of	the	city	and	the	country.	Such	complexes	of
fortifications,	said	Austerlitz,	concluding	his	remarks	that	day	in	the	Antwerp
Glove	Market	as	he	rose	from	the	table	and	slung	his	rucksack	over	his	shoulder,
show	us	how,	unlike	birds,	for	instance,	who	keep	building	the	same	nest	over
thousands	of	years,	we	tend	to	forge	ahead	with	our	projects	far	beyond	any
reasonable	bounds.	Someone,	he	added,	ought	to	draw	up	a	catalogue	of	types	of
buildings	listed	in	order	of	size,	and	it	would	be	immediately	obvious	that
domestic	buildings	of	
less
	than	normal	size—the	little	cottage	in	the	fields,	the
hermitage,	the	lockkeeper’s	lodge,	the	pavilion	for	viewing	the	landscape,	the
children’s	bothy	in	the	garden—are	those	that	offer	us	at	least	a	semblance	of
peace,	whereas	no	one	in	his	right	
mind	could	truthfully	say	that	he	liked	a	vast
edifice	such	as	the	Palace	of	Justice	on	the	old	Gallows	Hill	in	Brussels.	At	the
most	we	gaze	at	it	in	wonder,	a	kind	of	wonder	which	in	itself	is	a	form	of
dawning	horror,	for	somehow	we	know	by	instinct	that	outsize	buildings	cast	the
shadow	of	their	own	destruction	before	them,	and	are	designed	from	the	first
with	an	eye	to	their	later	existence	as	ruins.	These	remarks,	made	by	Austerlitz
as	he	was	leaving,	were	still	in	my	mind	next	morning	when	I	was	sitting	over	a
coffee	in	the	Glove	Market	which	he	had	left	so	abruptly	the	day	before,	and	was
hoping	that	he	might	reappear.	And	as	I	was	glancing	through	the	newspapers
while	I	waited	I	came	upon	an	article—I	don’t	remember	now	if	it	was	in	the
Gazet	van	Antwerpen
	or	
La	libre	Belgique
—about	the	fortress	of	Breendonk,
from	which	it	emerged	that	in	1940,	when	for	the	second	time	in	its	history	the
fort	had	to	be	surrendered	to	the	Germans,	it	was	made	into	a	reception	and
penal	camp	which	remained	in	existence	until	August	1944,	and	that	since	1947,
preserved	unchanged	as	far	as	possible,	it	had	been	a	national	memorial	and	a
museum	of	the	Belgian	Resistance.	If	the	name	of	Breendonk	had	not	come	up
in	my	conversation	with	Austerlitz	the	previous	evening,	this	mention	of	it	in	the
paper,	even	supposing	I	had	noticed	it	at	all,	would	hardly	have	made	me	go	to
see	the	fort	that	very	day.	The	passenger	train	I	boarded	later	that	morning	took	a
good	half-hour	to	travel	the	short	distance	to	Mechelen,	where	a	bus	runs	from
outside	the	station	to	the	small	town	of	Willebroek;	it	is	on	the	outskirts	of	this
town	that	the	fort	stands	in	its	grounds	of	some	ten	hectares,	set	among	the	fields
rather	like	an	island	in	the	sea	and	surrounded	by	an	embankment,	a	barbed-wire
fence,	and	a	wide	moat.	It	was	unusually	hot	for	the	time	of	
year,	and	large
cumulus	clouds	were	piling	up	on	the	southwest	horizon	as	I	crossed	the	bridge
over	the	dark	water.	After	the	previous	day’s	conversation,	I	still	had	an	image	in
my	head	of	a	star-shaped	bastion	with	walls	towering	above	a	precise
geometrical	ground	plan,	but	what	I	now	saw	before	me	was	a	low-built	concrete
mass,	rounded	at	all	its	outer	edges	and	giving	the	gruesome	impression	of
something	hunched	and	misshapen:	the	broad	back	of	a	monster,	I	thought,	risen
from	this	Flemish	soil	like	a	whale	from	the	deep.	I	felt	reluctant	to	pass	through
the	black	gateway	into	the	fortress	itself,	and	instead	began	by	walking	round	it
on	the	outside,	through	the	unnaturally	deep	green,	almost	blue-tinged	grass
growing	on	the	island.	From	whatever	viewpoint	I	tried	to	form	a	picture	of	the
complex	I	could	make	out	no	architectural	plan,	for	its	projections	and
indentations	kept	shifting,	so	far	exceeding	my	comprehension	that	in	the	end	I
found	myself	unable	to	connect	it	with	anything	shaped	by	human	civilization,
or	even	with	the	silent	relics	of	our	prehistory	and	early	history.	And	the	longer	I
looked	at	it,	the	more	often	it	
forced	me,	as	I	felt,	to	lower	my	eyes,	the	less
comprehensible	it	seemed	to	become.
	
	
Covered	in	places	by	open	ulcers	with	the	raw	crushed	stone	erupting	from	them,
encrusted	by	guano-like	droppings	and	calcareous	streaks,	the	fort	was	a
monolithic,	monstrous	incarnation	of	ugliness	and	blind	violence.
	
	
Even	later,	when	I	studied	the	symmetrical	ground	plan	with	its	outgrowths	
of
limbs	and	claws,	with	the	semicircular	bastions	standing	out	from	the	front	of	the
main	building	like	eyes,	and	the	stumpy	projection	at	the	back	of	its	body,	I
could	not,	despite	its	now	evident	rational	structure,	recognize	anything	designed
by	the	human	mind	but	saw	it,	rather	as	the	anatomical	blueprint	of	some	alien
and	crab-like	creature.
	
	
The	path	round	the	fort	led	past	the	tarred	black	posts	of	the	execution	ground,
and	the	labor	site	where	the	prisoners	had	to	clear	away	the	earthworks	around
the	walls,	moving	over	a	quarter	of	a	million	tons	of	soil	and	rubble	with	only
shovels	and	wheelbarrows	to	help	them.	These	wheelbarrows,	one	of	which	can
still	be	seen	in	the	anteroom	of	the	fort,	must	have	seemed	terrifyingly	primitive
even	then.	They	consisted	of	a	kind	of	stretcher	with	two	crude	handles	at	one
end	and	an	iron-shod	wooden	wheel	at	the	other.	A	container	with	sloping	sides,
roughly	cobbled	together	from	unplaned	planks,	stood	on	the	crossbars	of	the
stretcher,	the	whole	clumsy	contraption	resembling	the	handcarts	used	by
farmers	where	I	lived	as	a	child	for	clearing	muck	out	of	the	stables,	except	that
the	wheelbarrows	in	Breendonk	were	twice	as	large,	and	even	when	they	were
empty	must	have	weighed	around	a	hundredweight.	I	could	not	imagine	how	the
prisoners,	very	few	of	whom	had	probably	ever	done	hard	physical	labor	before
their	arrest	and	internment,	could	have	pushed	these	barrows	full	of	heavy
detritus	over	the	sun-baked	clay	of	the	ground,	furrowed	by	ruts	as	hard	as	stone,
or	through	the	mire	that	was	churned	up	after	a	single	day’s	rain;	it	was
impossible	to	picture	them	bracing	themselves	against	the	weight	until	their
hearts	nearly	burst,	or	think	of	the	overseer	beating	them	about	the	head	with	the
handle	of	a	shovel	when	they	could	not	move	forward.	However,	if	I	could	not
envisage	
the	drudgery	performed	day	after	day,	year	after	year,	at	Breendonk
and	all	the	other	main	and	branch	camps,	when	I	finally	entered	the	fort	itself
and	glanced	through	the	glass	panes	of	a	door	on	the	right	into	the	so-called
mess	of	the	SS	guards	with	its	scrubbed	tables	and	benches,	its	bulging	stove	and
the	various	adages	neatly	painted	on	its	wall	in	Gothic	lettering,	I	could	well
imagine	the	sight	of	the	good	fathers	and	dutiful	sons	from	Vilsbiburg	and
Fuhlsbüttel,	from	the	Black	Forest	and	the	Bavarian	Alps,	sitting	here	when	they
came	off	duty	to	play	cards	or	write	letters	to	their	loved	ones	at	home.	After	all,
I	had	lived	among	them	until	my	twentieth	year.	My	memory	of	the	fourteen
stations	which	the	visitor	to	Breendonk	passes	between	the	entrance	and	the	exit
has	clouded	over	in	the	course	of	time,	or	perhaps	I	could	say	it	was	clouding
over	even	on	the	day	when	I	was	in	the	fort,	whether	because	I	did	not	really
want	to	see	what	it	had	to	show	or	because	all	the	outlines	seemed	to	merge	in	a
world	illuminated	only	by	a	few	dim	electric	bulbs,	and	cut	off	for	ever	from	the
light	of	nature.
	

	
Even	now,	when	I	try	to	remember	them,	when	I	look	back	at	the	crab-like	plan
of	Breendonk	and	read	the	words	of	the	captions—
Former	Office,	Printing
Works,	Huts,	Jacques	Ochs	Hall,	Solitary	Confinement	Cell,	Mortuary,	Relics
Store
,	and	
Museum—
the	darkness	does	not	lift	but	becomes	yet	heavier	as	I	think
how	little	we	can	hold	in	mind,	how	everything	is	constantly	lapsing	into
oblivion	with	every	extinguished	life,	how	the	world	is,	as	it	were,	draining
itself,	in	that	the	history	of	countless	places	and	objects	which	themselves	have
no	power	of	memory	is	never	heard,	never	described	or	passed	on.	Histories,	for
instance,	like	those	of	the	straw	mattresses	which	lay,	shadow-like,	on	the
stacked	plank	beds	and	which	had	become	thinner	and	shorter	because	the	chaff
in	them	disintegrated	over	the	years,	shrunken—and	now,	in	writing	this,	I	do
remember	that	such	an	idea	occurred	to	me	at	the	time—as	if	they	were	the
mortal	frames	of	those	who	lay	there	in	that	darkness.	I	also	recollect	now	that	as
I	went	on	down	the	tunnel	which	could	be	said	to	form	the	backbone	of	the	fort,
I	had	to	resist	the	feeling	taking	root	in	my	heart,	one	which	to	this	day	often
comes	over	me	in	macabre	places,	a	sense	that	with	every	forward	step	the	air
was	growing	
thinner	and	the	weight	above	me	heavier.
	
	
At	the	time,	anyway,	in	that	silent	noonday	hour	in	the	early	summer	of	1967
which	I	spent	inside	the	fort	of	Breendonk,	encountering	no	other	visitors,	I
hardly	dared	to	go	on	to	the	point	where,	at	the	end	of	a	second	long	tunnel,	a
corridor	not	much	more	than	the	height	of	a	man,	and	(as	I	think	I	remember)
somewhat	sloping,	leads	down	to	one	of	the	casemates.	This	casemate,	in	which
you	sense	immediately	that	there	is	a	layer	of	concrete	several	meters	thick
overhead,	is	a	narrow	room	with	walls	converging	at	a	sharp	angle	on	one	side,
rounded	on	the	other,	and	with	its	floor	at	least	a	foot	lower	than	the	passage
giving	access	to	it,	so	that	it	is	less	like	an	oubliette	than	a	pit.	As	I	stared	at	the
smooth,	gray	floor	of	this	pit,	which	seemed	to	me	to	be	sinking	further	and
further,	the	grating	over	the	drain	in	the	middle	of	it	and	the	metal	pail	standing
beside	the	drain,	a	picture	of	our	laundry	room	at	home	in	W.	rose	from	the
abyss	and	with	it,	suggested	perhaps	by	the	iron	hook	hanging	on	a	cord	from	the
ceiling,	the	image	of	the	butcher’s	shop	I	always	had	to	pass	on	my	way	to
school,	where	at	noon	Benedikt	was	often	to	be	seen	in	a	rubber	apron	washing
down	the	tiles	with	a	thick	hose.	No	one	can	explain	exactly	what	happens
within	us	when	the	doors	behind	which	our	childhood	terrors	lurk	are	flung
open.	But	I	do	remember	that	there	in	the	casemate	at	Breendonk	a	nauseating
smell	of	soft	soap	rose	to	my	nostrils,	and	that	this	smell,	in	some	strange	place
in	my	head,	was	linked	to	the	bizarre	German	word	for	scrubbing	brush,
Wurzelbürste
,	which	was	a	favorite	of	my	father’s	and	which	I	had	always
disliked.	Black	striations	began	to	quiver	before	my	eyes,	and	I	had	to	rest	my
forehead	against	the	wall,	which	was	gritty,	covered	with	bluish	spots,	and
seemed	to	me	to	be	perspiring	
with	cold	beads	of	sweat.	It	was	not	that	as	the
nausea	rose	in	me	I	guessed	at	the	kind	of	third-degree	interrogations	which
were	being	conducted	here	around	the	time	I	was	born,	since	it	was	only	a	few
years	later	that	I	read	Jean	Améry’s	description	of	the	dreadful	physical
closeness	between	torturers	and	their	victims,	and	of	the	tortures	he	himself
suffered	in	Breendonk	when	he	was	hoisted	aloft	by	his	hands,	tied	behind	his
back,	so	that	with	a	crack	and	a	splintering	sound	which,	as	he	says,	he	had	not
yet	forgotten	when	he	came	to	write	his	account,	his	arms	dislocated	from	the
sockets	in	his	shoulder	joints,	and	he	was	left	dangling	as	they	were	wrenched	up
behind	him	and	twisted	together	above	his	head:	
la	pendaison	par	les	mains	liées
dans	le	dos	jusqu’à	évanouissement
—this	is	how	it	is	described	in	the	book	
Le
Jardin	des	Plantes
,	in	which	Claude	Simon	descends	once	more	into	the
storehouse	of	his	memories,	and	on	page	235	begins	to	tell	the	fragmentary	tale
of	a	certain	Gastone	Novelli	who,	like	Améry,	was	subjected	to	this	particular
form	of	torture.	The	passage	opens	with	an	entry	of	26	October	1943	from
General	Rommel’s	diary,	in	which	Rommel	comments	that	in	view	of	the	total
powerlessness	of	the	police	in	Italy	one	must	now	take	charge	oneself.	As	a
result	of	the	measures	thereupon	introduced	by	the	Germans,	says	Simon,
Novelli	was	arrested	and	taken	to	Dachau.	Novelli,	Simon	continues,	never
mentioned	what	happened	to	him	there	except	on	one	occasion,	when	he	said
that	after	his	liberation	from	the	camp	he	found	the	sight	of	a	German,	or	indeed
any	so-called	civilized	being,	male	or	female,	so	intolerable	that,	hardly
recovered,	he	embarked	on	the	first	ship	he	could	find,	to	make	his	living
prospecting	for	diamonds	and	
gold	in	South	America.	For	some	time	Novelli
lived	in	the	green	jungle	with	a	tribe	of	small	people	who	had	gleaming,	coppery
skins	and	had	emerged	beside	him	as	if	out	of	nowhere	one	day,	without	moving
so	much	as	a	leaf.	He	adopted	their	customs,	and	to	the	best	of	his	ability
compiled	a	dictionary	of	their	language,	consisting	almost	entirely	of	vowels,
particularly	the	sound	
A
	in	countless	variations	of	intonation	and	emphasis,	not	a
word	of	which,	Simon	writes,	had	yet	been	recorded	by	the	Linguistic	Institute
in	São	Paulo.	Later	Novelli	returned	to	his	native	land	and	began	to	paint
pictures.	His	main	subject,	depicted	again	and	again	in	different	forms	and
compositions—
filiforme,	gras,	soudain	plus	épais	ou	plus	grand,	puis	de
nouveau	mince,	boiteux—
was	the	letter	
A
,	which	he	traced	on	the	colored	ground
he	had	applied	sometimes	with	the	point	of	a	pencil,	sometimes	with	the	stem	of
his	brush	or	an	even	blunter	instrument,	in	ranks	of	scarcely	legible	ciphers
crowding	closely	together	and	above	one	another,	always	the	same	and	yet	never
repeating	themselves,	rising	and	falling	in	waves	like	a	long-drawn-out	scream.
	
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
	
	
Although	Austerlitz	did	not	reappear	in	the	Glove	Market	in	Antwerp	that
June	day	in	1967	on	which,	in	the	end,	I	went	out	to	Breendonk,	our	paths	kept
crossing,	in	a	way	that	I	still	find	hard	to	understand,	on	all	my	Belgian
excursions	of	that	time,	none	of	them	planned	in	advance.	A	few	days	after	our
first	encounter	in	the	
Salle	des	pas	perdus
	of	the	Centraal	Station,	I	met	
him
again	in	an	industrial	quarter	on	the	southwestern	outskirts	of	the	city	of	Liège,
which	I	had	reached	towards	evening,	coming	on	foot	from	St.	Georges–sur–
Meuse	and	Flémalle.	The	sun	was	just	breaking	once	again	through	the	inky	blue
wall	of	cloud	heralding	a	storm,	and	the	factory	buildings	and	yards,	the	long
rows	of	terraced	housing	for	the	laborers,	the	brick	walls,	the	slate	roofs,	and	the
windowpanes	shone	as	if	a	fire	were	glowing	within	them.	When	the	rain	began
lashing	down	on	the	streets	I	took	refuge	in	a	tiny	bar	called,	as	I	remember,	the
Café	des	Espérances,	where	to	my	considerable	surprise	I	found	Austerlitz	bent
over	his	notes	at	one	of	the	Formica	tables.	On	this	second	meeting,	as	on	all
subsequent	occasions,	we	simply	went	on	with	our	conversation,	wasting	no
time	in	commenting	on	the	improbability	of	our	meeting	again	in	a	place	like
this,	which	no	sensible	person	would	have	sought	out.	From	where	we	sat	until
late	that	evening	in	the	Café	des	Espérances,	you	could	look	through	a	back
window	down	into	a	valley,	perhaps	a	place	of	water	meadows	in	the	past,	where
now	the	reflected	light	from	the	blast	furnaces	of	a	gigantic	iron	foundry	glared
against	the	dark	sky,	and	I	remember	clearly	how,	as	we	both	gazed	intently	at
this	spectacle,	Austerlitz	launched	into	a	discourse	of	over	two	hours	on	the	way
in	which,	during	the	nineteenth	century,	the	vision	of	model	towns	for	workers
entertained	by	philanthropic	entrepreneurs	had	inadvertently	changed	into	the
practice	of	accommodating	them	in	barracks—just	as	our	best-laid	plans,	said
Austerlitz,	as	I	still	remember,	always	turn	into	the	exact	opposite	when	they	are
put	into	practice.	It	was	several	months	after	this	meeting	in	Liège	that	I	came
upon	Austerlitz,	again	entirely	by	chance,	on	the	old	Gallows	Hill	in	Brussels,	on
the	steps	of	the	Palace	of	Justice	
which,	as	he	immediately	told	me,	is	the	largest
accumulation	of	stone	blocks	anywhere	in	Europe.
	
	
The	building	of	this	singular	architectural	monstrosity,	on	which	Austerlitz	was
planning	to	write	a	study	at	the	time,	began	in	the	1880s	at	the	urging	of	the
bourgeoisie	of	Brussels,	over-hastily	and	before	the	details	of	the	grandiose
scheme	submitted	by	a	certain	Joseph	Poelaert	had	been	properly	worked	out,	as
a	result	of	which,	said	Austerlitz,	this	huge	pile	of	over	seven	hundred	thousand
cubic	meters	contains	corridors	and	stairways	leading	nowhere,	and	doorless
rooms	and	halls	where	no	one	would	ever	set	foot,	empty	spaces	surrounded	by
walls	and	representing	the	innermost	secret	of	all	sanctioned	authority.	Austerlitz
went	on	to	tell	me	that	he	himself,	looking	for	a	labyrinth	used	in	the	initiation
ceremonies	of	the	Freemasons,	which	he	had	heard	was	in	either	the	basement	
or
the	attic	story	of	the	palace,	had	wandered	for	hours	through	this	mountain	range
of	stone,	through	forests	of	columns,	past	colossal	statues,	upstairs	and
downstairs,	and	no	one	ever	asked	him	what	he	wanted.	During	these
wanderings,	feeling	tired	or	wishing	to	get	his	bearings	from	the	sky,	he	had
stopped	at	one	of	the	windows	set	deep	in	the	walls	to	look	out	over	the	leaden
gray	roofs	of	the	palace,	crammed	together	like	pack	ice,	and	down	into	ravines
and	shaft-like	interior	courtyards	never	penetrated	by	any	ray	of	light.	He	had
gone	on	and	on	down	the	corridors,	said	Austerlitz,	sometimes	turning	left	and
then	right	again,	then	walking	straight	ahead	and	passing	through	many	tall
doorways,	and	once	or	twice	he	had	climbed	flights	of	creaking	wooden	stairs
which	gave	the	impression	of	being	temporary	structures,	branching	off	from	the
main	corridors	here	and	there	and	leading	half	a	story	up	or	down,	only	to	end	in
dark	cul-de-sacs	with	rolltop	cupboards,	lecterns,	writing	desks,	office	chairs,
and	other	items	of	furniture	stacked	up	at	the	end	of	them,	as	if	someone	had
been	obliged	to	hold	out	there	in	a	state	of	siege.	He	had	even	heard,	said
Austerlitz,	of	people	who,	over	the	years,	had	managed	to	start	up	a	small
business	in	one	or	other	of	the	empty	rooms	and	remote	corridors	of	that	great
warren:	a	tobacconist’s,	a	bookie’s,	a	bar,	and	it	was	rumored,	Austerlitz	added,
that	a	man	called	Achterbos	had	once	turned	a	gentlemen’s	lavatory	down	in	the
basement	into	a	public	convenience	for,	among	others,	passersby	in	the	street,
installing	himself	at	the	entrance	with	a	small	table	and	a	plate	to	take	the
money,	and	that	later,	when	he	engaged	an	assistant	who	was	handy	with	a	comb
and	a	pair	of	scissors,	it	was	a	barber’s	shop	for	a	while.	I	heard	several	such
apocryphal	stories	from	Austerlitz,	anecdotes	
in	curious	contrast	to	his	usual
rigorous	objectivity,	not	only	that	day	but	on	our	later	encounters,	for	instance
one	quiet	November	afternoon	when	we	spent	some	time	sitting	in	a	café	with	a
billiards	room	in	Terneuzen—I	still	remember	the	proprietress,	a	woman	with
thick-lensed	spectacles	who	was	knitting	a	grass-green	sock,	the	glowing
nuggets	of	coke	in	the	hearth,	the	damp	sawdust	on	the	floor,	the	bitter	smell	of
chicory—and	looked	out	through	the	panoramic	window,	which	was	framed	by
the	tentacles	of	an	ancient	rubber	plant,	at	the	vast	expanse	of	the	misty	gray
mouth	of	the	Schelde.	Then,	not	long	before	Christmas,	I	saw	Austerlitz	coming
towards	me	on	the	promenade	at	Zeebrugge	when	evening	was	falling	and	there
was	not	another	living	soul	in	sight.	It	turned	out	that	we	had	both	booked	on	the
same	ferry,	so	we	slowly	walked	back	to	the	harbor	together,	with	the	emptiness
of	the	North	Sea	on	our	right,	and	the	tall	façades	of	the	apartment	blocks	set
among	the	dunes,	with	the	bluish	light	of	television	screens	flickering	behind
their	windows,	curiously	unsteady	and	ghostly.	It	was	night	by	the	time	the	ferry
sailed.	We	stood	together	on	the	stern	deck.	The	white	wake	vanished	into	the
darkness,	and	I	remember	that	we	once	thought	we	saw	a	few	snowflakes
swirling	in	the	lamplight.	Only	on	this	night	crossing	of	the	Channel,	in	fact,	did
I	discover	from	a	chance	remark	dropped	by	Austerlitz	that	he	was	a	lecturer	at	a
London	institute	of	art	history.	As	it	was	almost	impossible	to	talk	to	him	about
anything	personal,	and	as	neither	of	us	knew	where	the	other	came	from,	we	had
always	spoken	in	French	since	our	first	conversation	in	Antwerp,	I	with
lamentable	awkwardness,	but	Austerlitz	with	such	natural	perfection	that	for	a
long	time	I	thought	he	had	been	brought	up	in	France.	When	we	switched	to
English,	in	which	I	was	better	versed,	I	was	strangely	touched	to	notice	in	him
an	insecurity	which	had	been	entirely	concealed	from	me	before,	expressing
itself	in	a	slight	speech	impediment	and	occasional	fits	of	stammering,	during
which	he	clutched	the	worn	spectacle	case	he	always	held	in	his	left	hand	so
tightly	that	you	could	see	the	white	of	his	knuckles	beneath	the	skin.
	
*
	
Almost	every	time	I	went	to	London	in	the	years	that	followed	I	visited
Austerlitz	where	he	worked	in	Bloomsbury,	not	far	from	the	British	Museum.	I
would	usually	spend	an	hour	or	so	sitting	with	him	in	his	crowded	study,	which
was	like	a	stockroom	of	books	and	papers	with	hardly	any	space	left	for	himself,
let	alone	his	students,	among	the	stacks	piled	high	on	the	floor	and	the
overloaded	shelves.
	
	
When	I	began	my	own	studies	in	Germany	I	had	learnt	almost	nothing	from	the
scholars	then	lecturing	in	the	humanities	there,	most	of	them	academics	who	had
built	their	careers	
in	the	1930s	and	1940s	and	still	nurtured	delusions	of	power,
and	I	found	Austerlitz	the	first	teacher	I	could	listen	to	since	my	time	in	primary
school.	I	remember	to	this	day	how	easily	I	could	grasp	what	he	called	his
tentative	ideas	when	he	talked	about	the	architectural	style	of	the	capitalist	era,	a
subject	which	he	said	had	fascinated	him	since	his	own	student	days,	speaking	in
particular	of	the	compulsive	sense	of	order	and	the	tendency	towards
monumentalism	evident	in	law	courts	and	penal	institutions,	railway	stations	and
stock	exchanges,	opera	houses	and	lunatic	asylums,	and	the	dwellings	built	to
rectangular	grid	patterns	for	the	labor	force.	His	investigations,	so	Austerlitz
once	told	me,	had	long	outstripped	their	original	purpose	as	a	project	for	a
dissertation,	proliferating	in	his	hands	into	endless	preliminary	sketches	for	a
study,	based	entirely	on	his	own	views,	of	the	family	likeness	between	all	these
buildings.	Why	he	had	embarked	on	such	a	wide	field,	said	Austerlitz,	he	did	not
know;	very	likely	he	had	been	poorly	advised	when	he	first	began	his	research
work.	But	then	again,	it	was	also	true	that	he	was	still	obeying	an	impulse	which
he	himself,	to	this	day,	did	not	really	understand,	but	which	was	somehow	linked
to	his	early	fascination	with	the	idea	of	a	network	such	as	that	of	the	entire
railway	system.	At	the	very	beginning	of	his	studies,	said	Austerlitz,	and	later,
when	he	was	first	living	in	Paris,	he	used	to	visit	one	of	the	main	railway	stations
almost	daily,	usually	the	Gare	du	Nord	or	the	Gare	de	l’Est	and	especially	in	the
morning	or	evening,	to	see	the	steam	locomotives	moving	into	the	soot-
blackened,	glass-roofed	halls,	or	to	watch	the	brightly	illuminated,	mysterious
Pullman	trains	slide	gently	out	into	the	night	like	ships	on	the	endless	expanse	of
the	sea.	He	had	quite	often	found	himself	in	the	grip	of	dangerous	
and	entirely
incomprehensible	currents	of	emotion	in	the	Parisian	railway	stations,	which,	he
said,	he	regarded	as	places	marked	by	both	blissful	happiness	and	profound
misfortune.	I	can	still	see	Austerlitz	one	afternoon	in	the	London	institute
making	this	comment	on	what	he	once	later	described	as	his	obsession	with
railway	stations,	speaking	not	so	much	to	me	as	to	himself,	and	it	was	the	only
hint	of	his	personal	life	he	allowed	himself	to	give	me	before	I	returned	to
Germany	at	the	end	of	1975,	intending	to	settle	permanently	in	my	native
country,	to	which	I	felt	I	had	become	a	stranger	after	nine	years	of	absence.	As
far	as	I	remember	I	wrote	to	Austerlitz	from	Munich	a	couple	of	times,	but	I
never	had	any	reply	to	my	letters,	either	because,	as	I	thought	at	the	time,
Austerlitz	was	away	somewhere,	or	as	I	now	think	because	he	did	not	like
writing	to	Germany.	Whatever	the	reason	for	his	silence,	the	link	between	us
was	broken,	and	I	did	not	renew	it	when,	scarcely	a	year	later,	I	decided	to	return
to	the	United	Kingdom.	It	would	now	of	course	have	been	up	to	me	to	let
Austerlitz	know	of	the	unforeseen	change	in	my	plans,	and	my	failure	to	do	so
may	have	resulted	from	the	fact	that	soon	after	my	return	I	went	through	a
difficult	period	which	dulled	my	sense	of	other	people’s	existence,	and	from
which	I	only	very	gradually	emerged	by	turning	back	to	the	writing	I	had	long
neglected.	At	any	rate,	I	did	not	often	think	of	Austerlitz	in	all	those	years,	and
when	the	thought	of	him	did	cross	my	mind	I	always	forgot	him	again	the	next
moment,	so	that	we	did	not	in	fact	resume	our	old	relationship,	which	had	been
both	a	close	and	a	distant	one,	until	two	decades	later,	in	December	1996,	and
through	a	curious	chain	of	circumstances.	I	was	in	some	anxiety	at	the	time
because	I	had	noticed,	looking	up	an	address	in	the	telephone	book,	that	
the	sight
in	my	right	eye	had	almost	entirely	disappeared	overnight,	so	to	speak.	Even
when	I	glanced	up	from	the	page	open	in	front	of	me	and	turned	my	gaze	on	the
framed	photographs	on	the	wall,	all	my	right	eye	could	see	was	a	row	of	dark
shapes	curiously	distorted	above	and	below—the	figures	and	landscapes	familiar
to	me	in	every	detail	having	resolved	indiscriminately	into	a	black	and	menacing
cross-hatching.	At	the	same	time	I	kept	feeling	as	if	I	could	see	as	clearly	as	ever
on	the	edge	of	my	field	of	vision,	and	had	only	to	look	sideways	to	rid	myself	of
what	I	took	at	first	for	a	merely	hysterical	weakness	in	my	eyesight.	Although	I
tried	several	times,	I	did	not	succeed.	Instead,	the	gray	areas	seemed	to	be
spreading,	and	now	and	then,	opening	and	closing	my	eyes	alternately	to
compare	their	degrees	of	clarity,	I	thought	that	I	had	suffered	some	impairment
on	the	left	as	well.	Considerably	alarmed	by	what	I	feared	was	the	progressive
decline	of	my	eyesight,	I	remembered	reading	once	that	until	well	into	the
nineteenth	century	a	few	drops	of	liquid	distilled	from	belladonna,	a	plant	of	the
nightshade	family,	used	to	be	applied	to	the	pupils	of	operatic	divas	before	they
went	on	stage,	and	those	of	young	women	about	to	be	introduced	to	a	suitor,
with	the	result	that	their	eyes	shone	with	a	rapt	and	almost	supernatural	radiance,
but	they	themselves	could	see	almost	nothing.	I	no	longer	know	how	I	connected
this	memory	with	my	own	condition	that	dark	December	morning,	except	that	in
my	mind	it	had	something	to	do	with	the	deceptiveness	of	that	star-like,	beautiful
gleam	and	the	danger	of	its	premature	extinction,	an	idea	which	filled	me	with
concern	for	my	ability	to	continue	working	and	at	the	same	time,	if	I	may	so	put
it,	with	a	vision	of	release	in	which	I	saw	myself,	free	of	the	constant
compulsion	to	
read	and	write,	sitting	in	a	wicker	chair	in	a	garden,	surrounded
by	a	world	of	indistinct	shapes	recognizable	only	by	their	faint	colors.	Since
there	was	no	improvement	in	my	condition	over	the	next	few	days,	I	went	to
London	just	before	Christmas	to	see	a	Czech	ophthalmologist	who	had	been
recommended	to	me.	As	usual	when	I	go	down	to	London	on	my	own,	a	kind	of
dull	despair	stirred	within	me	on	that	December	morning.	I	looked	out	at	the	flat,
almost	treeless	landscape,	the	vast	brown	expanse	of	the	plowed	fields,	the
railway	stations	where	I	would	never	get	out,	the	flock	of	gulls	which	makes	a
habit	of	gathering	on	the	football	pitch	on	the	outskirts	of	Ipswich,	the
allotments,	the	crippled	bushes	overgrown	with	dead	traveler’s	joy	on	the
embankments,	the	quicksilver	mudflats	and	channels	at	Manningtree,	the	boats
capsized	on	their	sides,	the	Colchester	water	tower,	the	Marconi	factory	in
Chelmsford,	the	empty	greyhound	track	at	Romford,	the	ugly	backs	of	the
terraced	houses	past	which	the	railway	line	runs	in	the	suburbs	of	the	metropolis,
the	Manor	Park	cemetery	and	the	tower	blocks	of	flats	in	Hackney,	sights	which
are	always	the	same	and	flit	past	me	whenever	I	go	to	London,	yet	remain	alien
and	incomprehensible	in	spite	of	all	the	years	that	have	passed	since	my	arrival
in	England.	I	always	feel	particularly	apprehensive	on	the	last	stretch	of	the
journey,	where	just	before	turning	into	Liverpool	Street	Station	the	train	must
wind	its	way	over	several	sets	of	points	through	a	narrow	defile,	and	where	the
brick	walls	rising	above	both	sides	of	the	track	with	their	round	arches,	columns,
and	niches,	blackened	with	soot	and	diesel	oil,	put	me	in	mind	once	again	that
morning	of	an	underground	columbarium.	It	was	around	three	in	the	afternoon
by	the	time	I	reached	Harley	Street	and	one	of	its	mauve	
brick	buildings,	almost
all	of	them	occupied	by	dermatologists,	urologists,	gynecologists,	neurologists,
psychiatrists,	ear,	nose,	and	throat	specialists,	and	eye	surgeons,	and	was
standing	by	the	window	in	the	soft	lamplight	of	Zdeněk	Gregor’s	slightly
overheated	waiting	room.	From	the	gray	sky	that	lowered	over	the	city	outside	a
few	isolated	snowflakes	were	floating	down,	and	disappeared	into	the	dark
chasms	of	the	yards	behind	the	buildings.	I	thought	of	the	onset	of	winter	in	the
mountains,	the	complete	absence	of	sound,	and	my	childhood	wish	for
everything	to	be	snowed	over,	the	whole	village	and	the	valley	all	the	way	to	the
mountain	peaks,	and	how	I	used	to	imagine	what	it	would	be	like	when	we
thawed	out	again	and	emerged	from	the	ice	in	spring.	And	as	I	stood	in	the
waiting	room	remembering	the	snow	of	the	Alps,	the	whitened	panes	of	the
bedroom	window,	the	curved	drifts	around	the	porch,	the	softly	capped
insulators	of	the	telegraph	poles,	and	the	trough	of	the	well	which	was
sometimes	frozen	over	for	months,	the	opening	lines	of	one	of	my	favorite
poems	came	into	my	mind.
…	And	so	I	long	for	snow	to	sweep	across	the	low
heights	of	London	.…
	I	imagined	that	out	there	in	the	gathering	dusk	I	could	see
the	districts	of	the	city	of	London	crisscrossed	by	innumerable	streets	and
railway	lines,	crowding	ever	more	closely	together	as	they	marched	east	and
north,	one	reef	of	buildings	above	the	next	and	then	the	next,	and	so	on,	far
beyond	Holloway	and	Highbury,	and	I	saw	the	snow	falling	on	this	huge
outcropping	of	stone	slowly,	steadily,	until	everything	was	covered	up	and
buried.
…	London	a	lichen	mapped	on	mild	clays	and	its	rough	circle	without
purpose	…
	It	was	a	circle	of	this	kind	with	an	indistinct	outline	that	Zdeněk
Gregor	drew	on	a	piece	of	paper	to	illustrate	the	extent	of	the	gray	area	in	my
right	eye	
when	he	had	examined	it.	Usually,	he	said,	this	was	only	a	temporary
disability,	in	which	a	bubble	suffused	by	clear	liquid	formed	on	the	macula,
rather	like	a	blister	under	wallpaper.	There	was	considerable	uncertainty,	said
Zdeněk	Gregor,	about	the	causes	of	the	disorder,	described	by	the	literature	on
the	subject	as	central	serous	chorioretinopathy.	All	that	was	really	known	was
that	it	occurred	almost	exclusively	in	middle-aged	men	who	spent	too	much	time
reading	and	writing.	After	the	consultation	I	must	have	a	procedure	called	a
fluorescing	angiography	carried	out	to	determine	the	affected	area	of	the	retina
more	precisely—it	would	mean	taking	a	series	of	photographs	of	my	eyes,	or
rather,	if	I	understood	him	correctly,	of	the	back	of	the	eye	through	the	iris,	the
pupil,	and	the	vitreous	humor.	The	technician	already	waiting	for	me	in	a	small
room	specially	equipped	for	such	purposes	was	a	man	of	extraordinarily
distinguished	appearance	who	wore	a	white	turban	and	looked,	I	foolishly
thought,	rather	like	the	Prophet	Muhammad.	He	carefully	rolled	up	my	shirt
sleeve,	and	inserted	the	tip	of	the	needle	into	the	prominent	vein	below	the	crook
of	my	elbow	without	my	feeling	anything	at	all.	While	he	was	introducing	the
contrast	medium	into	my	bloodstream	he	said	I	might	feel	slightly	unwell	in	a
little	while,	and	in	any	case	my	skin	would	be	discolored	yellow	for	a	few	hours.
After	we	had	sat	in	silence	for	a	moment	or	two,	both	in	our	respective	places	in
the	little	room	which,	like	a	sleeping	car,	was	illuminated	only	by	a	dim	bulb,	he
asked	me	to	move	closer	to	him	and	place	my	head	in	the	framework	fixed	in	a
kind	of	stand	on	the	table,	with	my	chin	in	a	shallow	depression	and	my	forehead
against	the	iron	band	above	it.	As	I	write	this	I	once	again	see	the	little	points	of
light	that	shot	into	my	widely	opened	eyes	each	time	he	pressed	
the	shutter
release.	Half	an	hour	later	I	was	sitting	in	the	saloon	bar	of	the	Great	Eastern
Hotel	at	Liverpool	Street,	waiting	for	the	next	train	home.	I	had	sought	out	a
dark	corner,	since	by	now	I	did	indeed	feel	rather	qualmish	inside	my	yellow
skin.	On	the	way	to	the	station	in	the	taxi	we	had	seemed	to	be	driving	in	a	wide,
looping	trajectory	through	some	kind	of	Luna	Park,	so	strangely	did	the	city
lights	turn	beyond	the	windscreen,	and	now	the	dim	globes	of	the	sconces,	the
mirrors	behind	the	bar,	and	the	colorful	batteries	of	bottles	of	spirits	were
circling	before	my	eyes	as	if	I	were	on	a	roundabout.	Leaning	my	head	against
the	wall,	and	breathing	deeply	and	slowly	from	time	to	time	when	I	felt	nausea
rising,	I	had	for	a	good	while	been	watching	the	toilers	in	the	City	gold	mines	as
they	came	to	meet	at	their	usual	watering	hole	early	in	the	evening,	all	of	them
identical	in	their	dark	blue	suits,	striped	shirts,	and	gaudy	ties,	and	as	I	tried	to
grasp	the	mysterious	habits	of	the	members	of	this	species,	which	is	not	to	be
found	in	any	bestiary—their	preference	for	crowding	close	together,	their	semi-
gregarious,	semi-aggressive	demeanor,	the	way	they	put	their	throats	back	in
emptying	their	glasses,	the	increasingly	excitable	babble	of	their	voices,	the
sudden	hasty	departure	of	one	or	another	of	them—as	I	was	watching	all	of	this	I
suddenly	noticed	a	solitary	figure	on	the	edge	of	the	agitated	crowd,	a	figure
who	could	only	be	Austerlitz,	whom	I	realized	at	that	moment	I	had	not	seen	for
nearly	twenty	years.	He	had	not	changed	at	all	in	either	his	carriage	or	his
clothing,	and	even	had	the	rucksack	still	slung	over	his	shoulder.	Only	his	fair,
wavy	hair	was	paler,	although	it	still	stuck	out	oddly	from	his	head	as	it	used	to.
Nonetheless,	while	I	had	always	thought	he	was	about	ten	years	older	than	I,	he
now	seemed	ten	years	younger,	whether	
because	of	my	own	poor	state	of	health
or	because	he	was	one	of	those	bachelors	who	retain	something	boyish	about
them	all	their	days.	As	far	as	I	remember,	I	was	overcome	for	a	considerable
time	by	my	amazement	at	the	unexpected	return	of	Austerlitz.	In	any	case,	I
recollect	that	before	approaching	him	I	had	been	thinking	at	some	length	about
his	personal	similarity	to	Ludwig	Wittgenstein,	and	the	horror-stricken
expressions	on	both	their	faces.	I	believe	it	was	mainly	the	rucksack,	which
Austerlitz	told	me	later	he	had	bought	for	ten	shillings	from	Swedish	stock	in	an
army	surplus	store	in	the	Charing	Cross	Road	just	before	he	began	his	studies,
describing	it	as	the	only	truly	reliable	thing	in	his	life,	which	put	into	my	head
what	on	the	surface	was	the	rather	outlandish	idea	of	a	certain	physical	likeness
between	him	and	the	philosopher	who	died	of	the	disease	of	cancer	in
Cambridge	in	1951.
	
	
Wittgenstein	
always	carried	a	rucksack	too,	in	Puchberg	and	in	Otterthal,	when
he	went	to	Norway,	Ireland,	or	Kazakhstan,	or	home	to	his	sisters	to	spend
Christmas	with	them	in	the	Alleegasse.	That	rucksack,	which	his	sister
Margarete	once	told	him	in	a	letter	was	almost	as	dear	to	her	as	himself,	went
everywhere	with	him,	even,	I	believe,	across	the	Atlantic	on	the	liner	
Queen
Mary
,	and	then	on	from	New	York	to	Ithaca.	And	now,	whenever	I	see	a
photograph	of	Wittgenstein	somewhere	or	other,	I	feel	more	and	more	as	if
Austerlitz	were	gazing	at	me	out	of	it,	and	when	I	look	at	Austerlitz	it	is	as	if	I
see	in	him	the	disconsolate	philosopher,	a	man	locked	into	the	glaring	clarity	of
his	logical	thinking	as	inextricably	as	into	his	confused	emotions,	so	striking	is
the	likeness	between	the	two	of	them:	in	stature,	in	the	way	they	study	one	as	if
across	an	invisible	barrier,	in	the	makeshift	organization	of	their	lives,	in	a	wish
to	manage	with	as	few	possessions	as	possible,	and	in	the	inability,	typical	of
Austerlitz	as	it	was	of	Wittgenstein,	to	linger	over	any	kind	of	preliminaries.
Accordingly,	and	without	wasting	any	words	on	the	coincidence	of	our	meeting
again	after	all	this	time,	Austerlitz	took	up	the	conversation	that	evening	in	the
bar	of	the	Great	Eastern	Hotel	more	or	less	where	it	had	last	been	broken	off.	He
had	spent	the	afternoon,	he	told	me,	looking	round	the	Great	Eastern,	which	was
soon	to	be	thoroughly	renovated,	concentrating	mainly	on	the	Freemasons’
temple	incorporated	into	the	hotel	by	the	directors	of	the	railway	company	at	the
turn	of	the	century,	when	the	building	had	only	just	been	completed	and
furnished	with	the	utmost	luxury.	Though	I	really	gave	up	my	architectural
studies	long	ago,	he	said,	I	sometimes	relapse	into	my	old	habits,	even	if	I	don’t
make	notes	and	sketches	anymore,	but	simply	marvel	at	the	strange	edifices	we
construct.	That	had	been	the	case	
today,	when	his	way	led	him	past	the	Great
Eastern	and,	obeying	a	sudden	impulse,	he	had	gone	into	the	foyer	where,	as	it
turned	out,	he	had	been	very	courteously	received	by	the	business	manager,	a
Portuguese	called	Pereira,	despite	my	request,	said	Austerlitz,	which	can’t	be
one	he	hears	every	day,	and	despite	my	odd	appearance.	Pereira,	Austerlitz	went
on,	took	me	up	a	broad	staircase	to	the	first	floor,	produced	a	large	key,	and
unlocked	the	portal	of	the	temple,	a	hall	with	walls	paneled	in	sand-colored
marble	and	red	Moroccan	onyx,	a	black	and	white	checkered	floor,	and	a	vaulted
ceiling	with	a	single	golden	star	at	the	center	emitting	its	rays	into	the	dark
clouds	all	around	it.	Then	Pereira	and	I	went	all	over	the	hotel,	most	of	it	taken
out	of	use	already,	through	the	great	dining	hall	which	could	accommodate	more
than	three	hundred	guests	under	its	high	glass	dome,	through	the	smoking	rooms
and	the	billiards	saloons,	through	suites	and	up	staircases	to	the	fourth	floor
where	the	kitchens	used	to	be,	and	then	down	to	the	basement	and	the	floor
below	the	basement,	once	upon	a	time	a	cool	labyrinth	for	the	storage	of	Rhine
wines,	claret,	and	champagne,	for	the	making	of	thousands	of	items	of	pâtisserie
and	the	preparation	of	vegetables,	red	meat,	and	pale	poultry.
	
	
As	for	the	fish	section,	where	perch,	pike,	plaice,	sole,	and	eels	lay	heaped	on
black	slate	slabs	with	fresh	water	constantly	running	over	them,	Pereira
described	it	as	a	whole	underworld	in	itself,	said	Austerlitz,	and	if	it	hadn’t	been
too	late	he,	Austerlitz,	would	go	round	the	place	again	with	me.	He	added	that	he
would	particularly	like	to	show	me	the	temple,	with	its	ornamental	gold-painted
picture	of	a	three-story	ark	floating	beneath	a	rainbow,	and	the	dove	just
returning	to	it	carrying	the	olive	branch	in	her	beak.	Oddly	enough,	said
Austerlitz,	as	he	stood	in	front	of	this	attractive	motif	with	Pereira	that	afternoon
he	had	been	thinking	of	our	encounters	in	Belgium,	so	long	ago	now,	and	telling
himself	he	must	find	someone	to	whom	he	could	relate	his	own	story,	a	story
which	he	had	learned	only	in	the	last	few	years	and	for	which	he	needed	the	kind
of	listener	I	had	once	been	in	Antwerp,	Liège,	
and	Zeebrugge.
	
	
Contrary	to	all	statistical	probability,	then,	there	was	an	astonishing,	positively
imperative	internal	logic	to	his	meeting	me	here	in	the	bar	of	the	Great	Eastern
Hotel,	a	place	he	had	never	before	entered	in	his	life.	Having	said	this,	Austerlitz
fell	silent,	and	for	a	while,	it	seemed	to	me,	he	gazed	into	the	farthest	distance.
Since	my	childhood	and	youth,	he	finally	began,	looking	at	me	again,	I	have
never	known	who	I	really	was.	From	where	I	stand	now,	of	course,	I	can	see	that
my	name	alone,	and	the	fact	that	it	was	kept	from	me	until	my	fifteenth	year,
ought	to	have	put	me	on	the	track	of	my	origins,	but	it	has	also	become	clear	to
me	of	late	why	an	agency	greater	than	or	superior	to	my	own	capacity	for
thought,	which	circumspectly	directs	operations	somewhere	in	my	brain,	has
always	preserved	me	from	my	own	secret,	systematically	preventing	me	from
drawing	the	obvious	conclusions	and	embarking	on	the	inquiries	they	would
have	suggested	to	me.	It	hasn’t	been	easy	to	make	my	way	out	of	my	own
inhibitions,	and	it	will	not	be	easy	now	to	put	the	story	into	anything	like	proper
order.	I	grew	up,	began	Austerlitz	that	evening	in	the	bar	of	the	Great	Eastern
Hotel,	in	the	little	country	town	of	Bala	in	Wales,	in	the	home	of	a	Calvinist
preacher	and	former	missionary	called	Emyr	Elias	who	was	married	to	a	timid-
natured	Englishwoman.	I	have	never	liked	looking	back	at	the	time	I	spent	in
that	unhappy	house,	which	stood	in	isolation	on	a	hill	just	outside	the	town	and
was	much	too	large	for	two	people	and	an	only	child.	Several	rooms	on	the	top
floor	were	kept	shut	up	year	in,	year	out.	Even	today	I	still	sometimes	dream	that
one	of	those	locked	doors	opens	and	I	step	through	it,	into	a	friendlier,	more
familiar	world.	Several	of	the	rooms	that	were	not	locked	were	unused	too.
Furnished	sparsely	with	a	bed	or	a	chest	of	drawers,	
curtains	drawn	even	during
the	day,	they	drowsed	in	a	twilight	that	soon	extinguished	every	sense	of	self-
awareness	in	me.	So	I	can	recall	almost	nothing	of	my	early	days	in	Bala	except
how	it	hurt	to	be	suddenly	called	by	a	new	name,	and	how	dreadful	it	was,	once
my	own	clothes	had	disappeared,	to	have	to	go	around	dressed	in	the	English
fashion	in	shorts,	knee-length	socks	which	were	always	slipping	down,	a	string
vest	like	a	fishnet	and	a	mouse-gray	shirt,	much	too	thin.	I	know	that	I	often	lay
awake	for	hours	in	my	narrow	bed	in	the	manse,	trying	to	conjure	up	the	faces	of
those	whom	I	had	left,	I	feared	through	my	own	fault,	but	not	until	I	was	numb
with	weariness	and	my	eyelids	sank	in	the	darkness	did	I	see	my	mother	bending
down	to	me	just	for	a	fleeting	moment,	or	my	father	smiling	as	he	put	on	his	hat.
Such	comfort	made	it	all	the	worse	to	wake	up	early	in	the	morning	and	have	to
face	the	knowledge,	new	every	day,	that	I	was	not	at	home	now	but	very	far
away,	in	some	kind	of	captivity.	Only	recently	have	I	recalled	how	oppressed	I
felt,	in	all	the	time	I	spent	with	the	Eliases,	by	the	fact	that	they	never	opened	a
window,	and	perhaps	that	is	why	when	I	was	out	and	about	somewhere	on	a
summer’s	day	years	later,	and	passed	a	house	with	all	its	windows	thrown	open,
I	felt	an	extraordinary	sense	of	being	carried	away	and	out	of	myself.	It	was	only
a	few	days	ago	that,	thinking	over	that	experience	of	liberation,	I	remembered
how	one	of	the	two	windows	of	my	bedroom	was	walled	up	on	the	inside	while
it	remained	unchanged	on	the	outside,	a	circumstance	which,	as	one	is	never
both	outside	and	inside	a	house	at	the	same	time,	I	did	not	register	until	I	was
thirteen	or	fourteen,	although	it	must	have	been	troubling	me	throughout	my
childhood	in	Bala.	The	manse	was	always	freezing,	Austerlitz	continued,	not	just
in	winter,	
when	the	only	fire	was	often	in	the	kitchen	stove	and	the	stone	floor	in
the	hallway	was	frequently	covered	with	hoarfrost,	but	in	autumn	too,	and	well
into	spring	and	the	infallibly	wet	summers.	And	just	as	cold	reigned	in	the	house
in	Bala,	so	did	silence.	The	minister’s	wife	was	always	busy	with	her
housework,	dusting,	mopping	the	tiled	floor,	doing	the	laundry,	polishing	the
brass	door	fittings	and	preparing	the	meager	meals	which	we	usually	ate	without
a	word.	Sometimes	she	merely	walked	round	the	house	making	sure	that
everything	was	in	its	proper	place,	from	which	she	would	never	allow	it	to	be
moved.	I	once	found	her	sitting	on	a	chair	in	one	of	the	half-empty	rooms
upstairs,	with	tears	in	her	eyes	and	a	crumpled	wet	handkerchief	in	her	hand.
When	she	saw	me	standing	in	the	doorway	she	rose	and	said	it	was	nothing,	she
had	only	caught	a	cold,	and	as	she	went	out	she	ran	her	fingers	through	my	hair,
the	one	time,	as	far	as	I	remember,	she	ever	did	such	a	thing.	Meanwhile	it	was
the	minister’s	unalterable	custom	to	sit	in	his	study,	which	had	a	view	of	a	dark
corner	of	the	garden,	thinking	about	next	Sunday’s	sermon.	He	never	wrote	any
of	these	sermons	down,	but	worked	them	out	in	his	head,	toiling	over	them	for	at
least	four	days.	He	would	always	emerge	from	his	study	in	the	evening	in	a	state
of	deep	despondency,	only	to	disappear	into	it	again	next	morning.	But	on
Sunday,	when	he	stood	up	in	chapel	in	front	of	his	congregation	and	often
addressed	them	for	a	full	hour,	he	was	a	changed	man;	he	spoke	with	a	moving
eloquence	which	I	still	feel	I	can	hear,	conjuring	up	before	the	eyes	of	his	flock
the	Last	Judgment	awaiting	them	all,	the	lurid	fires	of	purgatory,	the	torments	of
damnation	and	then,	with	the	most	wonderful	stellar	and	celestial	imagery,	the
entry	of	the	righteous	into	eternal	bliss.	With	apparent	ease,	
as	if	he	were	making
up	the	most	appalling	horrors	as	he	went	along,	he	always	succeeded	in	filling
the	hearts	of	his	congregation	with	such	sentiments	of	remorse	that	at	the	end	of
the	service	quite	a	number	of	them	went	home	looking	white	as	a	sheet.	The
minister	himself,	on	the	other	hand,	was	in	a	comparatively	jovial	mood	for	the
rest	of	Sunday.	At	midday	dinner,	which	always	began	with	tapioca	soup,	he
would	make	a	few	informative	and	semi-jocular	remarks	to	his	wife,	who	was
exhausted	from	cooking	the	meal,	inquired	after	my	welfare,	generally	by
asking,	“And	how	is	the	boy?,”	and	tried	to	draw	me	out	a	little.	The	meal
always	finished	with	the	minister’s	favorite	dish	of	rice	pudding,	and	he	usually
fell	silent	as	he	enjoyed	it.	Once	dinner	was	over	he	lay	down	on	the	sofa	to	rest
for	an	hour,	or	in	fine	weather	he	would	sit	out	under	the	apple	tree	in	the	front
garden	looking	down	the	valley,	as	well	satisfied	with	his	week’s	work	as	the
Lord	God	of	Sabaoth	after	the	creation	of	the	world.	Before	evening	prayers	he
went	to	his	rolltop	desk	and	took	out	the	tin	box	in	which	he	kept	the	calendar
published	by	the	Calvinist	Methodists	of	Wales,	a	gray	little	book	already	worn
rather	threadbare	and	listing	the	Sundays	and	church	festivals	for	the	years	1928
to	1946,	in	which	he	had	made	regular	entries	against	every	date	week	by	week,
removing	the	thin	solid	ink	pencil	from	the	back	of	the	book,	moistening	its	tip
with	his	tongue,	and	very	slowly	and	neatly,	like	a	schoolboy	under	supervision,
noting	down	the	name	of	the	chapel	where	he	had	preached	that	day	and	the
biblical	passage	he	had	taken	as	his	text,	for	instance,	under	20	July	1939:	The
Tabernacle,	Llandrillo—Psalms	CXLVII,	4,	‘He	telleth	the	number	of	the	stars:
he	calleth	them	all	by	their	names’;	under	3	August	1941:	Chapel	Uchaf,	Gilboa
—Zephaniah	III,	6,	‘I	
have	cut	off	the	nations:	their	towers	are	desolate;	I	made
their	streets	waste,	that	none	passeth	by’;	and	under	21	May	1944:	Chapel
Bethesda,	Corwen—Isaiah	XLVIII,	18,	‘O	that	thou	hadst	hearkened	to	my
commandments!	then	had	thy	peace	been	as	a	river	and	thy	righteousness	as	the
waves	of	the	sea!’	The	last	entry	in	this	little	book,	which	is	among	those	few	of
the	minister’s	possessions	to	have	passed	into	my	hands	after	his	death	and
through	which	I	have	often	glanced	recently,	said	Austerlitz,	was	made	on	one	of
the	additional	leaves	inserted	at	the	end	and	is	dated	7	March	1952.	It	runs:	Bala
Chapel—Psalms	CII,	6,	‘I	am	like	a	pelican	of	the	wilderness:	I	am	like	an	owl
of	the	desert.’	For	the	most	part,	of	course,	these	Sunday	sermons,	and	I	must
have	heard	over	five	hundred	of	them,	went	over	my	head	when	I	was	a	child,
but	even	if	the	meaning	of	the	various	words	and	phrases	was	a	mystery	to	me
for	a	long	time,	and	whether	Elias	delivered	them	in	English	or	Welsh,	I	did
understand	that	his	subject	was	the	sinfulness	and	punishment	of	mankind,	fire
and	ashes	and	the	approaching	end	of	the	world.	However,	said	Austerlitz,	in	my
memory	Calvinist	eschatology	is	linked	not	so	much	to	these	biblical	images	of
destruction	as	to	what	I	saw	with	my	own	eyes	when	I	was	out	with	Elias.	Many
of	his	younger	colleagues	in	the	ministry	had	been	called	up	into	the	army	soon
after	the	beginning	of	the	war,	and	consequently	at	least	every	other	Sunday	he
had	to	go	and	preach	to	another	congregation,	often	quite	a	long	way	off.	At	first
we	drove	across	country	in	a	little	two-seater	trap	drawn	by	an	almost	snow-
white	pony,	and	in	accordance	with	Elias’s	usual	custom	he	would	sit	hunched
up	in	the	blackest	of	moods	on	the	outward	journey.	On	the	way	back,	however,
his	
spirits	rose,	just	as	they	did	at	home	on	Sunday	afternoons;	he	sometimes
even	hummed	to	himself,	and	cracked	the	whip	around	the	pony’s	ears	now	and
then.	And	these	light	and	dark	sides	of	the	minister	Elias	were	reflected	in	the
mountainous	landscape	around	us.	I	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	how	we	were
once	driving	through	the	endless	Tanat	valley,	with	nothing	on	the	hillsides	to
right	and	left	of	us	but	crooked	bushes,	ferns,	and	rusty-hued	vegetation,	and
then,	for	the	last	part	of	the	way	up	to	the	col,	only	gray	rock	and	drifting	mist,
so	that	I	was	afraid	we	were	coming	to	the	very	ends	of	the	earth.	But	on	another
day,	when	we	had	just	reached	the	Pennant	pass	I	saw	a	gap	open	up	in	the
banked	clouds	towering	high	in	the	west,	and	the	rays	of	the	sun	cast	a	narrow
beam	of	light	down	to	the	valley	floor	lying	at	a	dizzying	depth	below	us.	Where
there	had	been	nothing	a	moment	ago	but	fathomless	gloom,	there	now	shone	a
little	village	with	a	few	orchards,	meadows,	and	fields,	surrounded	by	black
shadows	but	sparkling	green	like	the	Islands	of	the	Blest,	and	as	we	walked
down	the	road	from	the	pass	beside	the	pony	and	trap	everything	grew	lighter
and	lighter,	the	mountainsides	emerged	from	the	darkness	shining	brightly,	the
fine	grasses	bending	in	the	wind	shimmered	with	light,	the	silvery	willows
gleamed	down	on	the	banks	of	the	stream;	before	long	we	had	descended	from
the	barren	heights	and	found	ourselves	among	trees	and	bushes	again,	beneath
the	softly	rustling	oaks	and	maples,	and	rowans	already	laden	with	red	berries.
Once,	I	think	when	I	was	nine,	I	went	away	with	Elias	to	a	place	in	South	Wales
where	the	flanks	of	the	mountains	had	been	ripped	open	on	both	sides	of	the
road,	and	the	woods	mauled	and	cut	down.	I	don’t	remember	the	name	
of	the
village	we	reached	at	nightfall.	It	was	surrounded	by	pithead	stocks	of	coal
spilling	down	into	the	alleys	here	and	there.	We	had	been	given	a	room	in	the
house	of	one	of	the	church	elders,	from	which	there	was	a	view	of	a	winding
tower	with	a	gigantic	wheel	turning	now	this	way	and	now	that	in	the	gathering
dusk,	and	further	down	the	valley	tall	flames	and	showers	of	sparks	shot	high
into	the	sky	from	the	smelting	furnaces	of	an	iron	and	steel	works,	at	regular
intervals	of	about	three	or	four	minutes.	When	I	was	in	bed	Elias	sat	on	a	stool
by	the	window,	looking	out	in	silence	for	a	long	time.	I	think	that	it	was	the	sight
of	the	valley	first	illuminated	by	the	firelight,	then	sinking	back	into	darkness,
which	inspired	him	to	preach	on	a	text	from	Revelation	next	morning,	delivering
a	sermon	on	the	wrath	of	the	Lord,	on	the	war	and	the	devastation	of	the
dwellings	of	men,	a	diatribe	in	which,	so	the	elder	told	him	when	we	left,	he	had
surpassed	himself.	If	the	congregation	had	been	almost	petrified	by	terror	during
the	sermon,	I	myself	could	hardly	have	had	the	divine	power	invoked	by	Elias
more	permanently	impressed	on	my	mind	than	by	the	fact	that	a	bomb	had
dropped	in	broad	daylight	that	afternoon	in	the	little	town	at	the	end	of	the
valley,	where	Elias	was	to	take	evening	prayers	that	same	day.	The	ruins	were
still	smoldering	when	we	reached	the	center	of	the	town,	and	people	were
standing	about	in	the	road	in	small	groups,	some	with	their	hands	still	raised	to
their	mouths	in	horror.	The	fire	engine	had	driven	straight	across	a	round	flower
bed,	and	there	on	the	grass,	dressed	in	their	Sunday	best,	lay	the	bodies	of	those
who,	as	I	hardly	needed	Elias	to	tell	me,	had	sinned	against	the	Lord’s
commandment	to	keep	the	Sabbath	day	holy.	In	this	way	a	
kind	of	Old
Testament	mythology	of	retribution	gradually	built	up	inside	my	head,	and	I
always	saw	its	supreme	expression	in	the	submersion	of	the	village	of
Llanwddyn	beneath	the	waters	of	the	Vyrnwy	reservoir.	As	far	as	I	can
remember	it	was	on	the	way	back	from	one	of	his	journeys	to	preach	away	from
home,	at	either	Abertridwr	or	Pont	Llogel,	that	Elias	stopped	the	pony-trap	on
the	banks	of	this	lake	and	walked	out	with	me	to	the	middle	of	the	dam,	where
he	told	me	about	his	family	home	lying	down	there	at	a	depth	of	about	a	hundred
feet	under	the	dark	water,	and	not	just	his	own	family	home	but	at	least	forty
other	houses	and	farms,	together	with	the	church	of	St.	John	of	Jerusalem,	three
chapels,	and	three	pubs,	all	of	them	drowned	when	the	dam	was	finished	in	the
autumn	of	1888.	In	the	years	before	its	submersion,	so	Elias	had	told	him,	said
Austerlitz,	Llanwddyn	had	been	particularly	famous	for	its	games	of	football	on
the	village	green	when	the	full	moon	shone	in	summer,	often	lasting	all	night
and	played	by	over	ten	dozen	youths	and	men	of	almost	every	age,	some	of	them
from	neighboring	villages.	The	story	of	the	football	games	of	Llanwddyn
occupied	my	imagination	for	a	long	time,	said	Austerlitz,	first	and	foremost,	I
am	sure,	because	Elias	never	told	me	anything	else	about	his	own	life	either
before	or	afterwards.	At	this	one	moment	on	the	Vyrnwy	dam	when,
intentionally	or	unintentionally,	he	allowed	me	a	glimpse	into	his	clerical	heart,	I
felt	for	him	so	much	that	he,	the	righteous	man,	seemed	to	me	like	the	only
survivor	of	the	deluge	which	had	destroyed	Llanwddyn,	while	I	imagined	all	the
others—his	parents,	his	brothers	and	sisters,	his	relations,	their	neighbors,	all	the
other	villagers—still	down	in	the	depths,	sitting	in	their	houses	and	
walking
along	the	road,	but	unable	to	speak	and	with	their	eyes	opened	far	too	wide.	This
notion	of	mine	about	the	subaquatic	existence	of	the	people	of	Llanwddyn	also
had	something	to	do	with	the	album	which	Elias	first	showed	me	on	our	return
home	that	evening,	containing	several	photographs	of	his	now	sunk	beneath	the
water.
	
	
As	there	were	no	other	pictures	of	any	kind	in	the	manse,	I	leafed	again	and
again	though	these	few	photographs,	which	came	into	my	own	possession	only
much	later	along	with	the	Calvinist	calendar,	until	the	people	looking	out	of
them,	the	blacksmith	in	his	leather	apron,	Elias’s	father	the	sub-postmaster,	the
shepherd	walking	along	the	village	street	with	his	sheep,	and	most	of	all	the	girl
sitting	in	a	chair	in	the	garden	with	her	little	dog	on	her	lap,	became	as	familiar
to	me	as	if	I	were	living	with	them	down	at	the	bottom	of	the	lake.	At	night,
before	I	fell	asleep	in	my	cold	room,	I	often	felt	as	if	I	too	had	
been	submerged
in	that	dark	water,	and	like	the	poor	souls	of	Vyrnwy	must	keep	my	eyes	wide
open	to	catch	a	faint	glimmer	of	light	far	above	me,	and	see	the	reflection,
broken	by	ripples,	of	the	stone	tower	standing	in	such	fearsome	isolation	on	the
wooded	bank.
	
	
Sometimes	I	even	imagined	that	I	had	seen	one	or	other	of	the	people	from	the
photographs	in	the	album	walking	down	the	road	in	Bala,	or	out	in	the	fields,
particularly	around	noon	on	hot	summer	days,	when	there	was	no	one	else	about
and	the	air	flickered	hazily.	Elias	said	I	was	not	to	speak	of	such	things,	so
instead	I	spent	every	free	moment	I	could	with	Evan	the	cobbler,	whose
workshop	was	not	far	from	the	manse	and	who	had	a	reputation	for	seeing
ghosts.	I	also	learned	Welsh	from	Evan,	picking	it	up	very	quickly,	because	I
liked	his	stories	much	better	than	the	endless	psalms	and	biblical	verses	I	had	to
learn	by	heart	for	Sunday	school.	Unlike	Elias,	who	always	connected	illness
and	
death	with	tribulations,	just	punishment,	and	guilt,	Evan	told	tales	of	the
dead	who	had	been	struck	down	by	fate	untimely,	who	knew	they	had	been
cheated	of	what	was	due	to	them	and	tried	to	return	to	life.	If	you	had	an	eye	for
them	they	were	to	be	seen	quite	often,	said	Evan.	At	first	glance	they	seemed	to
be	normal	people,	but	when	you	looked	more	closely	their	faces	would	blur	or
flicker	slightly	at	the	edges.	And	they	were	usually	a	little	shorter	than	they	had
been	in	life,	for	the	experience	of	death,	said	Evan,	diminishes	us,	just	as	a	piece
of	linen	shrinks	when	you	first	wash	it.	The	dead	almost	always	walked	alone,
but	they	did	sometimes	go	around	in	small	troops;	they	had	been	seen	wearing
brightly	colored	uniforms	or	wrapped	in	gray	cloaks,	marching	up	the	hill	above
the	town	to	the	soft	beat	of	a	drum,	and	only	a	little	taller	than	the	walls	round
the	fields	through	which	they	went.	Evan	told	me	the	story	of	how	his
grandfather	once	had	to	step	aside	on	the	road	from	Frongastell	to	Pyrsau	to	let
one	of	these	ghostly	processions	pass	by	when	it	caught	up	with	him.	It	had
consisted	entirely	of	beings	of	dwarfish	stature	who	strode	on	at	a	fast	pace,
leaning	forward	slightly	and	talking	to	each	other	in	reedy	voices.	Hanging	from
a	hook	on	the	wall	above	Evan’s	low	workbench,	said	Austerlitz,	was	the	black
veil	that	his	grandfather	had	taken	from	the	bier	when	the	small	figures	muffled
in	their	cloaks	carried	it	past	him,	and	it	was	certainly	Evan,	said	Austerlitz,	who
once	told	me	that	nothing	but	a	piece	of	silk	like	that	separates	us	from	the	next
world.	It	is	a	fact	that	through	all	the	years	I	spent	at	the	manse	in	Bala	I	never
shook	off	the	feeling	that	something	very	obvious,	very	manifest	in	itself	was
hidden	from	me.	Sometimes	it	was	as	if	I	were	in	a	dream	and	trying	to	perceive
reality;	then	again	I	felt	as	if	an	invisible	twin	brother	were	
walking	beside	me,
the	reverse	of	a	shadow,	so	to	speak.	And	I	suspected	that	some	meaning	relating
to	myself	lay	behind	the	Bible	stories	I	was	given	to	read	in	Sunday	school	from
my	sixth	year	onwards,	a	meaning	quite	different	from	the	sense	of	the	printed
words	as	I	ran	my	index	finger	along	the	lines.	I	can	still	see	myself,	said
Austerlitz,	muttering	intently	and	spelling	out	the	story	of	Moses	again	and	again
from	the	large-print	children’s	edition	of	the	Bible	Miss	Parry	had	given	me
when	I	had	been	set	to	learn	by	heart	the	chapter	about	the	confounding	of	the
languages	of	the	earth,	and	succeeded	in	reciting	it	correctly	and	with	good
expression.	I	have	only	to	turn	a	couple	of	pages	of	that	book,	said	Austerlitz,	to
remember	how	anxious	I	felt	at	the	time	when	I	read	the	tale	of	the	daughter	of
Levi,	who	made	an	ark	of	bulrushes	and	daubed	it	with	slime	and	with	pitch,
placed	the	child	in	the	ark	and	laid	it	among	the	reeds	by	the	side	of	the	water
—
yn	yr	hesg	ar	fin	yr	afon
,	I	think	that	was	how	it	ran.	Further	on	in	the	story	of
Moses,	said	Austerlitz,	I	particularly	liked	the	episode	where	the	children	of
Israel	cross	a	terrible	wilderness,	many	days’	journey	long	and	wide,	with
nothing	in	sight	but	sky	and	sand	as	far	as	the	eye	can	see.	I	tried	to	picture	the
pillar	of	cloud	going	before	the	people	on	their	wanderings	‘to	lead	them	the
way,’	as	the	Bible	puts	it,	and	I	immersed	myself,	forgetting	all	around	me,	in	a
full-page	illustration	showing	the	desert	of	Sinai	looking	just	like	the	part	of
Wales	where	I	grew	up,	with	bare	mountains	crowding	close	together	and	a
gray-hatched	background,	which	I	took	sometimes	for	the	sea	and	sometimes	for
the	air	above	it.	And	indeed,	said	Austerlitz	on	a	later	occasion	when	he	showed
me	his	Welsh	children’s	Bible,	I	knew	that	my	proper	place	was	among	the	tiny
figures	populating	the	camp.	Ibirthplace,	
examined	every	square	inch	of	the
illustration,	which	seemed	to	me	uncannily	familiar.
	
	
I	thought	I	could	make	out	a	stone	quarry	in	a	rather	lighter	patch	on	the	steep
slope	of	the	mountain	over	to	the	right,	and	I	seemed	to	see	a	railway	track	in	the
regular	curve	of	the	lines	below	it.	But	my	mind	dwelt	chiefly	on	the	fenced
square	in	the	middle	and	the	tent-like	building	at	the	far	end,	with	a	cloud	of
white	smoke	above	it.	Whatever	may	have	been	going	on	inside	me	at	the	time,
the	children	of	Israel’s	camp	in	the	wilderness	was	closer	to	me	than	life	in	Bala,
which	I	found	more	incomprehensible	every	day,	or	at	least,	said	Austerlitz,	that
is	how	it	strikes	me	now.	That	evening	in	the	bar	of	the	Great	Eastern	Hotel
Austerlitz	also	told	me	that	there	was	no	wireless	set	or	newspaper	in	the	manse
in	Bala.	I	don’t	know	that	Elias	and	his	wife,	Gwendolyn,	ever	mentioned	the
fighting	on	the	continent	of	Europe,	he	said.	I	couldn’t	imagine	any	world
outside	Wales.	Only	after	the	end	of	the	war	did	this	state	of	affairs	begin	to
change.	A	new	epoch	seemed	to	dawn	with	the	victory	celebrations,	when	even
in	Bala	there	was	dancing	in	the	streets,	which	were	decked	with	brightly
colored	bunting.	For	me,	it	began	when	I	first	broke	the	ban	on	going	to	the
cinema,	and	after	that	I	used	to	watch	the	newsreel	from	the	cubbyhole	occupied
by	the	film	projectionist	Owen,	one	of	the	three	sons	of	the	visionary	Evan.
Around	the	same	time	Gwendolyn’s	state	of	health	deteriorated,	almost
imperceptibly	at	first	but	then	with	increasing	speed.	She,	who	had	always	kept
everything	in	the	most	painfully	neat	order,	began	to	neglect	first	the	house	and
then	herself.	She	simply	stood	in	the	kitchen,	looking	helpless,	and	when	Elias
prepared	a	meal	as	best	he	could	she	would	eat	almost	nothing.
Her	illness	was	certainly	the	reason	why	I	was	sent	to	a	private	school	near
Oswestry	in	the	autumn	term	of	1946,	when	I	was	twelve	years	old.	Like	most
such	educational	establishments,	Stower	Grange	was	the	most	unsuitable	place
imaginable	for	an	adolescent.	The	headmaster,	a	man	called	Penrith-Smith,	who
wandered	aimlessly	about	the	school	buildings	in	his	dusty	gown	all	day	from
early	morning	until	late	at	night,	was	hopelessly	forgetful	and	absentminded,	and
the	rest	of	the	teaching	staff	in	that	immediate	post-war	period	were	also	a
curious	collection	of	oddities,	most	of	them	over	sixty	or	suffering	from	some
affliction.	School	life	ran	more	or	less	of	its	own	accord,	not	so	much	thanks	to
the	masters	who	taught	us	at	Stower	Grange	as	in	spite	of	them,	and	certainly	not
by	virtue	of	any	particular	ethos	but	through	customs	and	traditions,	a	number	of
them	positively	Oriental	in	character,	going	back	over	many	generations	of
pupils.	There	were	all	kinds	of	forms	of	major	tyranny	and	minor	despotism,
forced	labor,	enslavement,	serfdom,	the	bestowal	and	withdrawal	of	privileges,
hero-worship,	ostracism,	the	imposition	of	penalties	and	the	granting	of
reprieves,	and	by	dint	of	these	the	pupils,	without	any	supervision,	governed
themselves	and	indeed	the	entire	school,	not	excluding	the	masters.	Even	when
Penrith-Smith,	a	remarkably	kindly	man,	did	have	to	chastise	one	of	us	in	his
office	for	some	reason	which	had	been	brought	to	his	notice,	you	could	easily
have	gained	the	impression	that	the	victim	was	temporarily	granting	the	head
master	who	inflicted	the	punishment	a	privilege	due	in	fact	only	to	him,	the	boy
who	had	reported	to	take	it.	Sometimes,	particularly	at	weekends,	it	seemed	as	if
all	the	masters	had	gone	away	leaving	the	pupils	in	their	care	to	their	own
devices	in	the	school,	which	was	at	least	
two	miles	outside	town.	Then	some	of
us	would	wander	about	at	our	own	sweet	will,	while	others	hatched	plots	to
extend	their	power	bases,	or	went	to	the	laboratory	furnished	only	with	a	few
rickety	benches	and	stools	at	the	end	of	the	dark	basement	corridor	known,	for
some	inexplicable	reason,	as	the	Red	Sea,	to	toast	bread	and	make	scrambled
eggs	from	a	sulfur-yellow	powdered	egg	substitute,	a	large	supply	of	which	was
kept	in	one	of	the	wall	cupboards,	along	with	other	substances	intended	for
chemistry	lessons.	Given	the	conditions	at	Stower	Grange,	of	course,	quite	a
number	of	boys	spent	all	their	schooldays	there	in	a	state	of	misery.	For	instance,
said	Austerlitz,	I	remember	a	boy	called	Robinson,	who	was	obviously	so	unable
to	reconcile	himself	to	the	harshness	and	idiosyncrasies	of	school	life	that	at	the
age	of	nine	or	ten	he	tried,	on	several	occasions,	to	run	away	in	the	middle	of	the
night	by	climbing	down	a	drainpipe	and	striking	out	across	country.	A
policeman	always	brought	him	back	next	morning	in	the	check	dressing	gown
which,	curiously,	he	must	have	put	on	especially	for	his	flight,	and	handed	him
over	to	the	headmaster	like	a	common	criminal.	However,	unlike	poor	Robinson,
said	Austerlitz,	I	myself	found	my	years	at	Stower	Grange	a	time	not	of
imprisonment	but	of	liberation.	While	most	of	us,	even	those	who	tormented
their	contemporaries,	crossed	off	the	days	on	the	calendar	until	they	could	go
home,	I	would	have	preferred	never	to	return	to	Bala	at	all.	From	the	very	first
week	I	realized	that	for	all	the	adversities	of	the	school	it	was	my	only	escape
route,	and	I	immediately	did	all	I	could	to	find	my	way	around	its	strange	jumble
of	countless	unwritten	rules,	and	the	often	almost	carnivalesque	lawlessness	that
prevailed.	It	was	a	great	advantage	that	I	soon	began	to	distinguish	myself	on	the
rugby	field,	perhaps	because	
a	dull	pain	always	present	within	me,	although	I
was	unaware	of	it	at	the	time,	enabled	me	to	lower	my	head	and	make	my	way
through	ranks	of	opponents	better	than	any	of	my	fellow	pupils.	The	fearlessness
I	displayed	in	rugger	matches,	as	I	remember	them	always	played	under	a	cold
winter	sky	or	in	pouring	rain,	very	soon	gave	me	special	status	without	my
having	to	try	for	it	by	other	means,	such	as	recruiting	vassals	or	enslaving
weaker	boys.	Another	crucial	factor	in	my	good	progress	at	school	was	the	fact
that	I	never	found	reading	and	studying	a	burden.	Far	from	it,	for	confined	as	I
had	been	until	now	to	the	Bible	in	Welsh	and	homiletic	literature,	it	seemed	as	if
a	new	door	were	opening	whenever	I	turned	a	page.	I	read	everything	in	the
school	library,	which	contained	an	entirely	arbitrary	selection	of	works,	and
everything	I	could	borrow	from	my	teachers—works	on	geography	and	history,
travel	writings,	novels,	biographies—and	sat	up	until	late	in	the	evening	over
reference	books	and	atlases.	My	mind	thus	gradually	created	a	kind	of	ideal
landscape	in	which	the	Arabian	desert,	the	realm	of	the	Aztecs,	the	continent	of
Antarctica,	the	snow-covered	Alps,	the	North-West	Passage,	the	river	Congo,
and	the	Crimean	peninsula	formed	a	single	panorama,	populated	by	all	the
figures	proper	to	those	places.	As	I	could	move	into	that	world	at	any	time	I
liked—in	a	Latin	lesson,	during	divine	service,	on	the	interminable	weekends—I
never	fell	into	the	depression	from	which	so	many	of	the	boys	at	Stower	Grange
suffered.	I	felt	miserable	only	when	it	was	time	to	go	home	for	the	holidays.
Even	on	my	first	return	to	Bala	at	half-term	on	All	Saints’	Day,	I	felt	as	if	my
life	were	once	again	under	the	unlucky	star	which	had	been	my	companion	as
long	as	I	could	remember.	Gwendolyn	had	gone	further	downhill	during	my	two
months’	absence.	She	now	lay	in	bed	all	day	looking	fixedly	up	at	the	ceiling.
Elias	came	in	to	see	her	for	a	while	every	morning	and	every	evening,	but
neither	he	nor	Gwendolyn	spoke	a	single	word.	It	seems	to	me	now,	looking
back,	said	Austerlitz,	as	if	they	were	slowly	being	killed	by	the	chill	in	their
hearts.	I	don’t	know	what	kind	of	illness	Gwendolyn	died	of,	and	I	suspect	that
she	herself	could	not	have	said.	At	least,	she	had	no	weapon	against	it	but	the
curious	compulsion	which	came	over	her	several	times	a	day,	and	perhaps
during	the	night	too,	to	powder	herself	with	a	kind	of	cheap	talc	from	a	large
container	standing	on	the	little	table	beside	her	bed.	Gwendolyn	used	such
quantities	of	this	powder,	fine	as	dust	and	slightly	greasy,	that	the	linoleum	floor
around	her	bed,	and	soon	the	whole	room	and	the	corridors	of	the	upper	story	as
well,	were	covered	with	a	white	layer,	slightly	sticky	because	of	the	damp	air.	I
only	recently	remembered	this	white	pall	over	the	manse,	said	Austerlitz,	when	I
was	reading	the	reminiscences	of	his	childhood	and	youth	by	a	Russian	writer
who	describes	a	similar	mania	for	powder	in	his	grandmother,	a	lady	who,
although	she	spent	most	of	her	time	lying	on	a	sofa	nourishing	herself	almost
exclusively	on	wine	gums	and	almond	milk,	enjoyed	an	iron	constitution	and
always	slept	with	her	window	wide	open,	so	that	once,	after	a	night	of	stormy
weather,	she	woke	up	in	the	morning	under	a	blanket	of	snow	without	coming	to
the	slightest	harm.	However,	it	was	different	in	the	manse.	The	sickroom
windows	were	kept	closed,	and	the	white	powder	which	had	settled	on
everything,	grain	by	grain,	and	through	which	visible	paths	had	now	been
trodden,	was	not	at	all	like	glittering	snow.	Rather,	it	resembled	the	ectoplasm
that,	as	Evan	had	once	told	me,	clairvoyants	can	produce	from	their	mouths	in
great	bubbles	which	then	fall	to	the	ground,	where	they	soon	dry	and	fall	to	dust.
No,	it	was	not	newly	fallen	snow	wafting	around	the	manse;	what	filled	it	was
something	unpleasant,	and	I	did	not	know	where	it	came	from,	only	much	later
and	in	another	book	finding	for	it	the	completely	incomprehensible	but	to	me,
said	Austerlitz,	immediately	enlightening	term	“arsanical	horror.”	It	was	during
the	coldest	winter	in	human	memory	that	I	came	home	for	the	second	time	from
the	school	in	Oswestry,	and	found	Gwendolyn	barely	alive.	There	was	a	coal	fire
smoldering	on	the	hearth	of	her	sickroom.	The	yellowish	smoke	that	rose	from
the	glowing	coals	and	never	entirely	dispersed	up	the	chimney	mingled	with	the
smell	of	carbolic	pervading	the	whole	house.	I	stood	for	hours	at	the	window,
studying	the	wonderful	formations	of	icy	mountain	ranges	two	or	three	inches
high	formed	above	the	crossbars	by	water	running	down	the	panes.	Now	and
then	solitary	figures	emerged	from	the	snowy	landscape	outside.	Wrapped	in
dark	scarves	and	shawls,	umbrellas	open	to	keep	off	the	flurry	of	snowflakes,
they	stumbled	up	the	hill.	I	heard	them	knocking	the	snow	off	their	boots	down
in	the	porch	before	they	slowly	climbed	the	stairs,	escorted	by	the	neighbor’s
daughter	who	was	now	keeping	house	for	the	minister.	With	a	certain	hesitancy,
and	as	if	they	had	to	bend	underneath	something,	they	stepped	over	the	threshold
and	put	whatever	they	had	brought—a	jar	of	pickled	red	cabbage,	a	can	of
corned	beef,	a	bottle	of	rhubarb	wine—down	on	the	chest	of	drawers.
Gwendolyn	took	no	notice	of	these	visitors,	and	the	visitors	themselves	dared
not	look	at	her.	They	usually	stood	at	the	window	with	me	for	a	little	while,
looking	out	too,	and	sometimes	cleared	their	throats	slightly.	When	they	had
gone	again,	it	was	as	quiet	as	before	
except	for	the	shallow	breathing	I	could
hear	behind	me,	and	an	eternity	seemed	to	pass	between	each	breath.	On
Christmas	Day,	making	a	great	effort,	Gwendolyn	sat	up	in	bed	once	more.	Elias
had	brought	her	a	cup	of	sweet	tea,	but	she	only	moistened	her	lips	with	it.	Then
she	said,	so	quietly	that	you	could	hardly	hear	her:	What	was	it	that	so	darkened
our	world?	And	Elias	replied:	I	don’t	know,	dear,	I	don’t	know.	Gwendolyn
lingered	until	the	New	Year.	On	Epiphany	Day,	however,	she	reached	the	final
stage.	The	cold	had	grown	stronger	than	ever	outside,	and	it	had	become	more
and	more	silent.	The	whole	country,	so	I	heard	later,	came	to	a	standstill	that
winter.	Even	Lake	Bala,	which	I	had	thought	as	big	as	the	ocean	when	I	arrived
in	Wales,	was	covered	by	a	thick	sheet	of	ice.	I	thought	of	the	roach	and	eels	in
its	depths,	and	the	birds	which	the	visitors	had	told	me	were	falling	from	the
branches	of	the	trees,	frozen	stiff.	It	was	never	really	light	in	these	days,	and
when	at	last,	very	far	away,	the	sun	shone	faintly	in	the	misty	blue	sky,	the	dying
woman	opened	her	eyes	wide	and	would	not	move	her	glance	from	the	weak
light	filtering	through	the	windowpanes.	Only	when	darkness	fell	did	she	lower
her	lids,	and	not	long	after	that	a	gurgling	sound	began	to	emerge	from	her	throat
with	every	breath	she	took.	I	sat	beside	her	all	night,	together	with	the	minister.
At	dawn	the	stertorous	breathing	stopped.	Gwendolyn’s	body	arched	slightly	and
then	sank	back	again.	It	was	a	kind	of	tensing	movement;	I	had	felt	it	once
before,	when	I	picked	up	an	injured	rabbit	from	the	headland	of	a	field,	and	its
heart	stopped	in	my	hand	for	fear.	But	directly	after	she	had	arched	herself	in
death	Gwendolyn’s	body	seemed	to	shrink	a	little,	reminding	me	of	what	Evan
had	told	me.	I	saw	her	eyes	sink	back	in	their	sockets,	and	her	thin	lips,	now
stretched	
tautly	back,	half-bared	her	crooked	bottom	teeth,	while	outside,	for	the
first	time	in	many	days,	the	rose-colored	light	of	dawn	touched	the	rooftops	of
Bala.	I	don’t	remember	exactly	how	the	rest	of	that	day	passed	after	she	died,
said	Austerlitz.	I	think	I	was	so	exhausted	that	I	lay	down	and	slept	very	deeply
for	a	very	long	time.	When	I	got	up	again,	Gwendolyn	was	already	in	her	coffin,
which	stood	on	the	four	mahogany	chairs	in	the	front	room.	She	was	wearing	her
wedding	dress,	kept	all	these	years	in	a	trunk	upstairs,	and	a	pair	of	white	gloves
with	a	great	many	little	mother-of-pearl	buttons	which	I	had	never	seen	before.
The	sight	of	them	brought	tears	into	my	eyes,	the	first	tears	I	had	ever	shed	in	the
manse.	Elias	was	sitting	beside	the	coffin	keeping	watch	over	the	dead	woman,
while	on	his	own	out	in	the	empty	barn,	which	creaked	with	the	frost,	the	young
assistant	minister	who	had	ridden	over	from	Corwen	on	a	pony	was	rehearsing
the	sermon	he	would	preach	on	the	day	of	the	funeral.	Elias	never	recovered
from	his	wife’s	death.	
Grief
	is	not	the	right	word	for	the	condition	into	which	he
had	fallen	since	she	lay	dying,	said	Austerlitz.	Although	I	did	not	understand	it	at
the	time,	as	a	boy	of	thirteen,	I	can	see	now	that	the	unhappiness	building	up
inside	him	had	destroyed	his	faith	just	when	he	needed	it	most.	When	I	came
home	again	in	the	summer,	it	was	weeks	since	he	had	been	able	to	carry	out	his
duties	as	a	minister.	He	climbed	into	the	pulpit	once	more,	opened	the	Bible,	and
in	a	broken	voice,	as	if	reading	to	himself	alone,	announced	his	text	from
Lamentations:	‘He	has	made	me	dwell	in	darkness	as	those	who	have	been	long
dead.’	Elias	did	not	preach	the	sermon	itself.	He	merely	stood	there	for	a	while,
looking	out	over	the	heads	of	his	congregation,	who	were	paralyzed	by	alarm,
with	what	seemed	to	me	the	motionless	eyes	
of	one	blinded.	Then	he	slowly
climbed	down	from	the	pulpit	and	left	the	chapel.	He	was	taken	away	to
Denbigh	before	the	end	of	that	summer.	I	visited	him	there	only	once,	just	before
Christmas,	with	one	of	the	elders	of	the	congregation.	The	patients	were
accommodated	in	a	large	stone	building,	and	I	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	that
we	had	to	wait	in	a	room	painted	green.	After	quarter	of	an	hour	or	so,	an
attendant	came	and	took	us	up	to	Elias,	who	was	lying	in	a	bed	with	railings,	his
face	to	the	wall.	The	attendant	said:	Your	son’s	here	to	see	you,	
parech
,	but	even
when	he	was	addressed	a	second	and	a	third	time	Elias	did	not	answer.	When	we
left	the	ward	again	one	of	the	other	inmates,	a	gray	little	man	with	tangled	hair,
plucked	my	sleeve	and	whispered	behind	his	hand:	He’s	not	the	full	shilling,	you
know—which	at	the	time,	curiously	enough,	said	Austerlitz,	I	felt	was	a
reassuring	diagnosis	and	made	the	whole	wretched	situation	tolerable.—More
than	a	year	after	my	visit	to	the	Denbigh	asylum,	at	the	beginning	of	the	summer
term	of	1949,	when	we	were	just	preparing	for	the	exams	which	would
determine	our	subsequent	careers,	said	Austerlitz,	resuming	his	narrative	after	a
certain	time,	the	headmaster	Penrith-Smith	summoned	me	to	his	study	one
morning.	I	can	still	see	him	in	his	frayed	gown,	wreathed	in	the	blue	tobacco
smoke	from	his	pipe,	standing	in	the	sunlight	that	slanted	in	through	the	small
panes	of	the	lead-glazed	window	and	repeating	several	times	in	various	ways,	in
his	typically	confused	manner,	that	in	the	circumstances	my	conduct	had	been
exemplary,	truly	exemplary,	given	the	events	of	the	last	two	years,	and	if	in	the
next	few	weeks	I	came	up	to	my	teachers’	expectations	of	me,	which	were
undoubtedly	justified,	the	Stower	Grange	trustees	would	award	me	a	sixth-form
scholarship.	First,	
however,	it	was	his	duty	to	tell	me	that	I	must	put	not	Dafydd
Elias	but	Jacques	Austerlitz	on	my	exam	papers.	It	appears,	said	Penrith-Smith,
that	this	is	your	real	name.	My	foster	parents,	with	whom	he	had	discussed	the
matter	at	length	when	I	entered	the	school,	had	meant	to	tell	me	about	my	origins
in	good	time	before	the	examinations,	and	if	possible	adopt	me,	but	as	matters
now	stood,	said	Penrith-Smith,	that	was	unfortunately	out	of	the	question.	All	he
knew	himself	was	that	the	Eliases	had	taken	me	into	their	house	at	the	beginning
of	the	war,	when	I	was	only	a	little	boy,	so	he	could	tell	me	no	more.	He	was
sure	it	would	all	be	settled	once	Elias’s	condition	improved.	As	far	as	the	other
boys	are	concerned,	said	Penrith-Smith,	you	remain	Dafydd	Elias	for	the	time
being.	There’s	no	need	to	let	anyone	know.	It’s	just	that	you	will	have	to	put
Jacques	Austerlitz	on	your	examination	papers	or	else	your	work	may	be
considered	invalid.	Penrith-Smith	had	written	the	name	on	a	piece	of	paper,	and
when	he	handed	it	to	me	I	could	think	of	nothing	to	say,	said	Austerlitz,	but
“Thank	you,	sir.”	At	first,	what	disconcerted	me	most	was	that	I	could	connect
no	ideas	at	all	with	the	word	
Austerlitz
.	If	my	new	name	had	been	Morgan	or
Jones,	I	could	have	related	it	to	reality.	I	even	knew	the	name	
Jacques
	from	a
French	nursery	rhyme.	But	I	had	never	heard	of	an	Austerlitz	before,	and	from
the	first	I	was	convinced	that	no	one	else	bore	that	name,	no	one	in	Wales,	or	in
the	Isles,	or	anywhere	else	in	the	world.	And	since	I	began	investigating	my	own
history	some	years	ago,	I	have	never	in	fact	come	upon	another	Austerlitz,	not	in
the	telephone	books	of	London	or	Paris,	Amsterdam	or	Antwerp.	But	not	long
ago,	turning	on	the	wireless,	I	happened	upon	an	announcer	saying	that	Fred
Astaire,	of	whom	I	had	previously	known	nothing	at	all,	was	born	with	
the
surname	of	Austerlitz.	Astaire’s	father,	who	according	to	this	surprising	radio
program	came	from	Vienna,	had	worked	as	a	master	brewer	in	Omaha,
Nebraska,	where	Astaire	was	born,	and	from	the	veranda	of	the	Austerlitz
family’s	house	you	could	hear	freight	trains	being	shunted	back	and	forth	in	the
city’s	marshaling	yard.	Astaire	is	reported	to	have	said	later	that	this	constant,
uninterrupted	shunting	sound,	and	the	ideas	it	suggested	of	going	on	a	long
railroad	journey,	were	his	only	early	childhood	memories.	And	just	a	couple	of
days	after	I	chanced	in	this	way	upon	the	story	of	a	man	entirely	unknown	to	me,
Austerlitz	added,	a	neighbor	who	describes	herself	as	a	passionate	reader	told	me
that	in	Kafka’s	diaries	she	had	found	a	small,	bow-legged	man	of	my	own	name
who,	as	Kafka	recorded,	had	been	called	in	to	circumcise	his	nephew.	I	feel	it	is
unlikely	that	these	trails	lead	anywhere,	nor	do	I	entertain	any	hopes	of	a	note	I
found	some	time	ago	in	a	file	on	the	practice	of	euthanasia,	mentioning	one
Laura	Austerlitz	who	made	a	statement	to	an	Italian	investigating	judge	on	28
June	1966	about	the	crimes	committed	in	a	rice	mill	on	the	peninsula	of	San
Saba	near	Trieste	in	1944.	At	least,	said	Austerlitz,	I	haven’t	yet	succeeded	in
tracking	down	this	namesake	of	mine.	I	don’t	even	know	if	she	is	still	alive,
thirty	years	after	making	her	statement.	But	personally,	as	I	was	saying,	I	had
never	heard	the	name	Austerlitz	before	that	April	day	in	1949	when	Penrith-
Smith	handed	me	the	piece	of	paper	on	which	he	had	written	it.	I	couldn’t	work
out	the	spelling,	and	read	the	strange	term	which	sounded	to	me	like	some
password	three	or	four	times,	syllable	by	syllable,	before	I	looked	up	and	said:
Excuse	me,	sir,	but	what	does	it	mean?	To	which	Penrith-Smith	replied:	I	think
you	will	find	it	is	a	small	place	in	Moravia,	site	of	a	famous	battle,	you	
know.
And	sure	enough,	the	Moravian	village	of	Austerlitz	was	discussed	at	great
length	during	the	next	school	year,	for	the	curriculum	in	the	Lower	Sixth
included	European	history,	generally	regarded	as	a	complicated	and	not	entirely
safe	subject,	so	that	as	a	rule	it	was	confined	to	the	period	from	1789	to	1814
which	ended	with	a	great	English	victory.	The	master	who	was	to	teach	us	this
period—both	glorious	and	terrible,	as	he	often	emphasized—was	one	André
Hilary,	who	had	only	just	taken	up	his	post	at	Stower	Grange	after	being
demobbed	and	who,	as	it	soon	turned	out,	was	familiar	with	every	detail	of	the
Napoleonic	era.	André	Hilary	had	studied	at	Oriel	College,	but	had	grown	up
surrounded	by	an	enthusiasm	for	Napoleon	going	back	through	several
generations	of	his	family.	His	father,	so	he	once	told	me,	said	Austerlitz,	had	him
baptized	André	in	memory	of	Marshal	Masséna,	Duke	of	Rivoli.	Hilary	could
trace	the	orbit	of	the	Corsican	comet,	as	he	put	it,	across	the	sky	from	its	very
beginning	to	its	extinction	in	the	South	Atlantic	Ocean,	enumerating	all	the
constellations	through	which	it	passed,	and	the	events	and	characters	on	which	it
cast	light	at	any	point	of	its	ascendancy	or	decline,	speaking	without	any
preparation	and	just	as	if	he	had	been	there	himself.	The	Emperor’s	childhood	in
Ajaccio,	his	studies	at	the	military	academy	of	Brienne,	the	siege	of	Toulon,	the
stresses	and	strains	of	the	Egyptian	expedition	and	his	return	over	a	sea	full	of
enemy	ships,	the	crossing	of	the	Great	St.	Bernard,	the	battles	of	Marengo,	Jena
and	Auerstedt,	of	Eylau	and	Friedland,	of	Wagram,	Leipzig,	and	Waterloo—
Hilary	brought	it	all	vividly	to	life	for	us,	partly	by	recounting	the	course	of
these	events,	often	passing	from	plain	narrative	to	dramatic	descriptions	and	then
on	to	a	kind	of	impromptu	performance	distributed	among	several	
different
roles,	from	one	to	another	of	which	he	switched	back	and	forth	with	astonishing
virtuosity,	and	partly	by	studying	the	gambits	of	Napoleon	and	his	opponents
with	the	cold	intelligence	of	a	nonpartisan	strategist,	surveying	the	entire
landscape	of	those	years	from	above	with	an	eagle	eye,	as	he	once	and	not
without	pride	remarked.	Most	of	us	were	deeply	impressed	by	Hilary’s	history
lessons,	not	least,	said	Austerlitz,	because	very	often,	probably	owing	to	his
suffering	from	slipped	disks,	he	gave	them	while	lying	on	his	back	on	the	floor,
nor	did	we	find	this	at	all	comic,	for	it	was	at	such	times	that	Hilary	spoke	with
particular	clarity	and	authority.	His	undoubted	
pièce	de	résistance
	was	the	battle
of	Austerlitz.	He	spoke	on	it	at	length,	describing	the	terrain,	the	highway
leading	east	from	Brünn	to	Olmütz,	with	the	hilly	Moravian	countryside	on	its
left	and	the	Pratzen	heights	on	its	right,	the	curious	cone-shaped	mountain	which
reminded	the	veterans	in	the	Napoleonic	army	of	the	Egyptian	pyramids,	the
villages	of	Bellwitz,	Skolnitz,	and	Kobelnitz,	the	game	park	and	pheasant
enclosure,	the	watercourse	of	the	Goldbach	and	the	pools	and	lakes	to	the	south,
the	French	encampment	as	well	as	that	of	the	ninety	thousand	Allies,	which
extended	over	a	length	of	nine	miles.	Hilary	told	us,	said	Austerlitz,	how	at
seven	in	the	morning	the	peaks	of	the	highest	hills	emerged	from	the	mist	like
islands	in	a	sea	and,	as	the	day	gradually	grew	brighter	over	the	rounded	hilltops,
the	milky	haze	in	the	valleys	became	noticeably	denser.	The	Russian	and
Austrian	troops	had	come	down	from	the	mountainsides	like	a	slow	avalanche,
and	soon,	increasingly	unsure	where	they	were	going,	were	wandering	around	on
the	slopes	and	in	the	meadows	below,	while	the	French,	in	a	single	onslaught,
captured	the	now	half-abandoned	positions	on	the	
Pratzen	heights	and	then
proceeded	to	attack	the	enemy	in	the	rear	from	that	vantage	point.	Hilary	painted
us	a	picture	of	the	disposition	of	the	regiments	in	their	white	and	red,	green	and
blue	uniforms,	constantly	forming	into	new	patterns	in	the	course	of	the	battle
like	crystals	of	glass	in	a	kaleidoscope.	Again	and	again	we	heard	the	names	of
Kolovrat	and	Bragation,	Kutuzov,	Bernadotte,	Miloradovich,	Soult,	Murat,
Vandamme,	and	Kellermann,	we	saw	the	black	clouds	of	smoke	hovering	over
the	guns,	the	cannonballs	flying	past	above	the	heads	of	the	troops,	the	glint	of
bayonets	as	the	first	rays	of	the	sun	penetrated	the	mist;	we	even	seemed	to	hear
the	heavy	cavalry	clashing,	and	felt	(like	a	weakness	sensed	in	our	own	bodies)
whole	ranks	of	men	collapsing	beneath	the	surge	of	the	oncoming	force.	Hilary
could	talk	for	hours	about	the	second	of	December	1805,	but	nonetheless	it	was
his	opinion	that	he	had	to	cut	his	accounts	far	too	short,	because,	as	he	several
times	told	us,	it	would	take	an	endless	length	of	time	to	describe	the	events	of
such	a	day	properly,	in	some	inconceivably	complex	form	recording	who	had
perished,	who	survived,	and	exactly	where	and	how,	or	simply	saying	what	the
battlefield	was	like	at	nightfall,	with	the	screams	and	groans	of	the	wounded	and
dying.	In	the	end	all	anyone	could	ever	do	was	sum	up	the	unknown	factors	in
the	ridiculous	phrase,	“The	fortunes	of	battle	swayed	this	way	and	that,”	or	some
similarly	feeble	and	useless	cliché.	All	of	us,	even	when	we	think	we	have	noted
every	tiny	detail,	resort	to	set	pieces	which	have	already	been	staged	often
enough	by	others.	We	try	to	reproduce	the	reality,	but	the	harder	we	try,	the
more	we	find	the	pictures	that	make	up	the	stock-in-trade	of	the	spectacle	of
history	forcing	themselves	upon	us:	the	fallen	drummer	boy,	the	infantryman
shown	in	the	act	of	stabbing	another,	the	horse’s	eye	starting	from	its	socket,	the
invulnerable	Emperor	surrounded	by	his	generals,	a	moment	frozen	still	amidst
the	turmoil	of	battle.	Our	concern	with	history,	so	Hilary’s	thesis	ran,	is	a
concern	with	preformed	images	already	imprinted	on	our	brains,	images	at
which	we	keep	staring	while	the	truth	lies	elsewhere,	away	from	it	all,
somewhere	as	yet	undiscovered.	I	myself,	added	Austerlitz,	in	spite	of	all	the
accounts	of	it	I	have	read,	remember	only	the	picture	of	the	final	defeat	of	the
Allies	in	the	battle	of	the	Three	Emperors.	Every	attempt	to	understand	the
course	of	events	inevitably	turns	into	that	one	scene	where	the	hosts	of	Russian
and	Austrian	soldiers	are	fleeing	on	foot	and	horseback	on	to	the	frozen	Satschen
ponds.	I	see	cannonballs	suspended	for	an	eternity	in	the	air,	I	see	others
crashing	into	the	ice,	I	see	the	unfortunate	victims	flinging	up	their	arms	as	they
slide	from	the	toppling	floes,	and	I	see	them,	strangely,	not	with	my	own	eyes
but	with	those	of	shortsighted	Marshal	Davout,	who	has	made	a	forced	march
with	his	regiments	from	Vienna	and,	glasses	tied	firmly	behind	his	head	with
two	laces,	looks	like	an	early	motorist	or	aviator.	When	I	look	back	at	André
Hilary’s	performances	today,	said	Austerlitz,	I	remember	once	again	the	idea	I
developed	at	the	time	of	being	linked	in	some	mysterious	way	to	the	glorious
past	of	the	people	of	France.	The	more	often	Hilary	mentioned	the	word
Austerlitz
	in	front	of	the	class,	the	more	it	really	did	become	my	own	name,	and
the	more	clearly	I	thought	I	saw	that	what	had	at	first	seemed	like	an
ignominious	flaw	was	changing	into	a	bright	light	always	hovering	before	me,	as
promising	as	the	sun	of	Austerlitz	itself	when	it	rose	above	the	December	mists.
All	that	school	year	I	felt	as	if	I	had	been	chosen,	and	although,	as	I	also	knew,
such	a	belief	
in	no	way	matched	my	uncertain	status,	I	have	held	fast	to	it	almost
my	whole	life.	I	don’t	think	that	any	of	my	fellow	pupils	at	Stower	Grange	knew
my	new	name,	and	the	masters,	who	had	been	informed	of	my	double	identity	by
Penrith-Smith,	went	on	calling	me	Elias	too.	André	Hilary	was	the	only	one	to
whom	I	myself	told	my	real	name.	It	was	soon	after	we	had	handed	in	an	essay
on	the	concepts	of	empire	and	nation	that	Hilary	summoned	me	to	his	study
outside	regular	school	hours	to	return	my	work,	which	he	had	marked	with	a
triple-starred	
A
,	giving	it	back	in	person	and	not,	as	he	put	it,	along	with
everyone	else’s	pathetic	efforts.	He	himself	had	published	various	articles	in
historical	journals,	and	he	said	he	could	not	have	written	such	a	perceptive	piece
in	so	comparatively	short	a	space	of	time;	he	wondered	whether	I	had	perhaps
been	initiated	into	historical	studies	at	home	by	my	father	or	an	elder	brother.
When	I	answered	Hilary’s	question	I	had	some	difficulty	in	not	losing	my
command	over	myself,	and	it	was	in	this	situation,	which	I	felt	I	could	no	longer
endure,	that	I	told	him	the	secret	of	my	real	name.	It	was	some	time	before	he
was	able	to	calm	down.	He	struck	his	forehead	again	and	again,	breaking	into
exclamations	of	astonishment,	as	if	Providence	had	finally	sent	him	the	pupil	he
had	always	wanted.	For	the	rest	of	my	time	at	Stower	Grange,	Hilary	supported
and	encouraged	me	in	every	possible	way.	I	owe	it	to	him	first	and	foremost,
said	Austerlitz,	that	I	far	outstripped	the	rest	of	my	year	in	our	final
examinations	in	history,	Latin,	German,	and	French,	and	could	go	on	my	own
way	into	freedom,	as	I	confidently	thought	at	the	time,	provided	with	a	generous
scholarship.	When	we	said	goodbye	André	Hilary	gave	me	a	present	from	his
collection	of	Napoleonic	memorabilia,	a	gold-framed	piece	of	dark	
card	on
which,	behind	shining	glass,	were	fixed	three	rather	fragile	willow	leaves	from	a
tree	on	the	island	of	St.	Helena,	along	with	a	scrap	of	lichen	resembling	a	pale
sprig	of	coral	taken	by	one	of	Hilary’s	forebears,	as	the	tiny	caption	said,	from
the	heavy	granite	tombstone	of	Marshal	Ney	on	31	July	1830.
	
This	memento,	worth	nothing	in	itself,	is	still	in	my	possession,	said	Austerlitz.
It	means	more	to	me	than	almost	any	other	picture,	first	because	despite	their
fragility	the	relics	preserved	in	it,	the	lichen	and	the	dried	lanceolate	willow
leaves,	have	remained	intact	for	more	than	a	century,	but	also	because	it	reminds
me	daily	of	Hilary,	without	whom	I	would	surely	never	have	been	able	to
emerge	from	the	shadows	of	the	manse	in	Bala.	Moreover,	it	was	Hilary	who,
after	my	foster	father’s	death	in	the	Denbigh	asylum	early	in	1954,	undertook	the
task	of	winding	up	his	meager	estate	and	then	set	on	foot	the	process	of	my
naturalization,	which	in	view	of	the	fact	that	Elias	had	obliterated	every
indication	of	my	origin	involved	a	good	deal	of	difficulty.	When	I	was	studying
at	Oriel,	like	Hilary	himself	before	me,	he	visited	me	regularly,	and	we	took
every	opportunity	of	making	excursions	to	the	deserted	and	dilapidated	country
houses	to	be	found	all	around	Oxford,	as	elsewhere,	in	the	postwar	years.
While	I	was	still	at	school,	said	Austerlitz,	as	well	as	Hilary’s	support	my
friendship	with	Gerald	Fitzpatrick	in	particular	helped	me	to	overcome	the	self-
doubts	that	sometimes	oppressed	me.	In	line	with	the	usual	practice	at	public
schools,	Gerald	was	assigned	to	me	as	a	fag	when	I	entered	the	sixth	form.	It	was
his	job	to	keep	my	room	tidy,	clean	my	boots,	and	bring	the	tray	with	the	tea
things.	From	the	first	day,	when	he	asked	me	for	one	of	the	new	photographs	of
the	rugger	team	where	I	featured	
to	the	extreme	right	of	the	front	row,	I	realized
that	Gerald	felt	as	isolated	as	I	did,	said	Austerlitz,	who	scarcely	a	week	after	our
reunion	at	the	Great	Eastern	Hotel	sent	me	a	postcard	copy	of	the	picture	he	had
mentioned,	without	further	comment.	On	that	December	evening,	however,	in
the	hotel	bar,	which	was	quiet	now,	Austerlitz	went	on	to	tell	me	more	about
Gerald,	and	how	he	had	suffered	from	awful	homesickness	ever	since	his	arrival
at	Stower	Grange,	entirely	against	the	grain	of	his	naturally	cheerful	disposition.
	
	
All	the	time,	said	Austerlitz,	in	every	free	moment	he	had,	he	was	rearranging
the	things	he	had	brought	from	home	in	his	tuck	box,	and	once,	not	long	after	he
became	my	fag,	I	found	him	at	the	end	of	a	corridor	one	dreary	Saturday
afternoon,	with	the	autumn	rain	pouring	down	outside,	trying	to	set	fire	to	a	pile
of	newspapers	stacked	on	the	stone	floor	beside	the	open	door	which	led	into	a
back	yard.	I	saw	his	small,	crouched	figure	in	the	gray	light	behind	him,	and	the
little	flames	licking	around	the	edges	of	the	newspaper,	but	the	fire	would	not
burn	properly.	When	I	asked	what	he	thought	he	was	doing,	he	said	he	wanted	to
make	a	huge	blaze,	and	would	not	mind	if	the	whole	school	were	reduced	to	a
pile	of	rubble	and	ashes.	After	that	I	kept	an	eye	on	Gerald.	I	let	him	off	tidying
my	room	and	cleaning	my	boots,	and	I	made	the	tea	myself	and	shared	it	with
him,	a	breach	of	regulations	regarded	with	disapproval	by	most	of	my	fellow
pupils	and	my	housemaster	himself,	rather	as	if	it	were	against	the	natural	order
of	things.	In	the	evenings	Gerald	often	accompanied	me	to	the	darkroom	where,
at	this	time,	I	was	making	my	first	experiments	with	photography.	This	little
cubbyhole	behind	the	chemistry	lab	had	not	been	used	for	years,	but	the	wall
cupboards	and	drawers	still	held	several	boxes	with	rolls	of	film,	a	large	supply
of	photographic	paper,	and	a	miscellaneous	collection	of	cameras,	including	an
Ensign	such	as	I	myself	owned	later.	From	the	outset	my	main	concern	was	with
the	shape	and	the	self-contained	
nature	of	discrete	things,	the	curve	of	banisters
on	a	staircase,	the	molding	of	a	stone	arch	over	a	gateway,	the	tangled	precision
of	the	blades	in	a	tussock	of	dried	grass.
	
	
I	took	hundreds	of	such	photographs	at	Stower	Grange,	most	of	them	in	square
format,	but	it	never	seemed	to	me	right	to	turn	the	viewfinder	of	my	camera	on
people.	In	my	photographic	work	I	was	always	especially	entranced,	said
Austerlitz,	by	the	moment	when	the	shadows	of	reality,	so	to	speak,	emerge	out
of	nothing	on	the	exposed	paper,	as	memories	do	in	the	middle	of	the	night,
darkening	again	if	you	try	to	cling	to	them,	just	like	a	photographic	print	left	in
the	developing	bath	too	long.	Gerald	enjoyed	helping	me,	and	I	can	still	see	him,
a	head	shorter	than	I	was,	standing	beside	me	in	the	darkroom,	which	was	dimly
illuminated	only	by	the	little	reddish	light,	holding	the	photographs	in	tweezers
and	swishing	them	back	and	forth	in	a	sink	full	of	water.	He	often	told	me	about
his	family	on	these	occasions,	and	most	of	all	he	liked	talking	about	the	three
homing	pigeons	who	would	be	expecting	his	return,	he	thought,	as	eagerly	as	he
usually	awaited	theirs.	Gerald’s	Uncle	Alphonso	had	given	him	these	pigeons	a
year	ago	for	his	tenth	birthday,	said	Austerlitz,	two	of	them	a	slaty	blue,	one
snow-white.	Whenever	possible,	if	someone	was	going	to	Bala	or	Aberystwyth
by	car,	he	would	send	his	three	pigeons	to	be	freed	at	a	distance,	and	they	always
infallibly	found	their	way	back	to	their	loft.	Once,	towards	the	end	of	last
summer,	Tilly	the	white	pigeon	did	stay	away	much	longer	than	the	homeward
flight	should	have	taken	her,	after	being	dispatched	on	a	test	flight	from
Dolgellau	only	a	few	miles	up	the	valley,	and	it	was	not	until	the	following	day,
when	he	was	on	the	point	of	giving	up	hope,	that	she	finally	returned—on	foot,
walking	up	the	gravel	drive	with	a	
broken	wing.	I	often	thought	later	of	this	tale
of	the	bird	making	her	long	journey	home	alone,	wondering	how	she	had
managed	to	reach	her	destination	over	the	steep	terrain,	circumventing	numerous
obstacles,	and	that	question,	said	Austerlitz,	a	question	which	still	exercises	my
mind	today	when	I	see	a	pigeon	in	flight,	is	one	that,	against	all	reason,	seems	to
me	connected	with	the	way	Gerald	finally	lost	his	life.—I	believe,	Austerlitz
went	on	after	some	considerable	time,	it	was	on	the	second	or	third	parents’
visiting	day	that	Gerald,	proud	of	his	privileged	relationship	with	me,	introduced
me	to	his	mother,	Adela.	She	can	hardly	have	been	thirty	at	the	time,	and	she
was	very	glad	that	after	his	initial	difficulties	her	young	son	had	found	a
protector	in	me.	Gerald	had	already	told	me	about	his	father,	Aldous,	shot	down
over	the	Ardennes	in	the	last	winter	of	the	war,	and	I	had	also	heard	how	his
mother	was	now	living	with	only	an	old	uncle	and	an	even	older	great-uncle	in	a
country	house	just	outside	the	small	seaside	town	of	Barmouth.	Gerald	claimed
that	its	position	was	the	finest	anywhere	along	the	entire	Welsh	coast.	Once
Adela	had	discovered	from	Gerald	that	I	had	no	parents	or	any	family	at	all,	I
was	invited	to	their	house	repeatedly,	indeed	constantly,	even	when	I	was	doing
my	national	service	and	when	I	was	up	at	Oxford,	and	I	could	wish	now,	said
Austerlitz,	to	have	vanished	without	trace	in	the	peace	that	always	reigned	there.
At	the	very	beginning	of	the	school	holidays,	when	we	traveled	westward	up	the
Dee	valley	in	the	little	steam	train	from	Wrexham,	I	would	feel	my	heart	begin
to	lift.	Bend	after	bend,	our	train	followed	the	winding	of	the	river,	the	green
meadows	looked	in	through	the	open	carriage	window,	and	so	did	the	houses,
stony	gray	or	whitewashed,	the	gleaming	slate	roofs,	the	silver	shades	of	the
willows,	the	darker	
alder	woods,	the	sheep	pastures	climbing	up	beyond	the
trees,	and	higher	still	the	mountains,	sometimes	tinged	with	blue,	and	the	sky
where	the	clouds,	coming	in	from	the	sea,	always	drove	eastwards.	Scraps	of
steam	vapor	flew	past	outside;	you	could	hear	the	engine	whistling	and	feel	the
air	cool	on	your	forehead.	Never	have	I	traveled	better,	said	Austerlitz,	than	on
this	journey	of	seventy	miles	at	the	most,	which	took	us	three	and	a	half	hours.
When	we	stopped	at	Bala,	the	halfway	station,	of	course	I	could	not	help
thinking	back	to	my	time	in	the	manse,	visible	up	there	on	its	hill,	yet	it	always
seemed	to	me	inconceivable	that	I	had	really	been	among	its	unhappy	inhabitants
for	almost	the	whole	of	my	life.	And	every	time	I	set	eyes	on	Lake	Bala,
particularly	when	its	surface	was	churned	up	by	the	wind	in	winter,	I
remembered	the	story	Evan	the	cobbler	had	told	me,	about	the	two	headstreams
of	Dwy	Fawr	and	Dwy	Fach	which	are	said	to	flow	right	through	the	lake,	far
down	in	its	dark	depths,	never	mingling	their	waters	with	its	own.	The	two
rivers,	according	to	Evan,	said	Austerlitz,	were	called	after	the	only	human
beings	not	drowned	but	saved	from	the	biblical	deluge	in	the	distant	past.	At	the
far	end	of	Lake	Bala	the	railway	line	passed	over	a	low	anticline	into	the	Afon
Mawddach	valley.	The	mountains	were	higher	now,	coming	down	closer	and
closer	to	the	tracks	until	you	reached	Dolgellau,	where	they	retreated	again,	and
gentler	slopes	fell	to	the	estuary	of	the	Mawddach,	which	reaches	far	inland	like
a	fjord.	Finally,	when	we	left	the	southern	bank	and	crawled	to	the	opposite	side
over	the	bridge,	almost	a	mile	long	and	supported	on	mighty	posts	of	oak,	on	our
right	the	riverbed,	inundated	by	the	sea	at	high	tide	and	looking	like	a	mountain
lake,	and	on	our	left	Barmouth	Bay	stretching	to	the	bright	horizon,	I	felt	
so
joyful	that	I	often	scarcely	knew	where	to	look	first.	Adela	used	to	fetch	us	from
Barmouth	station,	usually	in	the	little	black-painted	pony	trap,	and	then	it	was
only	half	an	hour	before	the	gravel	of	the	drive	up	to	Andromeda	Lodge	was
crunching	under	our	wheels,	the	bay	pony	stopped,	and	we	could	get	down	and
enter	into	our	holiday	refuge.	The	two-story	house,	built	of	pale	gray	brick,	was
protected	to	the	north	and	northeast	by	the	Llawr	Llech	hills,	which	fall	steeply
away	at	this	point.	To	the	southwest	the	terrain	lay	open	in	a	wide	semicircle,	so
that	from	the	forecourt	of	the	house	you	had	a	view	of	the	full	length	of	the
estuary	from	Dolgellau	to	Barmouth,	while	these	places	themselves	were
excluded	from	the	panorama,	which	was	almost	devoid	of	human	habitations,	by
a	rocky	outcrop	on	one	side	and	a	laurel-grown	hill	on	the	other.	Only	on	the	far
side	of	the	river	could	the	little	village	of	Arthog	be	seen—in	certain
atmospheric	conditions,	said	Austerlitz,	you	might	have	thought	it	an	eternity
away—infinitesimally	small,	with	the	shadowy	side	of	Cader	Idris	rising	behind
it	to	a	height	of	almost	three	thousand	feet	above	the	shimmering	sea.	While	the
climate	of	the	entire	area	was	remarkably	mild,	temperatures	in	this	especially
favored	place	were	a	couple	of	degrees	higher	even	than	the	Barmouth	average.
The	garden,	which	had	run	completely	wild	during	the	war	years	and	went	up
the	slope	at	the	back	of	the	house,	contained	plants	and	shrubs	that	I	had	never
seen	in	Wales	before:	giant	rhubarb	and	New	Zealand	ferns	taller	than	a	grown
man,	water	lettuce	and	camellias,	thickets	of	bamboo	and	palms.	And	a	brook
tumbled	down	over	a	rocky	wall	to	the	valley,	its	white	spray	constantly
pervading	the	dappled	twilight	under	the	leafy	canopy	of	the	tall	trees.	But	it	was
not	only	the	plants,	natives	of	warmer	climates,	that	
made	you	feel	you	were
living	in	another	world:	the	greatest	exotic	attractions	of	Andromeda	Lodge	were
the	white	cockatoos	which	flew	all	around	the	house	within	a	radius	of	up	to	two
or	three	miles,	calling	from	the	bushes,	bathing	and	luxuriating	in	the	fine	spray
from	the	cascading	brook	until	evening	fell.	Gerald’s	great-grandfather	had
brought	several	pairs	home	from	the	Moluccas	and	established	them	in	the
orangery,	where	they	soon	increased	and	multiplied,	forming	a	large	colony.
They	lived	in	small	sherry	casks	that	had	been	stacked	on	top	of	each	other	in	a
pyramid	against	one	of	the	side	walls,	and	departing	from	their	native	custom,
said	Austerlitz,	they	had	lined	these	casks	themselves	with	wood	shavings	from
a	sawmill	down	beside	the	river.	Most	of	them	even	survived	the	hard	winter	of
1947,	since	Adela	kept	the	old	orangery	stove	heated	for	them	through	the	two
icy	months	of	January	and	February.	It	was	wonderful,	said	Austerlitz,	to	see	the
dexterity	with	which	the	birds	clambered	around	the	trelliswork,	hanging	on	by
their	beaks,	and	performing	all	kinds	of	acrobatic	feats	as	they	came	down;	to
watch	them	flying	in	and	out	of	the	open	windows	or	hopping	and	walking	along
the	ground,	always	active	and	always,	or	that	was	the	impression	they	gave,
intent	upon	some	purpose	or	other.	In	fact	they	were	very	like	human	beings	in
many	ways.	You	might	hear	them	sigh,	laugh,	sneeze,	and	yawn.	They	cleared
their	throats	before	beginning	to	converse	in	their	own	cockatoo	language,	they
showed	themselves	alert,	scheming,	mischievous	and	sly,	deceitful,	malicious,
vindictive	and	quarrelsome.	They	liked	certain	people,	particularly	Adela	and
Gerald,	and	persecuted	others	with	downright	malice,	for	instance	the	Welsh
housekeeper	who	seldom	showed	her	face	out	of	doors.	They	seemed	to	know
exactly	when	she	
would	be	going	to	chapel,	always	wearing	a	black	hat	and
carrying	a	black	umbrella,	and	on	these	occasions	they	lay	in	wait	to	screech	at
her	in	the	most	obnoxious	way.	They	also	reflected	human	society	in	the	way
they	ganged	up	together	in	ever-changing	groups,	or	then	again	paired	off	in
couples	sitting	side	by	side	as	if	they	knew	nothing	but	harmony	and	were
forever	inseparable.	They	even	had	their	own	cemetery,	with	a	long	row	of
graves	in	a	clearing	surrounded	by	strawberry	trees,	and	one	of	the	rooms	on	the
upper	floor	of	Andromeda	Lodge	had	in	it	what	was	obviously	a	purpose-built
wall	cupboard,	full	of	dark	green	cardboard	boxes	containing	a	number	of	dead
birds	of	species	related	to	the	cockatoos,	their	red-chested	or	yellow-headed
brothers,	Hyacinth	and	Scarlet	Macaws,	Ruby	Lorikeets	and	Blue-Winged
Parrotlets,	Horned	Parakeets	and	Ground	Parrots,	all	brought	back	by	Gerald’s
great-grandfather	or	great-great-grandfather	from	his	circumnavigation	of	the
globe,	or	alternatively	ordered	from	a	trader	called	Théodore	Grace	in	Le	Havre
for	a	few	guineas	or	louis	d’or,	as	noted	on	the	provenances	placed	inside	the
boxes.	The	finest	of	all	these	birds,	in	a	collection	which	also	included	some
native	woodpeckers,	wrynecks,	kites,	and	orioles,	was	the	African	Gray	parrot.	I
can	still	see	the	inscription	on	his	green	cardboard	sarcophagus:	Jaco,	
Ps.
erithacus	L
.	He	came	from	the	Congo	and	had	reached	the	great	age	of	sixty-six
in	his	Welsh	exile,	as	his	obituary	recounted,	adding	that	he	had	been	very	tame
and	trusting,	was	a	quick	learner,	chattered	away	to	himself	and	others,	could
whistle	entire	songs	and	had	composed	some	too,	but	best	of	all	he	liked	to
mimic	the	voices	of	children	and	to	have	them	teach	him	new	words.	His	one
bad	habit	was	that	if	no	one	gave	him	any	apricot	kernels	and	hard	nuts,	which
he	could	
crack	open	with	the	greatest	ease,	he	went	about	in	a	bad	temper
chewing	and	shredding	the	furniture.	Gerald	often	took	this	special	parrot	out	of
his	box.	He	was	about	nine	inches	long,	and	as	his	name	suggests	had	ash-gray
plumage,	as	well	as	a	carmine	tail,	a	black	beak,	and	a	pale	face	that	you	might
have	thought	was	marked	by	deep	grief.	Indeed,	Austerlitz	went	on,	there	was
some	kind	of	cabinet	of	natural	curiosities	in	almost	every	room	at	Andromeda
Lodge:	cases	with	multiple	drawers,	some	of	them	glass-fronted,	where	the
roundish	eggs	of	parrots	were	arranged	in	their	hundreds;	collections	of	shells,
minerals,	beetles,	and	butterflies;	slowworms,	adders,	and	lizards	preserved	in
formaldehyde;	snail	shells	and	sea	urchins,	crabs	and	shrimps,	and	large	herbaria
containing	leaves,	flowers,	and	grasses.
	
	
Adela	had	once	told	him,	said	Austerlitz,	that	the	transformation	of	Andromeda
Lodge	into	a	kind	of	natural	history	museum	had	begun	in	1869,	when	Gerald’s
parrot-collecting	ancestor	made	the	acquaintance	of	Charles	Darwin,	then
working	on	his	study	of	the	
Descent	of	Man	in	a	rented	house	not	far	from
Dolgellau.	Darwin	had	paid	frequent	visits	to	the	Fitzpatricks	of	Andromeda
Lodge	in	those	days,	and	according	to	a	family	tradition	he	always	praised	the
wonderful	view	from	the	house.	It	was	from	the	same	period,	according	to
Adela,	said	Austerlitz,	that	the	schism	in	the	Fitzpatrick	clan	dated,	a	schism
continuing	to	the	present	day,	whereby	one	of	the	two	sons	in	every	generation
abandoned	the	Catholic	faith	and	became	a	natural	scientist.	For	instance
Aldous,	Gerald’s	father,	had	been	a	botanist,	while	his	brother,	Evelyn,	over
twenty	years	his	senior,	clung	to	the	traditional	Papist	creed,	regarded	in	Wales
as	the	worst	of	all	perversions.	In	fact	the	Catholic	line	of	the	family	had	always
been	represented	by	its	crazier	and	more	eccentric	members,	as	the	case	of	Uncle
Evelyn	clearly	illustrated.	At	the	time	when	I	was	spending	many	weeks	every
year	with	the	Fitzpatricks	as	Gerald’s	guest,	said	Austerlitz,	Evelyn	was	perhaps
in	his	mid-fifties,	but	was	so	crippled	by	Bechterew’s	disease	that	he	looked	like
an	old	man,	and	could	walk	only	with	the	greatest	difficulty,	bending	right	over.
For	that	very	reason,	however,	and	to	prevent	his	joints	from	seizing	up	entirely,
he	was	always	on	the	move	in	his	rooms	on	the	top	floor,	where	a	kind	of
handrail	had	been	fitted	along	the	walls,	like	the	barre	in	a	ballet	school.	He	held
on	to	this	handrail	as	he	inched	his	way	forward,	moaning	quietly,	his	head	and
bent	torso	scarcely	higher	than	his	hand	on	the	rail.	It	took	him	a	good	hour	to
make	the	rounds	of	his	quarters,	from	the	bedroom	into	the	living	room,	out	of
the	living	room	into	the	corridor,	and	from	the	corridor	back	to	the	bedroom.
Gerald,	who	had	already	developed	an	aversion	to	the	Roman	faith,	once
claimed,	said	Austerlitz,	that	Uncle	Evelyn	had	grown	so	crooked	out	of	sheer
miserliness,	which	he	justified	to	himself	by	reflecting	that	he	sent	the	money	he
did	not	spend	in	any	given	week,	usually	amounting	to	twelve	or	thirteen
shillings,	as	a	donation	to	the	Mission	to	the	Congo	for	the	salvation	of	black
souls	still	languishing	in	unbelief.	There	were	no	curtains	or	other	furnishings	in
Evelyn’s	rooms,	since	he	did	not	want	to	make	unnecessary	use	of	anything,
even	if	it	had	been	acquired	long	ago	and	simply	had	to	be	brought	from	another
part	of	the	house.	Years	before,	he	had	had	a	narrow	strip	of	linoleum	laid	on	the
wooden	floor	where	he	walked	beside	the	walls,	to	spare	the	wood,	and	his
dragging	footsteps	had	worn	the	linoleum	so	thin	that	you	could	make	out	almost
nothing	of	its	original	flower	pattern.	Not	until	the	temperature	on	the
thermometer	beside	the	window	had	dropped	to	below	fifty	degrees	Fahrenheit
for	several	days	running	was	the	housekeeper	allowed	to	light	a	tiny	fire	in	the
hearth,	a	fire	burning	almost	no	fuel	at	all.	To	save	electricity,	Evelyn	always
went	to	bed	when	darkness	fell,	which	meant	around	four	in	the	afternoon	in
winter,	although	lying	down	was	perhaps	even	more	painful	for	him	than
walking,	so	that	as	a	rule,	despite	his	exhausted	state	after	his	constant
perambulations,	it	was	a	long	time	before	he	could	get	to	sleep.	Then,	through
the	grille	of	a	ventilation	shaft	that	linked	his	bedchamber	to	one	of	the	ground-
floor	living	rooms	and	inadvertently	functioned	as	a	kind	of	communication
channel,	he	could	be	heard	calling	on	numerous	different	saints	for	hours	on	end,
in	particular,	if	I	remember	correctly,	Saints	Catherine	and	Elizabeth,	who
suffered	the	most	cruel	of	martyrdoms,	begging	them	to	intercede	for	him	in	the
contingency,	as	he	put	it,	of	his	imminent	appearance	before	the	judgment	seat
of	his	Heavenly	Lord.
	
	
Unlike	Uncle	Evelyn,	said	Austerlitz	after	a	while,	taking	from	his	jacket	pocket
a	kind	of	folder	containing	several	postcard-sized	photographs,	Great-Uncle
Alphonso,	who	was	about	ten	years	older	and	continued	the	line	of	the	naturalist
Fitzpatricks,	looked	positively	youthful.	Always	even-tempered,	he	spent	most
of	his	time	out	of	doors,	going	on	long	expeditions	even	in	the	worst	of	weather,
or	when	it	was	fine	sitting	on	a	camp	stool	somewhere	near	the	house	in	his
white	smock,	a	straw	hat	on	his	head,	painting	watercolors.	When	he	was	thus
engaged	he	generally	wore	glasses	with	gray	silk	tissue	instead	of	lenses	in	the
frames,	so	that	the	landscape	appeared	through	a	fine	veil	that	muted	its	colors,
and	the	weight	of	the	world	dissolved	before	your	eyes.	The	faint	images	that
Alphonso	transferred	onto	paper,	said	Austerlitz,	were	barely	sketches	of
pictures—here	a	rocky	slope,	there	a	small	bosky	thicket	or	a	cumulus	cloud—
fragments,	almost	without	color,	fixed	with	a	tint	made	of	a	few	drops	of	water
and	a	grain	of	malachite	green	or	ash-blue.	I	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	how
Alphonso	once	told	his	great-nephew	and	me	that	everything	was	fading	before
our	eyes,	and	that	many	of	the	loveliest	of	colors	had	already	disappeared,	or
existed	only	where	no	one	saw	them,	in	the	submarine	gardens	fathoms	deep
below	the	surface	of	the	sea.	In	his	childhood,	he	said,	he	used	to	walk	beside	the
chalk	cliffs	of	Devon	and	Cornwall,	where	hollows	and	basins	have	been	carved
and	cut	out	of	the	rock	by	the	breakers	over	millions	of	years,	admiring	the
endless	diversity	of	the	semi-sentient	marvels	oscillating	between	the	vegetable,
animal,	and	mineral	kingdoms,	the	zooids	and	corallines,	sea	anemones,	sea	fans
and	sea	feathers,	the	anthozoans	and	crustaceans	over	which	the	tide	washed
twice	a	day	
while	long	fronds	of	seaweed	swayed	around	them,	and	which	then,
as	the	water	went	out,	revealed	their	wonderfully	iridescent	life	in	the	rock	pools
exposed	once	more	to	the	light	and	the	air,	showing	all	the	colors	of	the	rainbow
—emerald,	scarlet	and	rosy	red,	sulfur	yellow,	velvety	black.
	
	
At	that	time	the	whole	southwest	coast	of	the	island	was	surrounded	by	a
colorful	fringe	ebbing	and	flowing	with	the	tides,	and	now,	said	Uncle
Alphonso,	barely	half	a	century	later,	those	glories	had	been	almost	entirely
destroyed	by	our	passion	for	collecting	and	by	other	imponderable	disturbances
and	disruptions.	On	another	occasion,	said	Austerlitz,	Great-Uncle	Alphonso
took	us	up	the	hill	behind	the	house	on	a	still,	moonless	night	to	spend	a	few
hours	looking	into	the	mysterious	world	of	moths.	Most	of	us,	said	Austerlitz,
know	nothing	about	moths	except	that	they	eat	holes	in	carpets	and	clothes	and
have	to	be	kept	at	bay	by	the	use	of	camphor	and	naphthalene,	although	in	truth
their	lineage	is	among	the	most	ancient	and	most	remarkable	in	the	whole
history	of	nature.	Soon	after	darkness	fell	we	were	sitting	on	a	promontory	far
above	Andromeda	Lodge,	behind	us	the	higher	slopes	and	before	us	the
immense	darkness	out	at	sea,	and	no	sooner	had	Alphonso	placed	his
incandescent	lamp	in	a	shallow	hollow	surrounded	by	heather	and	lit	it	than	the
moths,	not	one	of	which	we	had	seen	during	our	climb,	came	flying	in	as	if	from
nowhere,	describing	thousands	of	different	arcs	and	spirals	and	loops,	until	like
snowflakes	they	formed	a	silent	storm	around	the	light,	while	others,	wings
whirring,	crawled	over	the	sheet	spread	under	the	lamp	or	else,	exhausted	by
their	wild	circling,	settled	in	the	gray	recesses	of	the	egg	boxes	stacked	in	a	crate
by	Alphonso	to	provide	shelter	for	them.	I	do	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	that	the
two	of	us,	Gerald	
and	I,	could	not	get	over	our	amazement	at	the	endless	variety
of	these	invertebrates,	which	are	usually	hidden	from	our	sight,	and	that
Alphonso	let	us	simply	gaze	at	their	wonderful	display	for	a	long	time,	but	I
don’t	recollect	now	exactly	what	kinds	of	night-winged	creatures	landed	there
beside	us,	perhaps	they	were	China	Marks,	Dark	Porcelains	and	Marbled
Beauties,	Scarce	Silver-lines	or	Burnished	Brass,	Green	Foresters	and	Green
Adelas,	White	Plumes,	Light	Arches,	Old	Ladies	and	Ghost	Moths,	but	at	any
rate	we	counted	dozens	of	them,	so	different	in	structure	and	appearance	that
neither	Gerald	nor	I	could	grasp	it	all.	Some	had	collars	and	cloaks,	like	elegant
gentlemen	on	their	way	to	the	opera,	said	Gerald;	some	had	a	plain	basic	hue,
but	when	they	moved	their	wings	showed	a	fantastic	lining	underneath,	with
oblique	and	wavy	lines,	shadows,	crescent	markings	and	lighter	patches,
freckles,	zigzag	bands,	fringes	and	veining	and	colors	you	could	never	have
imagined,	moss	green	shot	with	blue,	fox	brown,	saffron,	lime	yellow,	satiny
white,	and	a	metallic	gleam	as	of	powdered	brass	or	gold.	Many	of	them	were
still	resplendent	in	immaculate	garments,	others,	their	short	lives	almost	over,
had	torn	and	ragged	wings.	Alphonso	told	us	how	each	of	these	extravagant
creatures	had	its	own	character,	and	that	many	of	them	lived	only	among	alders,
or	on	hot,	stony	slopes,	in	pastures	on	poor	soil,	or	on	moors.	Describing	their
previous	existence	as	larvae,	he	said	that	almost	all	caterpillars	ate	only	one	kind
of	food—the	roots	of	couch	grass,	the	leaves	of	sallow	or	barberry,	withered
bramble	foliage—and	they	stuffed	themselves	with	that	chosen	food,	said
Alphonso,	until	they	became	well-nigh	senseless,	whereas	the	moths	ate	nothing
more	at	all	for	the	rest	of	their	lives,	and	were	bent	solely	on	the	business	of
reproduction.	
They	did	sometimes	seem	to	suffer	thirst,	and	in	periods	of
drought,	when	no	dew	had	fallen	at	night	for	a	long	time,	it	was	apparently
known	for	them	to	set	out	together	in	a	kind	of	cloud	in	search	of	the	nearest
river	or	stream,	where	they	drowned	in	large	numbers	as	they	tried	to	settle	on
the	flowing	water.	And	I	also	remember	what	Alphonso	said	about	the
extraordinarily	keen	hearing	of	moths,	said	Austerlitz.	They	can	make	out	the
squeaking	of	bats	from	a	great	distance,	and	he,	Alphonso,	had	himself	noticed
that	in	the	evening,	when	the	housekeeper	came	out	into	the	yard	to	call	her	cat
Enid	in	that	shrill	voice	of	hers,	they	always	rose	from	the	bushes	and	flew	away
into	the	darker	trees.	During	the	day,	said	Alphonso,	they	slept	safely	hidden
under	stones,	or	in	cracks	in	the	rock,	in	leaf	litter	on	the	ground	or	among
foliage.	Most	of	them	are	in	a	deathlike	state	when	you	find	them,	and	have	to
coax	and	quiver	themselves	back	to	life,	crawling	over	the	ground	and	jerkily
moving	their	wings	and	legs	before	they	are	ready	for	flight.	Their	body
temperature	will	then	be	thirty-six	degrees	Celsius,	like	that	of	mammals,	and	of
dolphins	and	tunny	fish	swimming	at	full	speed.	Thirty-six	degrees,	according	to
Alphonso,	has	always	proved	the	best	natural	level,	a	kind	of	magical	threshold,
and	it	had	sometimes	occurred	to	him,	Alphonso,	said	Austerlitz,	that	all
mankind’s	misfortunes	were	connected	with	its	departure	at	some	point	in	time
from	that	norm,	and	with	the	slightly	feverish,	overheated	condition	in	which	we
constantly	found	ourselves.	On	that	summer	night,	said	Austerlitz,	we	sat	high
above	the	estuary	of	the	Mawddach	in	our	hollow	in	the	hills	until	daybreak,
watching	the	moths	fly	to	us,	perhaps	some	ten	thousand	of	them	by	Alphonso’s
estimate.	The	trails	of	light	which	they	
seemed	to	leave	behind	them	in	all	kinds
of	curlicues	and	streamers	and	spirals,	and	which	Gerald	in	particular	admired,
did	not	really	exist,	explained	Alphonso,	but	were	merely	phantom	traces	created
by	the	sluggish	reaction	of	the	human	eye,	appearing	to	see	a	certain	afterglow	in
the	place	from	which	the	insect	itself,	shining	for	only	the	fraction	of	a	second	in
the	lamplight,	had	already	gone.	It	was	such	unreal	phenomena,	said	Alphonso,
the	sudden	incursion	of	unreality	into	the	real	world,	certain	effects	of	light	in
the	landscape	spread	out	before	us,	or	in	the	eye	of	a	beloved	person,	that
kindled	our	deepest	feelings,	or	at	least	what	we	took	for	them.	Although	I	did
not	study	natural	history	later,	said	Austerlitz,	many	of	Great-Uncle	Alphonso’s
botanical	and	zoological	disquisitions	have	remained	in	my	mind.	Only	a	few
days	ago	I	was	rereading	that	passage	in	Darwin	he	once	showed	me,	describing
a	flock	of	butterflies	flying	uninterruptedly	for	several	hours	ten	miles	out	from
the	South	American	coast,	when	even	with	a	telescope	it	was	impossible	to	find
a	patch	of	empty	sky	visible	between	their	whirling	wings.	But	I	always	found
what	Alphonso	told	us	at	that	time	about	the	life	and	death	of	moths	especially
memorable,	and	of	all	creatures	I	still	feel	the	greatest	awe	for	them.	In	the
warmer	months	of	the	year	one	or	other	of	those	nocturnal	insects	quite	often
strays	indoors	from	the	small	garden	behind	my	house.	When	I	get	up	early	in
the	morning,	I	find	them	clinging	to	the	wall,	motionless.	I	believe,	said
Austerlitz,	they	know	they	have	lost	their	way,	since	if	you	do	not	put	them	out
again	carefully	they	will	stay	where	they	are,	never	moving,	until	the	last	breath
is	out	of	their	bodies,	and	indeed	they	will	remain	in	the	place	where	they	came
to	grief	even	after	death,	held	fast	by	the	tiny	claws	that	stiffened	in	their	last
agony,	
until	a	draft	of	air	detaches	them	and	blows	them	into	a	dusty	corner.
	
	
Sometimes,	seeing	one	of	these	moths	that	have	met	their	end	in	my	house,	I
wonder	what	kind	of	fear	and	pain	they	feel	while	they	are	lost.	As	Alphonso
had	told	him,	said	Austerlitz,	there	is	really	no	reason	to	suppose	that	lesser
beings	are	devoid	of	sentient	life.	We	are	not	alone	in	dreaming	at	night	for,
quite	apart	from	dogs	and	other	domestic	creatures	whose	emotions	have	been
bound	up	with	ours	for	many	thousands	of	years,	the	smaller	mammals	such	as
mice	and	moles	also	live	in	a	world	that	exists	only	in	their	minds	whilst	they	are
asleep,	as	we	can	detect	from	their	eye	movements,	and	who	knows,	said
Austerlitz,	perhaps	moths	dream	as	well,	perhaps	a	lettuce	in	the	garden	dreams
as	it	looks	up	at	the	moon	by	night.	I	myself	often	felt	as	if	I	were	dreaming
during	those	weeks	and	months	I	spent	at	the	Fitzpatricks’	house,	said	Austerlitz,
even	in	daylight.	The	view	from	the	room	with	the	blue	ceiling	which	Adela
always	called	mine	did	indeed	verge	on	the	unreal.	I	looked	down	from	above	on
the	treetops,	mainly	of	cedars	and	parasol	pines	and	resembling	a	
green,	hilly
landscape	going	down	from	the	road	below	the	house	to	the	riverbank,	I	saw	the
dark	folds	of	the	mountain	range	on	the	other	side	of	the	river,	and	I	spent	hours
looking	out	at	the	Irish	Sea	that	was	always	changing	with	the	time	of	day	and
the	weather.	How	often	I	stood	by	the	open	window,	unable	to	think	coherently
in	the	face	of	this	spectacle,	which	was	never	the	same	twice.	In	the	morning	you
saw	the	shadowy	half	of	the	world	outside,	the	gray	of	the	air	lying	in	layers
above	the	water.	In	the	afternoon	cumulus	clouds	often	rose	on	the	southwest
horizon,	their	snow-white	slopes	and	steep	precipices	displacing	one	another,
towering	above	each	other,	reaching	higher	and	higher,	as	high,	Gerald	once
commented,	said	Austerlitz,	as	the	peaks	of	the	Andes	or	the	Karakorum
mountains.	Or	you	might	see	rain	falling	in	the	distance,	drawn	inland	from	the
sea	like	heavy	curtains	drawn	in	a	theater,	and	on	autumn	evenings	mist	would
roll	on	to	the	beach,	accumulating	by	the	mountainsides	and	forcing	its	way	up
the	valley.	But	on	bright	summer	days,	in	particular,	so	evenly	disposed	a	luster
lay	over	the	whole	of	Barmouth	Bay	that	the	separate	surfaces	of	sand	and	water,
sea	and	land,	earth	and	sky	could	no	longer	be	distinguished.	All	forms	and
colors	were	dissolved	in	a	pearl-gray	haze;	there	were	no	contrasts,	no	shading
anymore,	only	flowing	transitions	with	the	light	throbbing	through	them,	a	single
blur	from	which	only	the	most	fleeting	of	visions	emerged,	and	strangely—I
remember	this	well—it	was	the	very	evanescence	of	those	visions	that	gave	me,
at	the	time,	something	like	a	sense	of	eternity.	One	evening,	after	we	had	done
some	shopping	in	Barmouth,	Adela,	Gerald,	the	dog	Toby	and	I	went	out	on	the
long	footbridge	running	beside	the	railway	line	which,	as	I	mentioned	before,
said	Austerlitz,	crosses	the	estuary	
of	the	Mawddach	at	this	point,	where	it	is
over	a	mile	wide.	For	a	halfpenny	each	you	could	sit	there	on	one	of	the	seats
protected	on	three	sides,	like	little	cabins,	from	wind	and	weather,	with	your
back	to	the	land	and	looking	out	to	sea.	It	was	the	end	of	a	fine	day	in	late
summer,	the	fresh	salty	air	blew	around	us,	and	in	the	evening	light	the	tide
came	in,	gleaming	like	a	dense	shoal	of	mackerel,	flowing	under	the	bridge	and
up	the	river,	so	swift	and	strong	that	you	might	have	thought	you	were	going	the
other	way,	out	to	the	open	sea	in	a	boat.	We	all	four	sat	there	together	in	silence
until	the	sun	had	set.	Even	the	usually	restless	Toby,	who	had	the	same	odd	ruff
of	hair	around	his	face	as	the	little	dog	belonging	to	the	girl	in	the	Vyrnwy
photograph,	did	not	move	at	our	feet,	but	looked	up,	rapt,	at	the	heights	where
the	light	still	lingered	and	large	numbers	of	swallows	were	swooping	through	the
air.	After	a	while,	when	the	dark	dots	had	become	tinier	and	tinier	in	their
arching	flight,	Gerald	asked	whether	we	knew	that	these	voyagers	never	slept	on
the	earth.	Once	they	had	left	their	nests,	he	said,	picking	up	Toby	and	tickling
him	under	the	chin,	they	never	touched	the	ground	again.	As	night	fell	they
would	rise	two	or	three	miles	in	the	air	and	glide	there,	banking	now	to	one	side,
now	to	the	other,	and	moving	their	outspread	wings	only	occasionally,	until	they
came	back	down	to	us	at	break	of	day.—Austerlitz	had	been	so	deeply	immersed
in	his	Welsh	tale,	and	I	in	listening	to	him,	that	we	did	not	notice	how	late	it	had
grown.	The	last	rounds	had	long	since	been	poured,	the	last	guests	were	gone
except	for	the	two	of	us.	The	barman	had	collected	the	glasses	and	ashtrays,
wiped	the	tables	with	a	cloth,	and	was	now	waiting	to	lock	up	after	us	with	his
hand	on	the	light	switch	by	the	door.	The	way	in	which	he	wished	us	
Good
night,	
gentlemen
,	with	his	eyes	clouded	by	weariness	and	his	head	tilted	slightly
to	one	side,	struck	me	as	an	extraordinary	mark	of	distinction,	almost	like	an
absolution	or	a	blessing.	And	Pereira,	the	business	manager	of	the	Great	Eastern,
was	equally	civil	and	courteous	when	we	entered	the	hotel	foyer	directly
afterwards.	He	seemed	positively	expectant	as	he	stood	behind	the	reception
desk	in	his	starched	white	shirt	and	gray	cloth	waistcoat,	with	his	hair
immaculately	parted,	one	of	those	rare	and	often	rather	mysterious	people,	as	I
thought	on	seeing	him,	who	are	infallibly	to	be	found	at	their	posts,	and	whom
one	cannot	imagine	ever	feeling	any	need	to	go	to	bed.	After	I	had	made	an
appointment	to	meet	Austerlitz	the	next	day	Pereira,	having	inquired	after	my
wishes,	led	me	upstairs	to	the	first	floor	and	showed	me	into	a	room	containing	a
great	deal	of	wine-red	velvet,	brocade,	and	dark	mahogany	furniture,	where	I	sat
until	almost	three	in	the	morning	at	a	secretaire	faintly	illuminated	by	the	street
lighting—the	cast-iron	radiator	clicked	quietly,	and	only	occasionally	did	a	black
cab	drive	past	outside	in	Liverpool	Street—writing	down,	in	the	form	of	notes
and	disconnected	sentences,	as	much	as	possible	of	what	Austerlitz	had	told	me
that	evening.	Next	morning	I	woke	late,	and	after	breakfast	I	sat	for	some	time
reading	the	newspapers,	where	I	found	not	only	the	usual	home	and	international
news,	but	also	the	story	of	an	ordinary	man	who	was	overcome	by	such	deep
grief	after	the	death	of	his	wife,	for	whom	he	had	cared	devotedly	during	her
long	and	severe	illness,	that	he	decided	to	end	his	own	life	by	means	of	a
guillotine	which	he	had	built	himself	in	the	square	concrete	area	containing	the
basement	steps	at	the	back	of	his	house	in	Halifax.	As	a	craftsman,	and	having
taken	careful	stock	of	other	possible	methods,	he	
thought	the	guillotine	the	most
reliable	way	of	carrying	out	his	plan,	and	sure	enough,	as	the	short	report	said,
he	had	finally	been	found	lying	with	his	head	cut	off	by	such	an	instrument	of
decapitation.	It	was	of	uncommonly	sturdy	construction,	with	every	tiny	detail
neatly	finished,	and	a	slanting	blade	which,	as	the	reporter	remarked,	two	strong
men	could	scarcely	have	lifted.	The	pincers	with	which	he	had	cut	through	the
wire	operating	it	were	still	in	his	rigid	hand.	Austerlitz	had	come	to	fetch	me
around	eleven,	and	when	I	told	him	this	story	as	we	walked	down	to	the	river
through	Whitechapel	and	Shoreditch	he	said	nothing	for	quite	a	long	time,
perhaps,	I	told	myself	reproachfully	afterwards,	because	he	felt	it	was	tasteless
of	me	to	dwell	on	the	absurd	aspects	of	the	case.	Only	on	the	riverbank,	where
we	stood	for	a	while	looking	down	at	the	gray-brown	water	rolling	inland,	did	he
say,	looking	straight	at	me	as	he	sometimes	did	with	wide	and	frightened	eyes,
that	he	could	understand	the	Halifax	carpenter	very	well,	for	what	could	be
worse	than	to	bungle	even	the	end	of	an	unhappy	life?	Then	we	walked	the	rest
of	the	way	in	silence,	going	on	downstream	from	Wapping	and	Shadwell	to	the
quiet	basins	which	reflect	the	towering	office	blocks	of	the	Docklands	area,	and
so	to	the	Foot	Tunnel	running	under	the	bend	in	the	river.	Over	on	the	other	side
we	climbed	up	through	Greenwich	Park	to	the	Royal	Observatory,	which	had
scarcely	any	visitors	apart	from	us	on	this	cold	day	not	long	before	Christmas.
At	least,	I	do	not	remember	meeting	anyone	during	the	hours	we	spent	there,
both	of	us	separately	studying	the	ingenious	observational	instruments	and
measuring	devices,	quadrants	and	sextants,	chronometers	and	regulators,
displayed	in	the	glass	cases.	Only	in	the	octagonal	observation	room	above	the
quarters	of	the	
former	Astronomers	Royal,	where	Austerlitz	and	I	gradually
resumed	the	conversation	we	had	broken	off,	did	a	solitary	Japanese	tourist
appear	in	the	doorway.
	
	
He	hovered	there	for	a	while	before	he	went	all	round	the	octagon	once	and	then
quietly	vanished	again,	following	the	green	arrow	pointing	the	way.	In	this
room,	which	as	Austerlitz	commented	was	ideal	for	its	purpose,	I	was	surprised
by	the	simple	beauty	of	the	wooden	flooring,	made	of	planks	of	different	widths,
and	by	the	unusually	tall	windows,	each	divided	into	a	hundred	and	twenty-two
lead-framed	square	glass	panes,	through	which	long	telescopes	were	once	turned
on	eclipses	of	the	sun	and	the	moon,	on	the	intersection	of	the	orbits	of	the	stars
with	the	line	of	the	meridian,	on	the	Leonid	meteorite	showers	and	the	long-
tailed	comets	flying	through	space.	In	accordance	with	his	usual	custom,
Austerlitz	took	a	few	photographs,	some	of	them	of	the	snow-white	stucco	roses
in	the	frieze	of	flowers	running	round	the	ceiling,	others	of	the	panorama	of	the
city	to	the	north	and	northwest	on	the	far	side	of	the	park,	shot	through	the
leaded	windowpanes,	and	while	he	was	still	busy	
with	his	camera	he	embarked
on	a	disquisition	of	some	length	on	time,	much	of	which	has	remained	clear	in
my	memory.	Time,	said	Austerlitz	in	the	observation	room	in	Greenwich,	was
by	far	the	most	artificial	of	all	our	inventions,	and	in	being	bound	to	the	planet
turning	on	its	own	axis	was	no	less	arbitrary	than	would	be,	say,	a	calculation
based	on	the	growth	of	trees	or	the	duration	required	for	a	piece	of	limestone	to
disintegrate,	quite	apart	from	the	fact	that	the	solar	day	which	we	take	as	our
guideline	does	not	provide	any	precise	measurement,	so	that	in	order	to	reckon
time	we	have	to	devise	an	imaginary,	average	sun	which	has	an	invariable	speed
of	movement	and	does	not	incline	towards	the	equator	in	its	orbit.	If	Newton
thought,	said	Austerlitz,	pointing	through	the	window	and	down	to	the	curve	of
the	water	around	the	Isle	of	Dogs	glistening	in	the	last	of	the	daylight,	if	Newton
really	thought	that	time	was	a	river	like	the	Thames,	then	where	is	its	source	and
into	what	sea	does	it	finally	flow?	Every	river,	as	we	know,	must	have	banks	on
both	sides,	so	where,	seen	in	those	terms,	where	are	the	banks	of	time?	What
would	be	this	river’s	qualities,	qualities	perhaps	corresponding	to	those	of	water,
which	is	fluid,	rather	heavy,	and	translucent?	In	what	way	do	objects	immersed
in	time	differ	from	those	left	untouched	by	it?	Why	do	we	show	the	hours	of
light	and	darkness	in	the	same	circle?	Why	does	time	stand	eternally	still	and
motionless	in	one	place,	and	rush	headlong	by	in	another?	Could	we	not	claim,
said	Austerlitz,	that	time	itself	has	been	nonconcurrent	over	the	centuries	and	the
millennia?	It	is	not	so	long	ago,	after	all,	that	it	began	spreading	out	over
everything.	And	is	not	human	life	in	many	parts	of	the	earth	governed	to	this	day
less	by	time	than	by	
the	weather,	and	thus	by	an	unquantifiable	dimension	which
disregards	linear	regularity,	does	not	progress	constantly	forward	but	moves	in
eddies,	is	marked	by	episodes	of	congestion	and	irruption,	recurs	in	ever-
changing	form,	and	evolves	in	no	one	knows	what	direction?	Even	in	a
metropolis	ruled	by	time	like	London,	said	Austerlitz,	it	is	still	possible	to	be
outside	time,	a	state	of	affairs	which	until	recently	was	almost	as	common	in
backward	and	forgotten	areas	of	our	own	country	as	it	used	to	be	in	the
undiscovered	continents	overseas.	The	dead	are	outside	time,	the	dying	and	all
the	sick	at	home	or	in	hospitals,	and	they	are	not	the	only	ones,	for	a	certain
degree	of	personal	misfortune	is	enough	to	cut	us	off	from	the	past	and	the
future.	In	fact,	said	Austerlitz,	I	have	never	owned	a	clock	of	any	kind,	a	bedside
alarm	or	a	pocket	watch,	let	alone	a	wristwatch.	A	clock	has	always	struck	me	as
something	ridiculous,	a	thoroughly	mendacious	object,	perhaps	because	I	have
always	resisted	the	power	of	time	out	of	some	internal	compulsion	which	I
myself	have	never	understood,	keeping	myself	apart	from	so-called	current
events	in	the	hope,	as	I	now	think,	said	Austerlitz,	that	time	will	not	pass	away,
has	not	passed	away,	that	I	can	turn	back	and	go	behind	it,	and	there	I	shall	find
everything	as	it	once	was,	or	more	precisely	I	shall	find	that	all	moments	of	time
have	co-existed	simultaneously,	in	which	case	none	of	what	history	tells	us
would	be	true,	past	events	have	not	yet	occurred	but	are	waiting	to	do	so	at	the
moment	when	we	think	of	them,	although	that,	of	course,	opens	up	the	bleak
prospect	of	everlasting	misery	and	neverending	anguish.—It	was	around	three-
thirty	in	the	afternoon	and	dusk	was	gathering	as	I	left	the	Observatory	with
Austerlitz.	We	lingered	
for	a	while	in	the	walled	forecourt.	Far	away,	we	could
hear	the	hollow	grinding	of	the	city,	and	the	air	was	full	of	the	drone	of	the	great
planes	flying	low	and	as	it	seemed	to	me	incredibly	slowly	over	Greenwich	from
the	northeast,	at	intervals	of	scarcely	more	than	a	minute,	and	then	disappearing
again	westwards	towards	Heathrow.	Like	strange	monsters	going	home	to	their
dens	to	sleep	in	the	evening,	they	hovered	above	us	in	the	darkening	air,	rigid
wings	extended	from	their	bodies.	The	leafless	trees	on	the	slopes	of	the	park
were	already	deep	in	the	shadows	rising	from	the	earth;	before	us,	at	the	foot	of
the	hill,	was	the	broad	square	of	turf,	black	as	night	and	crossed	diagonally	by
two	pale	sandy	paths	and	the	white	façades	and	colonnades	of	the	National
Maritime	Museum,	and	on	the	Isle	of	Dogs	on	the	far	side	of	the	river	the
sparkling	glass	towers	rose	above	the	rapidly	gathering	darkness	into	the	last	of
the	daylight.	As	we	walked	down	to	Greenwich,	Austerlitz	told	me	that	a
number	of	artists	had	painted	the	park	in	past	centuries.	Their	pictures	showed
the	green	lawns	and	the	canopies	of	the	trees,	usually	with	very	small,	isolated
human	figures	in	the	foreground,	generally	ladies	in	brightly	colored	hooped
skirts	carrying	parasols,	and	a	few	of	the	white,	half-tame	deer	kept	in	the	park	at
that	time.	In	the	background	of	these	paintings,	however,	behind	the	trees	and
the	twin	domes	of	the	Royal	Naval	College,	you	saw	the	bend	in	the	river	and,
like	a	faint	line	drawn	out,	as	it	were,	towards	the	rim	of	the	world,	the	city	of
uncounted	souls,	an	indefinable	shape,	hunched	and	gray	or	plaster-colored,	a
kind	of	excrescence	or	crust	on	the	surface	of	the	earth,	and	above	the	city	the
sky	occupying	half	or	more	of	the	entire	picture,	perhaps	with	rain	hanging	
down
from	the	clouds	in	the	far	distance.	I	believe	I	first	saw	an	example	of	these
panoramas	of	Greenwich	in	one	of	the	dilapidated	country	houses	which,	as	I
mentioned	yesterday,	I	often	visited	with	Hilary	when	I	was	studying	at	Oxford.
I	clearly	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	how	on	such	an	excursion,	after	walking	for
a	long	time	in	a	park	densely	overgrown	with	young	sycamore	and	birch	trees,
we	came	to	a	silent	house	of	this	kind,	one	of	which	on	average,	according	to	a
calculation	I	made	then,	was	being	demolished	every	two	or	three	days	in	the
1950s.	We	saw	quite	a	number	of	houses	at	that	time	from	which	almost
everything	had	been	ripped	out—the	bookshelves,	the	paneling	and	banisters,	the
brass	central	heating	pipes	and	the	marble	fireplaces;	houses	with	their	roofs
falling	in,	houses	knee-deep	in	rubble,	refuse,	and	detritus,	houses	full	of	sheep
and	bird	droppings,	and	great	lumps	of	plaster	come	down	from	the	ceilings.	Iver
Grove,	however,	said	Austerlitz,	a	house	which	stood	in	the	middle	of	its
wilderness	of	a	park	at	the	foot	of	a	gentle	south-facing	slope,	seemed	largely
intact,	at	least	from	the	outside.	Nonetheless,	as	we	paused	on	the	broad	stone
steps	which	had	been	colonized	by	hart’s-tongue	ferns	and	other	weeds	and
looked	up	at	the	blind	windows,	it	seemed	to	us	as	if	silent	horror	had	seized
upon	the	house	at	the	prospect	of	its	imminent	and	shameful	end.	Inside	we
found	heaps	of	grain	in	one	of	the	large	ground-floor	reception	rooms,	as	if	the
place	were	a	barn.	In	a	second	great	hall,	ornamented	with	baroque	stucco	work,
hundreds	of	sacks	of	potatoes	leaned	against	each	other.	We	stood	gazing	at	this
sight	for	some	time,	until—just	as	I	was	about	to	take	some	photographs—the
owner	of	Iver	Grove,	who	turned	
out	to	be	a	certain	James	Mallord	Ashman,
came	towards	the	house	along	the	western	terrace.
	
	
Fully	understanding	our	interest	in	the	buildings	now	everywhere	falling	into
decay,	he	told	us	during	a	long	conversation	that	after	the	family	seat	had	been
requisitioned	for	use	as	a	convalescent	home	during	the	war	years,	the	expense
of	putting	it	back	into	any	kind	of	order,	however	makeshift,	had	been	far
beyond	his	means,	so	that	he	had	been	obliged	to	move	to	Grove	Farm,	which
belonged	to	the	estate	and	lay	at	the	other	end	of	the	park,	and	to	work	the	land
himself.	Hence,	so	Ashman	told	us,	said	Austerlitz,	the	sacks	of	potatoes	and	the
grain	on	the	floor.	Iver	Grove	had	been	built	around	1780	by	one	of	Ashman’s
ancestors,	said	Austerlitz,	a	man	who	suffered	from	insomnia	and	withdrew	into
the	observatory	he	had	built	at	the	top	of	the	house	to	devote	himself	to	various
astronomical	studies,	particularly	selenography	or	the	delineation	of	the	moon,
and	consequently,	as	Ashman	told	us,	he	had	also	been	in	frequent	contact	with
John	Russell	of	Guildford,	a	miniaturist	and	artist	in	pastels	famous	beyond	the
frontiers	of	England,	who	for	several	decades	at	this	period	was	working	on	a
map	of	the	
moon	laid	out	over	an	area	measuring	five	feet	by	five	feet,	and
easily	surpassing	all	earlier	depictions	of	the	earth’s	satellite	in	its	precision	and
beauty,	those	of	Riccioli	and	Cassini	and	those	of	Tobias	Mayer	and	Hevelius
alike.	On	nights	when	the	moon	did	not	rise	or	was	veiled	by	cloud,	said
Ashman,	when	he	had	finished	showing	us	round	his	house	and	we	entered	the
billiards	room,	on	such	nights	his	ancestor	used	to	play	frame	after	frame	of
billiards	against	himself	in	this	retreat,	which	he	had	equipped	specially	for	the
purpose,	often	until	the	dawn	of	day.	Since	his	death	on	New	Year’s	Eve,	1813,
no	one	had	ever	picked	up	a	cue	in	the	games	room,	said	Ashman,	not	his
grandfather	or	his	father	or	himself,	Ashman,	let	alone	one	of	the	women,	of
course.	And	indeed,	said	Austerlitz,	everything	was	exactly	as	it	must	have	been
a	hundred	and	fifty	years	before.	The	mighty	mahogany	table,	weighted	down	by
the	slate	slabs	embedded	in	it,	stood	in	its	place	unmoved;	the	scoring	apparatus,
the	gold-framed	looking	glass	on	the	wall,	the	stands	for	the	cues	and	their
extension	shafts,	the	cabinet	full	of	drawers	containing	the	ivory	balls,	the
chalks,	brushes,	polishing	cloths,	and	everything	else	the	billiard	player	requires,
had	never	been	touched	again	or	changed	in	any	way.	Over	the	mantelpiece	hung
an	engraving	after	Turner’s	
View	from	Greenwich	Park
,	and	the	records	book	in
which	the	selenographer,	under	the	rubric	
Ashman	vs.	Ashman
,	had	entered	all
games	won	or	lost	against	himself	in	his	fine	curving	hand	still	lay	open	on	a	tall
desk.	The	inside	shutters	had	always	been	kept	closed,	and	the	light	of	day	never
entered	the	room.	Evidently,	said	Austerlitz,	this	place	had	always	remained	so
secluded	from	the	rest	of	the	house	that	for	a	century	and	a	half	scarcely	so	much
as	a	gossamer-thin	layer	of	dust	had	been	able	to	settle	on	the	cornices,	
the	black
and	white	square	stone	flags	of	the	floor,	and	the	green	baize	cloth	stretched	over
the	table,	which	seemed	like	a	self-contained	universe.
	
	
	
It	was	as	if	time,	which	usually	runs	so	irrevocably	away,	had	stood	still	here,	as
if	the	years	behind	us	were	still	to	come,	and	I	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	that
when	we	were	standing	in	the	billiards	room	of	Iver	Grove	with	Ashman,	Hilary
remarked	on	the	curious	confusion	of	emotions	affecting	even	a	historian	in	a
room	like	this,	sealed	away	so	long	from	the	flow	of	the	hours	and	days	and	the
succession	of	the	generations.	Ashman	replied	that	in	1941,	when	the	house	was
requisitioned,	he	himself	had	hidden	the	doors	to	the	billiards	room	and	the
nurseries	on	the	top	floor	of	the	house	by	putting	in	false	walls	and	pushing	large
wardrobes	in	front	of	them,	and	when	these	partitions	were	taken	down	in	the
autumn	of	1951	or	1952,	and	he	entered	the	nursery	again	for	the	first	time	in	ten
years,	it	wouldn’t	have	taken	much,	said	Ashman,	to	overset	his	reason
altogether.	The	mere	sight	of	the	model	train	with	the	green	Great	Western
Railway	carriages,	and	the	Noah’s	Ark	with	the	pairs	of	well-behaved	animals
saved	from	the	Flood	looking	out	of	it,	had	made	him	feel	as	if	the	chasm	of	time
were	opening	up	before	him,	and	as	he	ran	his	finger	over	the	long	row	of
notches	he	had	carved	in	silent	fury	at	the	age	of	eight	on	the	edge	of	his	little
bedside	table,	the	day	before	he	was	sent	off	to	preparatory	school,	Ashman
remembered,	the	same	rage	had	flared	up	in	him	again,	and	before	he	knew	what
he	was	about	he	found	himself	standing	in	the	yard	behind	the	house,	firing	his
rifle	several	times	at	the	little	clock	tower	on	the	coach	house,	where	the	marks
he	made	are	visible	on	the	clock	face	to	this	day.
	
Ashman	and	Hilary,	Iver	Grove	and	Andromeda	Lodge,	whatever	
my
thoughts	turn	to,	said	Austerlitz	as	we	descended	the	darkening	grassy	slopes	of
the	park	to	the	city	lights	which	had	now	come	on	in	a	wide	semicircle	before	us,
it	all	arouses	in	me	a	sense	of	disjunction,	of	having	no	ground	beneath	my	feet.
I	think	it	was	in	early	October	1957,	he	continued	abruptly	after	some	time,
when	I	was	on	the	point	of	going	to	Paris	to	pursue	the	studies	of	architectural
history	on	which	I	had	embarked	the	previous	year	at	the	Courtauld	Institute,
that	I	last	visited	the	Fitzpatricks	in	Barmouth	for	the	double	funeral	of	Uncle
Evelyn	and	Great-Uncle	Alphonso.	They	had	died	almost	within	a	day	of	each
other,	Alphonso	of	a	stroke	as	he	was	picking	up	his	favorite	apples	out	in	the
garden,	Evelyn	in	his	icy	bed,	cramped	with	pain	and	anguish.	Autumn	mists
filled	the	whole	valley	on	the	morning	of	the	burial	of	these	two	very	different
men,	Evelyn	always	at	odds	with	himself	and	the	world,	Alphonso	animated	by	a
cheerfully	equable	temperament.	Just	as	the	funeral	procession	began	moving
towards	Cutiau	cemetery,	the	sun	broke	through	the	hazy	veils	above	the
Mawddach,	and	a	breeze	blew	along	its	banks.	The	few	dark	figures,	the	group
of	poplars,	the	flood	of	light	over	the	water,	the	massif	of	Cader	Idris	on	the	far
side	of	the	river,	these	were	the	elements	in	a	farewell	scene	which,	curiously
enough,	I	rediscovered	a	few	weeks	ago	in	one	of	the	rapid	watercolor	sketches
Turner	often	made,	noting	down	what	he	saw	either	from	the	life	or	looking	back
at	the	past	later.	This	almost	insubstantial	picture,	bearing	the	title	of	
Funeral	at
Lausanne
,	dates	from	1841,	and	thus	from	a	time	when	Turner	could	hardly
travel	anymore	and	dwelt	increasingly	on	ideas	of	his	own	mortality,	and
perhaps	for	that	very	reason,	when	something	like	this	little	cortège	in	Lausanne
emerged	from	his	memory,	he	swiftly	set	
down	a	few	brushstrokes	in	an	attempt
to	capture	visions	which	would	melt	away	again	the	next	moment.
	
What	particularly	attracted	me	to	Turner’s	watercolor,	said	Austerlitz,	was	not
merely	the	similarity	of	the	scene	in	Lausanne	to	the	funeral	at	Cutiau,	but	the
memory	it	prompted	in	me	of	my	last	walk	with	Gerald	in	the	early	summer	of
1966,	through	the	vineyards	above	Morges	on	the	banks	of	Lake	Geneva.	During
my	subsequent	studies	of	Turner’s	life	and	his	sketchbooks	I	discovered	the	fact,
entirely	insignificant	in	itself	but	nonetheless	one	I	found	curiously	moving,	that
in	1798	he,	Turner,	had	himself	visited	the	estuary	of	the	Mawddach	on	a
journey	through	Wales,	and	that	at	the	time	he	was	exactly	the	same	age	as	I	was
at	the	funeral	in	Cutiau.	As	I	speak	of	it	now,	said	Austerlitz,	it	is	as	if	I	had	been
sitting	in	the	south-facing	drawing	room	of	Andromeda	Lodge	among	the
mourners	only	yesterday,	as	if	I	could	still	hear	their	quiet	murmuring,	and
Adela	saying	she	didn’t	know	what	she	
would	do	with	herself	now,	all	alone	in
that	big	house.	Gerald,	who	was	then	in	his	last	year	of	school	and	had	come
over	from	Oswestry	especially	for	the	funeral,	told	me	about	the	lack	of	any
improvement	in	conditions	at	Stower	Grange,	which	he	described	as	a	horrible
inkblot	disfiguring	the	souls	of	its	pupils	for	ever.	He	was	kept	from	going	mad,
said	Gerald,	only	by	the	fact	that	since	joining	the	Air	Cadet	Corps	he	had	been
able	to	fly	over	the	whole	wretched	place	in	a	Chipmunk	and	get	right	away
from	it	once	a	week.	The	further	you	can	rise	above	the	earth	the	better,	he	said,
and	for	that	same	reason	he	had	decided	to	study	astronomy.	About	four	o’clock
I	went	down	to	Barmouth	station	with	Gerald.	When	I	returned—dusk	was
already	falling,	said	Austerlitz,	and	fine	rain	hung	suspended	in	the	air,
apparently	without	sinking	to	the	ground—Adela	came	to	meet	me	from	the
misty	depths	of	the	garden,	muffled	up	in	greenish-brown	tweed	with	millions	of
tiny	drops	of	water	clinging	to	the	fine	fuzz	of	its	outline	and	forming	a	kind	of
silvery	radiance	around	her.	She	was	carrying	a	large	bunch	of	rust-colored
chrysanthemums	in	the	crook	of	her	right	arm,	and	when	we	had	walked	side	by
side	across	the	yard	without	a	word	and	were	standing	in	the	doorway,	she	raised
her	free	hand	and	put	the	hair	back	from	my	forehead,	as	if	she	knew,	in	this	one
gesture,	that	she	had	the	gift	of	being	remembered.	Yes,	I	can	still	see	Adela,
said	Austerlitz;	in	my	mind	she	has	remained	unchanged,	as	beautiful	as	she	was
then.	At	the	end	of	those	long	summer	days	we	quite	often	played	badminton
together	in	the	ballroom	of	Andromeda	Lodge,	which	had	been	empty	since	the
war,	while	Gerald	fed	and	watered	his	pigeons	before	night	fell.	The	feathered
shuttlecock	flew	between	us	as	we	struck	it	back	and	forth.	The	trajectory	it
followed,	
always	turning	on	its	way	although	you	could	not	have	said	how,	was
a	streak	of	white	drawn	through	the	evening	hour,	and	I	could	have	sworn	that
Adela	often	hovered	in	the	air	just	above	the	parquet	floor	for	much	longer	than
the	force	of	gravity	allowed.	After	our	game	we	usually	stayed	in	the	ballroom
for	a	little	while,	looking	at	the	images	cast	on	the	wall	opposite	the	tall,	arched
window	by	the	last	rays	of	the	sun	shining	low	through	the	moving	branches	of	a
hawthorn,	until	at	last	they	were	extinguished.	There	was	something	fleeting,
evanescent	about	those	sparse	patterns	appearing	in	constant	succession	on	the
pale	surface,	something	which	never	went	beyond	the	moment	of	its	generation,
so	to	speak,	yet	here,	in	this	intertwining	of	sunlight	and	shadow	always	forming
and	re-forming,	you	could	see	mountainous	landscapes	with	glaciers	and	ice
fields,	high	plateaux,	steppes,	deserts,	fields	full	of	flowers,	islands	in	the	sea,
coral	reefs,	archipelagoes	and	atolls,	forests	bending	to	the	storm,	quaking	grass
and	drifting	smoke.	And	once,	I	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	as	we	gazed	together
at	this	slowly	fading	world,	Adela	leaned	towards	me	and	asked:	Do	you	see	the
fronds	of	the	palm	trees,	do	you	see	the	caravan	coming	through	the	dunes	over
there?	By	the	time	Austerlitz	repeated	this	question	of	Adela’s,	a	question	still
imprinted	on	his	memory,	we	were	on	our	way	back	into	the	city	from
Greenwich.	Our	taxi	made	slow	progress	in	the	dense	evening	traffic.	It	had
begun	to	rain;	the	beams	of	headlights	gleamed	on	the	asphalt,	cutting	through
the	windscreen	covered	with	silvery	beads.	It	took	us	nearly	an	hour	to	travel	a
distance	of	not	much	more	than	three	miles	to	Tower	Bridge	by	way	of	Greek
Street,	Evelyn	Street,	Lower	Road,	and	Jamaica	Road.	Austerlitz	leaned	back
with	his	arms	round	his	rucksack,	staring	ahead	in	silence.	
Perhaps	he	had	closed
his	eyes,	I	thought,	but	I	did	not	venture	to	glance	sideways	at	him.	Only	at
Liverpool	Street	Station,	where	he	waited	with	me	in	McDonald’s	until	my	train
left,	and	after	a	casual	remark	about	the	glaring	light	which,	so	he	said,	allowed
not	even	the	hint	of	a	shadow	and	perpetuated	the	momentary	terror	of	a
lightning	flash—only	at	Liverpool	Street	did	he	resume	his	story.	I	never	saw
Adela	again	after	the	day	of	the	funeral,	he	began,	which	was	my	own	fault,
because	I	did	not	once	return	to	England	all	the	time	I	was	in	Paris.	And	then,	he
continued,	when	I	had	taken	up	my	appointment	in	London	and	went	to
Cambridge	to	see	Gerald,	who	had	now	finished	his	studies	and	was	beginning
his	research	work,	Andromeda	Lodge	had	been	sold	and	Adela	had	gone	to
North	Carolina	with	an	entomologist	called	Willoughby.	Gerald,	who	at	the	time
had	rented	a	cottage	in	the	tiny	village	of	Quy	not	far	from	Cambridge	airfield
and	had	bought	a	Cessna	with	his	share	of	the	proceeds	from	the	sale	of	the
property,	kept	coming	back	to	his	passion	for	flying	in	all	our	conversations,
whatever	their	ostensible	subjects.	I	remember,	for	instance,	said	Austerlitz,	that
once,	when	we	were	discussing	our	schooldays	at	Stower	Grange,	he	told	me	at
length	how	after	I	had	gone	up	to	Oxford	he	spent	many	of	the	endless	hours	of
study	at	the	school	working	out	an	ornithological	system	based,	as	its	principal
criterion,	on	the	degree	of	a	bird’s	aptitude	for	flight,	and	according	to	Gerald,
said	Austerlitz,	whatever	way	he	modified	this	system	pigeons	always	led	the
field,	not	just	for	their	speed	in	traveling	very	long	distances	but	for	their
navigational	abilities,	which	set	them	apart	from	all	other	living	creatures.	You
can	dispatch	a	pigeon	from	shipboard	in	the	middle	of	a	snowstorm	over	the
North	Sea,	and	if	its	strength	holds	out	it	
will	infallibly	find	its	way	home.	To
this	day	no	one	knows	how	these	birds,	sent	off	on	their	journey	into	so
menacing	a	void,	their	hearts	surely	almost	breaking	with	fear	in	their
presentiment	of	the	vast	distances	they	must	cover,	make	straight	for	their	place
of	origin.	At	least,	Gerald	had	said,	the	scientific	explanations	known	to	him
claiming	that	pigeons	take	their	bearings	from	the	constellations,	or	air	currents,
or	magnetic	fields	are	not	much	more	conclusive	than	the	various	theories	he
worked	out	himself	as	a	boy	of	twelve,	hoping	that	once	he	had	solved	this
problem	he	would	be	able	to	make	the	pigeons	fly	the	other	way,	for	instance
from	their	home	in	Barmouth	to	his	place	of	exile	in	Oswestry,	and	he	kept
imagining	them	suddenly	sailing	down	to	him	out	of	the	sky,	with	sunlight
filtered	through	the	feathers	of	their	motionless,	outstretched	wings,	and	landing
with	a	faint	coo	in	their	throats	on	the	sill	of	the	window	where,	as	he	said,	he
often	stood	for	hours	on	end.	The	sense	of	liberation	he	had	felt	when	he	first
became	aware	of	the	lifting	capacity	of	the	air	beneath	him	in	one	of	the	Cadet
Corps	planes,	Gerald	said,	was	indescribable,	and	he	himself	still	remembered,
added	Austerlitz,	how	proud,	indeed	positively	radiant	Gerald	had	been	when
once,	in	the	late	summer	of	1962	or	1963,	they	took	off	together	from	the
runway	of	Cambridge	airfield	for	an	evening	flight.	The	sun	had	set	not	long
before	we	started,	but	as	soon	as	we	gained	altitude	we	were	surrounded	once
again	by	a	glittering	brightness	which	did	not	fade	until	we	were	going	south,
following	the	white	strip	of	the	Suffolk	coast,	when	shadows	emerged	from	the
depths	of	the	sea,	gradually	rising	and	inclining	towards	us,	until	the	last	gleam
of	light	was	extinguished	on	the	horizons	of	the	western	world.	Soon	the	shapes
of	the	landscape	below,	the	
woods	and	the	pale	stubble	fields,	could	be
distinguished	only	as	shadowy	outlines,	and	I	shall	never	forget,	said	Austerlitz,
how	the	curving	estuary	of	the	Thames	emerged	before	us	as	if	out	of	nothing,	a
dragon’s	tail,	black	as	cart	grease,	winding	its	way	through	the	falling	night,
while	the	lights	of	Canvey	Island,	Sheerness,	and	Southend-on-Sea	came	on
beside	it.	Later,	as	we	described	a	wide	arc	over	Picardy	in	the	darkness	and	then
turned	back	on	course	for	England,	if	we	raised	our	eyes	from	the	illuminated
board	instruments	to	look	through	the	glazed	cockpit	we	could	see	the	whole
vault	of	heaven	as	I	had	never	seen	it	before,	apparently	at	a	standstill	but	in
truth	turning	slowly,	with	the	constellations	of	the	Swan,	Cassiopeia,	the
Pleiades,	the	Charioteer,	the	Corona	Borealis,	and	all	the	rest	almost	lost	in	the
shimmering	dust	of	the	myriads	of	nameless	stars	sprinkled	over	the	sky.	It	was
in	the	autumn	of	1965,	continued	Austerlitz,	who	had	drifted	for	some	time	in
his	memories,	that	Gerald	began	developing	what	we	now	know	was	his	trail-
blazing	hypothesis	on	the	so-called	Eagle	Nebula	in	the	constellation	of	the
Serpent.	He	spoke	of	huge	regions	of	interstellar	gas	which,	not	unlike
stormclouds,	became	concentrated	into	vast,	billowing	forms	projecting	several
light-years	into	the	void,	where	new	stars	were	born	in	a	process	of	condensation
steadily	intensifying	under	the	influence	of	gravity.	I	remember	Gerald’s	saying
that	there	were	positive	nurseries	of	stars	out	there,	a	claim	which	I	recently
found	confirmed	in	a	newspaper	report	accompanying	one	of	the	spectacular
photographs	sent	back	to	earth	from	the	Hubble	telescope	on	its	further	journey
into	space.	At	any	rate,	said	Austerlitz,	Gerald	then	moved	from	Cambridge	to
continue	his	work	at	an	astrophysics	research	institute	in	Geneva,	where	I	visited
him	several	times,	and	as	we	walked	out	of	the	city	together	and	along	the	banks
of	the	lake	I	observed	the	way	his	ideas,	like	the	stars	themselves,	gradually
emerged	from	the	whirling	nebulae	of	his	astrophysical	fantasies.
	
	
On	one	of	these	occasions	Gerald	also	told	me	about	the	flights	he	had	made
over	the	gleaming,	snow-covered	mountains	in	his	Cessna,	over	the	volcanic
peaks	of	
the	Puy-de-Dôme	region,	down	the	beautiful	Garonne	and	on	to
Bordeaux.
	
	
I	suppose	it	was	inevitable	that	he	would	fail	to	come	home	from	one	of	these
flights,	said	Austerlitz.	It	was	a	bad	day	when	I	heard	that	he	had	crashed	in	the
Savoy	Alps,	and	perhaps	that	was	the	beginning	of	my	own	decline,	a
withdrawal	into	myself	which	became	increasingly	morbid	and	intractable	with
the	passage	of	time.
	
*
	
Almost	quarter	of	a	year	had	passed	before	I	next	went	to	London	and	visited
Austerlitz	in	his	house	in	Alderney	Street.	On	our	parting	in	December	we	had
agreed	that	I	would	wait	to	receive	news	from	him.	As	the	weeks	went	by	I	had
felt	less	and	less	sure	whether	I	would	ever	hear	from	him	again,	fearing	at
various	times	that	I	might	have	made	a	thoughtless	remark,	or	offended	him	in
some	other	way.	It	also	occurred	to	me	that,	following	his	old	custom,	he	might
simply	have	gone	away	with	some	unknown	purpose	in	mind	and	for	an
indefinite	period.	Had	I	realized	at	the	time	that	for	Austerlitz	certain	moments
had	no	beginning	or	end,	while	on	the	other	hand	his	whole	life	had	sometimes
seemed	to	him	a	blank	point	without	duration,	I	would	probably	have	waited
more	patiently.	But	at	any	rate,	one	day	my	mail	included	a	picture	postcard
from	the	1920s	or	1930s	showing	a	camp	of	white	tents	in	the	Egyptian	desert,	a
picture	taken	during	a	campaign	now	remembered	by	no	one,	the	message	on	the
back	saying	merely	
Saturday	19	March,	Alderney	Street
,	followed	by	a	question
mark	and	a	capital	
A
	for	
Austerlitz
.	Alderney	Street	is	quite	a	long	way	out	in	the
East	End	of	London.	It	is	a	remarkably	quiet	street	running	parallel	to	the	main
road	not	far	from	the	
Mile	End	junction,	where	there	are	always	traffic	jams	and,
on	such	Saturdays,	market	traders	set	up	their	stalls	of	clothes	and	fabrics	on	the
pavements.
	
	
Thinking	back	now,	I	see	again	a	low	block	of	flats	like	a	fortress	standing	on
the	corner	of	the	street;	a	garish	green	kiosk	with	its	wares	openly	laid	out,
though	there	was	never	anyone	behind	the	counter;	a	cast-iron	fence	round	a
patch	of	grass	on	which	you	might	think	no	one	had	ever	trodden;	and	the	brick
wall	on	the	right,	about	fifty	yards	long	and	as	tall	as	a	man.	At	the	end	of	it	I
found	the	house	where	Austerlitz	lived,	the	first	in	a	row	of	six	or	seven.	The
interior,	which	appeared	to	be	very	spacious,	contained	only	the	most	essential
furniture	and	no	curtains	or	carpets.	The	walls	were	painted	a	pale	shade	of	matt
gray,	and	the	floorboards	were	also	gray,	but	of	a	rather	darker	hue.	Apart	from
what	seemed	to	me	a	curiously	elongated,	old-fashioned	ottoman,	the	front
room,	into	which	Austerlitz	took	me	first,	had	nothing	in	it	but	a	large	table,	also
varnished	matt	gray,	with	several	dozen	photographs	lying	on	it,	most	of	them
dating	quite	a	long	way	back	and	rather	worn	at	the	
edges.	Some	of	the	pictures
were	already	familiar	to	me,	so	to	speak:	pictures	of	empty	Belgian	landscapes,
stations	and	Métro	viaducts	in	Paris,	the	palm	house	in	the	Jardin	des	Plantes,
various	moths	and	other	night-flying	insects,	ornate	dovecotes,	Gerald
Fitzpatrick	on	the	airfield	near	Quy,	and	a	number	of	heavy	doors	and	gateways.
Austerlitz	told	me	that	he	sometimes	sat	here	for	hours,	laying	out	these
photographs	or	others	from	his	collection	the	wrong	way	up,	as	if	playing	a
game	of	patience,	and	that	then,	one	by	one,	he	turned	them	over,	always	with	a
new	sense	of	surprise	at	what	he	saw,	pushing	the	pictures	back	and	forth	and
over	each	other,	arranging	them	in	an	order	depending	on	their	family
resemblances,	or	withdrawing	them	from	the	game	until	either	there	was	nothing
left	but	the	gray	tabletop,	or	he	felt	exhausted	by	the	constant	effort	of	thinking
and	remembering	and	had	to	rest	on	the	ottoman.	I	often	lie	here	until	late	in	the
evening,	feeling	time	roll	back,	said	Austerlitz,	as	we	passed	into	the	sitting
room	at	the	rear,	where	he	lit	the	little	gas	fire	and	invited	me	to	sit	down	on	one
of	the	chairs	standing	on	either	side	of	the	hearth.	This	room	too	contained
hardly	any	furniture;	there	were	just	the	gray	floorboards	and	the	walls	on	which
the	light	of	the	flickering	blue	flames	was	now	cast	in	the	gathering	dusk.	I	can
still	hear	the	faint	hiss	of	the	gas,	and	I	remember	that	while	Austerlitz	was
making	tea	in	the	kitchen	I	sat	entranced	by	the	reflection	of	the	little	fire,	which
looked	as	if	it	were	burning	at	some	distance	from	the	house	on	the	other	side	of
the	glazed	veranda	doors,	among	the	now	almost	pitch-black	bushes	in	the
garden.	When	Austerlitz	had	brought	the	tea	tray	in	and	was	holding	slices	of
white	bread	on	a	toasting	fork	in	front	of	the	blue	gas	flames,	I	said	something
about	the	incomprehensibility	of	mirror	images,	to	which	he	
replied	that	he	often
sat	in	this	room	after	nightfall,	staring	at	the	apparently	motionless	spot	of	light
reflected	out	there	in	the	darkness,	and	when	he	did	so	he	inevitably	thought	of	a
Rembrandt	exhibition	he	had	seen	once,	many	years	ago,	in	the	Rijksmuseum	in
Amsterdam,	where	he	had	not	felt	inclined	to	linger	before	any	of	the	large-scale
masterpieces	which	have	been	reproduced	over	and	over	again,	but	instead	stood
for	a	long	time	looking	at	a	small	painting	measuring	at	most	nine	by	twelve
inches,	from	the	Dublin	collection,	as	far	as	he	remembered,	which	according	to
its	label	showed	the	Flight	into	Egypt,	although	he	could	make	out	neither	Mary
and	Joseph,	nor	the	child	Jesus,	nor	the	ass,	but	only	a	tiny	flicker	of	fire	in	the
middle	of	the	gleaming	black	varnish	of	the	darkness	which,	said	Austerlitz,	he
could	see	in	his	mind’s	eye	to	this	day.—But	where,	he	continued,	shall	I	take	up
my	story?	When	I	came	back	from	France	I	bought	this	house	for	what	today	is
the	positively	ridiculous	sum	of	nine	hundred	and	fifty	pounds,	and	then	I	taught
for	almost	thirty	years	until	I	took	early	retirement	in	1991,	partly,	said
Austerlitz,	because	of	the	inexorable	spread	of	ignorance	even	to	the
universities,	and	partly	because	I	hoped	to	set	out	on	paper	my	investigations
into	the	history	of	architecture	and	civilization,	as	had	long	been	my	intention.	I
might	perhaps,	Austerlitz	said	to	me,	have	had	some	idea	since	our	first
conversations	in	Antwerp	of	the	extent	of	his	interests,	the	drift	of	his	ideas,	and
the	nature	of	his	observations	and	comments,	always	made	extempore	or	first
recorded	in	provisional	form,	but	eventually	covering	thousands	of	pages.	Even
in	Paris,	said	Austerlitz,	I	had	thought	of	collecting	my	fragmentary	studies	in	a
book,	although	I	constantly	postponed	writing	it.	The	various	ideas	I	entertained
at	different	times	of	this	
book	I	was	to	write	ranged	from	the	concept	of	a
systematically	descriptive	work	in	several	volumes	to	a	series	of	essays	on	such
subjects	as	hygiene	and	sanitation,	the	architecture	of	the	penal	system,	secular
temples,	hydrotherapy,	zoological	gardens,	departure	and	arrival,	light	and
shade,	steam	and	gas,	and	so	forth.	However,	even	a	first	glance	at	the	papers	I
had	brought	here	from	the	Institute	to	Alderney	Street	showed	that	they
consisted	largely	of	sketches	which	now	seemed	misguided,	distorted,	and	of
little	use.	I	began	to	assemble	and	recast	anything	that	still	passed	muster	in
order	to	re-create	before	my	own	eyes,	as	if	in	the	pages	of	an	album,	the	picture
of	the	landscape,	now	almost	immersed	in	oblivion,	through	which	my	journey
had	taken	me.	But	the	more	I	labored	on	this	project	over	several	months	the
more	pitiful	did	the	results	seem.	I	was	increasingly	overcome	by	a	sense	of
aversion	and	distaste,	said	Austerlitz,	at	the	mere	thought	of	opening	the	bundles
of	papers	and	looking	through	the	endless	reams	I	
had	written	in	the	course	of
the	years.
	
	
Yet	reading	and	writing,	he	added,	had	always	been	his	favorite	occupation.
How	happily,	said	Austerlitz,	have	I	sat	over	a	book	in	the	deepening	twilight
until	I	could	no	longer	make	out	the	words	and	my	mind	began	to	wander,	and
how	secure	have	I	felt	seated	at	the	desk	in	my	house	in	the	dark	night,	just
watching	the	tip	of	my	pencil	in	the	lamplight	following	its	shadow,	as	if	of	its
own	accord	and	with	perfect	fidelity,	while	that	shadow	moved	regularly	from
left	to	right,	line	by	line,	over	the	ruled	paper.	But	now	I	found	writing	such	hard
going	that	it	often	took	me	a	whole	day	to	compose	a	single	sentence,	and	no
sooner	had	I	thought	such	a	sentence	out,	with	the	greatest	effort,	and	written	it
down,	than	I	saw	the	awkward	falsity	of	my	constructions	and	the	inadequacy	of
all	the	words	I	had	employed.	If	at	times	some	kind	of	self-deception	nonetheless
made	me	feel	that	I	had	done	a	good	day’s	work,	then	as	soon	as	I	glanced	at	the
page	next	morning	I	was	sure	to	find	the	most	appalling	mistakes,
inconsistencies,	and	lapses	staring	at	me	from	the	paper.	However	much	or	little
I	had	written,	on	a	subsequent	reading	it	always	seemed	so	fundamentally	flawed
that	I	had	to	destroy	it	immediately	and	begin	again.	Soon	I	could	not	even
venture	on	the	first	step.	Like	a	tightrope	walker	who	has	forgotten	how	to	put
one	foot	in	front	of	the	other,	all	I	felt	was	the	swaying	of	the	precarious
structure	on	which	I	stood,	stricken	with	terror	at	the	realization	that	the	ends	of
the	balancing	pole	gleaming	far	out	on	the	edges	of	my	field	of	vision	were	no
longer	my	guiding	lights,	as	before,	but	malignant	enticements	to	me	to	cast
myself	into	the	depths.	Now	and	then	a	train	of	thought	did	succeed	in	emerging
with	wonderful	clarity	inside	my	head,	but	I	knew	even	as	it	formed	that	I	was	in
no	position	to	record	it,	for	
as	soon	as	I	so	much	as	picked	up	my	pencil	the
endless	possibilities	of	language,	to	which	I	could	once	safely	abandon	myself,
became	a	conglomeration	of	the	most	inane	phrases.	There	was	not	an
expression	in	the	sentence	but	it	proved	to	be	a	miserable	crutch,	not	a	word	but
it	sounded	false	and	hollow.	And	in	this	dreadful	state	of	mind	I	sat	for	hours,	for
days	on	end	with	my	face	to	the	wall,	tormenting	myself	and	gradually
discovering	the	horror	of	finding	that	even	the	smallest	task	or	duty,	for	instance
arranging	assorted	objects	in	a	drawer,	can	be	beyond	one’s	power.	It	was	as	if
an	illness	that	had	been	latent	in	me	for	a	long	time	were	now	threatening	to
erupt,	as	if	some	soul-destroying	and	inexorable	force	had	fastened	upon	me	and
would	gradually	paralyze	my	entire	system.	I	already	felt	in	my	head	the
dreadful	torpor	that	heralds	disintegration	of	the	personality,	I	sensed	that	in
truth	I	had	neither	memory	nor	the	power	of	thought,	nor	even	any	existence,
that	all	my	life	had	been	a	constant	process	of	obliteration,	a	turning	away	from
myself	and	the	world.	If	someone	had	come	then	to	lead	me	away	to	a	place	of
execution	I	would	have	gone	meekly,	without	a	word,	without	so	much	as
opening	my	eyes,	just	as	people	who	suffer	from	violent	seasickness,	if	they	are
crossing	the	Caspian	Sea	on	a	steamer,	for	instance,	will	not	offer	the	slightest
resistance	should	someone	tell	them	that	they	are	about	to	be	thrown	overboard.
Whatever	was	going	on	within	me,	said	Austerlitz,	the	panic	I	felt	on	facing	the
start	of	any	sentence	that	must	be	written,	not	knowing	how	I	could	begin	it	or
indeed	any	other	sentence,	soon	extended	to	what	is	in	itself	the	simpler	business
of	reading,	until	if	I	attempted	to	read	a	whole	page	I	inevitably	fell	into	a	state
of	the	greatest	confusion.	If	language	may	be	regarded	as	an	old	city	full	
of
streets	and	squares,	nooks	and	crannies,	with	some	quarters	dating	from	far	back
in	time	while	others	have	been	torn	down,	cleaned	up,	and	rebuilt,	and	with
suburbs	reaching	further	and	further	into	the	surrounding	country,	then	I	was	like
a	man	who	has	been	abroad	a	long	time	and	cannot	find	his	way	through	this
urban	sprawl	anymore,	no	longer	knows	what	a	bus	stop	is	for,	or	what	a	back
yard	is,	or	a	street	junction,	an	avenue	or	a	bridge.	The	entire	structure	of
language,	the	syntactical	arrangement	of	parts	of	speech,	punctuation,
conjunctions,	and	finally	even	the	nouns	denoting	ordinary	objects	were	all
enveloped	in	impenetrable	fog.	I	could	not	even	understand	what	I	myself	had
written	in	the	past—perhaps	I	could	understand	that	least	of	all.	All	I	could	think
was	that	such	a	sentence	only	appears	to	mean	something,	but	in	truth	is	at	best	a
makeshift	expedient,	a	kind	of	unhealthy	growth	issuing	from	our	ignorance,
something	which	we	use,	in	the	same	way	as	many	sea	plants	and	animals	use
their	tentacles,	to	grope	blindly	through	the	darkness	enveloping	us.	The	very
thing	which	may	usually	convey	a	sense	of	purposeful	intelligence—the
exposition	of	an	idea	by	means	of	a	certain	stylistic	facility—now	seemed	to	me
nothing	but	an	entirely	arbitrary	or	deluded	enterprise.	I	could	see	no
connections	anymore,	the	sentences	resolved	themselves	into	a	series	of	separate
words,	the	words	into	random	sets	of	letters,	the	letters	into	disjointed	signs,	and
those	signs	into	a	blue-gray	trail	gleaming	silver	here	and	there,	excreted	and	left
behind	it	by	some	crawling	creature,	and	the	sight	of	it	increasingly	filled	me
with	feelings	of	horror	and	shame.	One	evening,	said	Austerlitz,	I	gathered	up	all
my	papers,	bundled	or	loose,	my	notepads	and	exercise	books,	my	files	and
lecture	notes,	anything	with	my	writing	on	it,	and	carried	the	
entire	collection
out	of	the	house	to	the	far	end	of	the	garden,	where	I	threw	it	on	the	compost
heap	and	buried	it	under	layers	of	rotted	leaves	and	spadefuls	of	earth.	For
several	weeks	afterwards,	while	I	turned	out	the	rooms	of	my	house	and
repainted	the	floors	and	walls,	I	did	think	I	felt	some	relief	from	the	burden
weighing	down	on	my	life,	but	I	soon	realized	that	the	shadows	were	falling	over
me.	Especially	in	the	evening	twilight,	which	had	always	been	my	favorite	time
of	day,	I	was	overcome	by	a	sense	of	anxiety,	diffuse	at	first	and	then	growing
ever	denser,	through	which	the	lovely	spectacle	of	fading	colors	turned	to	a
malevolent	and	lightless	pallor,	my	heart	felt	constricted	in	my	chest	to	a	quarter
of	its	natural	size,	until	at	last	there	remained	only	one	idea	in	my	head:	I	must
go	to	the	third-floor	landing	of	a	certain	building	in	Great	Portland	Street,	where
I	had	once	had	a	strange	turn	after	visiting	a	doctor’s	surgery,	and	throw	myself
over	the	banisters	into	the	dark	depths	of	the	stairwell.	It	was	impossible	for	me
then	to	go	and	see	any	of	my	friends,	who	were	not	numerous	in	any	case,	or
mix	with	other	people	in	any	normal	way.	The	mere	idea	of	listening	to	anyone
brought	on	a	wave	of	revulsion,	while	the	thought	of	talking	myself,	said
Austerlitz,	was	perhaps	worse	still,	and	as	this	state	of	affairs	continued	I	came
to	realize	how	isolated	I	was	and	always	have	been,	among	the	Welsh	as	much
as	among	the	English	and	French.	It	never	occurred	to	me	to	wonder	about	my
true	origins,	said	Austerlitz,	nor	did	I	ever	feel	that	I	belonged	to	a	certain	social
class,	professional	group,	or	religious	confession.	I	was	as	ill	at	ease	among
artists	and	intellectuals	as	in	bourgeois	life,	and	it	was	a	very	long	time	since	I
had	felt	able	to	make	personal	friendships.	No	sooner	did	I	become	acquainted
with	someone	than	I	feared	I	had	come	
too	close,	no	sooner	did	someone	turn
towards	me	than	I	began	to	retreat.	In	the	end	I	was	linked	to	other	people	only
by	certain	forms	of	courtesy	which	I	took	to	extremes	and	which	I	know	today,
said	Austerlitz,	I	observed	not	so	much	for	the	sake	of	their	recipients	as	because
they	allowed	me	to	ignore	the	fact	that	my	life	has	always,	for	as	far	back	as	I
can	remember,	been	clouded	by	an	unrelieved	despair.	It	was	then,	after	my
work	of	destruction	in	the	garden	and	when	I	had	turned	out	my	house,	that	I
began	my	nocturnal	wanderings	through	London,	to	escape	the	insomnia	which
increasingly	tormented	me.	For	over	a	year,	I	think,	said	Austerlitz,	I	would
leave	my	house	as	darkness	fell,	walking	on	and	on,	down	the	Mile	End	Road
and	Bow	Road	to	Stratford,	then	to	Chigwell	and	Romford,	right	across	Bethnal
Green	and	Canonbury,	through	Holloway	and	Kentish	Town	and	thus	to
Hampstead	Heath,	or	else	south	over	the	river	to	Peckham	and	Dulwich	or
westward	to	Richmond	Park.	It	is	a	fact	that	you	can	traverse	this	vast	city
almost	from	end	to	end	on	foot	in	a	single	night,	said	Austerlitz,	and	once	you
are	used	to	walking	alone	and	meeting	only	a	few	nocturnal	specters	on	your
way,	you	soon	begin	to	wonder	why,	apparently	because	of	some	agreement
concluded	long	ago,	Londoners	of	all	ages	lie	in	their	beds	in	those	countless
buildings	in	Greenwich,	Bayswater,	or	Kensington,	under	a	safe	roof,	as	they
suppose,	while	really	they	are	only	stretched	out	with	their	faces	turned	to	the
earth	in	fear,	like	travelers	of	the	past	resting	on	their	way	through	the	desert.
My	wanderings	took	me	to	the	most	remote	areas	of	London,	into	outlying	parts
of	the	metropolis	which	I	would	never	otherwise	have	seen,	and	when	dawn
came	I	would	go	back	to	Whitechapel	on	the	Underground,	together	with	all	the
other	poor	souls	who	
flow	from	the	suburbs	towards	the	center	at	that	time	of
day.	As	I	passed	through	the	stations,	I	thought	several	times	that	among	the
passengers	coming	towards	me	in	the	tiled	passages,	on	the	escalators	plunging
steeply	into	the	depths,	or	behind	the	gray	windows	of	a	train	just	pulling	out,	I
saw	a	face	known	to	me	from	some	much	earlier	part	of	my	life,	but	I	could
never	say	whose	it	was.	These	familiar	faces	always	had	something	different
from	the	rest	about	them,	something	I	might	almost	call	indistinct,	and	on
occasion	they	would	haunt	and	disturb	me	for	days	on	end.	In	fact	at	this	time,
usually	when	I	came	home	from	my	nocturnal	excursions,	I	began	seeing	what
might	be	described	as	shapes	and	colors	of	diminished	corporeality	through	a
drifting	veil	or	cloud	of	smoke,	images	from	a	faded	world:	a	squadron	of	yachts
putting	out	into	the	shadows	over	the	sea	from	the	glittering	Thames	estuary	in
the	evening	light,	a	horse-drawn	cab	in	Spitalfields	driven	by	a	man	in	a	top	hat,
a	woman	wearing	the	costume	of	the	1930s	and	casting	her	eyes	down	as	she
passed	me	by.	It	was	at	moments	of	particular	weakness,	when	I	thought	I	could
not	go	on	any	longer,	that	my	senses	played	these	tricks	on	me.	It	sometimes
seemed	to	me	as	if	the	noises	of	the	city	were	dying	down	around	me	and	the
traffic	was	flowing	silently	down	the	street,	or	as	if	someone	had	plucked	me	by
the	sleeve.	And	I	would	hear	people	behind	my	back	speaking	in	a	foreign
tongue,	Lithuanian,	Hungarian,	or	something	else	with	a	very	alien	note	to	it,	or
so	I	thought,	said	Austerlitz.	I	had	several	such	experiences	in	Liverpool	Street
Station,	to	which	I	was	always	irresistibly	drawn	back	on	my	night	journeys.
Before	work	began	to	rebuild	it	at	the	end	of	the	1980s	this	station,	with	its	main
concourse	fifteen	to	twenty	feet	below	street	level,	was	one	of	the	
darkest	and
most	sinister	places	in	London,	a	kind	of	entrance	to	the	underworld,	as	it	has
often	been	described.	The	ballast	between	the	tracks,	the	cracked	sleepers,	the
brick	walls	with	their	stone	bases,	the	cornices	and	panes	of	the	tall	windows,	the
wooden	kiosks	for	the	ticket	inspectors,	and	the	towering	cast-iron	columns	with
their	palmate	capitals	were	all	covered	in	a	greasy	black	layer	formed,	over	the
course	of	a	century,	by	coke	dust	and	soot,	steam,	sulfur,	and	diesel	oil.	Even	on
sunny	days	only	a	faint	grayness,	scarcely	illuminated	at	all	by	the	globes	of	the
station	lights,	came	through	the	glass	roof	over	the	main	hall,	and	in	this	eternal
dusk,	which	was	full	of	a	muffled	babble	of	voices,	a	quiet	scraping	and
trampling	of	feet,	innumerable	people	passed	in	great	tides,	disembarking	from
the	trains	or	boarding	them,	coming	together,	moving	apart,	and	being	held	up	at
barriers	and	bottlenecks	like	water	against	a	weir.
	
	
Whenever	I	got	out	at	Liverpool	Street	Station	on	my	way	back	to	the	East	End,
said	Austerlitz,	I	would	stay	there	at	least	a	couple	of	hours,	sitting	on	a	bench
with	other	passengers	who	were	already	tired	in	
the	early	morning,	or	standing
somewhere,	leaning	on	a	handrail	and	feeling	that	constant	wrenching	inside	me,
a	kind	of	heartache	which,	as	I	was	beginning	to	sense,	was	caused	by	the	vortex
of	past	time.	I	knew	that	on	the	site	where	the	station	stood	marshy	meadows	had
once	extended	to	the	city	walls,	meadows	which	froze	over	for	months	on	end	in
the	cold	winters	of	the	so-called	Little	Ice	Age,	and	that	Londoners	used	to	strap
bone	runners	under	their	shoes,	skating	there	as	the	people	of	Antwerp	skated	on
the	Schelde,	sometimes	going	on	until	midnight	in	the	flickering	light	of	the
bonfires	burning	here	and	there	on	the	ice	in	heavy	braziers.	Later	on,	the
marshes	were	progressively	drained,	elm	trees	were	planted,	market	gardens,
fish	ponds,	and	white	sandy	paths	were	laid	out	to	make	a	place	where	the
citizens	could	walk	in	their	leisure	time,	and	soon	pavilions	and	country	houses
were	being	built	all	the	way	out	to	Forest	Park	and	Arden.	Until	the	seventeenth
century,	Austerlitz	continued,	the	priory	of	the	order	of	St.	Mary	of	Bethlehem
stood	on	the	site	of	the	present	main	station	concourse	and	the	Great	Eastern
Hotel.	It	had	been	founded	by	a	certain	Simon	FitzMary	in	gratitude	for	his
miraculous	rescue	from	the	hands	of	the	Saracens	when	he	was	on	a	crusade,	so
that	the	pious	brothers	and	sisters	could	pray	henceforward	for	the	salvation	of
the	founder’s	soul	and	the	souls	of	his	ancestors,	his	descendants,	and	all	those
related	to	him.	The	hospital	for	the	insane	and	other	destitute	persons	which	has
gone	down	in	history	under	the	name	of	Bedlam	also	belonged	to	the	priory
outside	Bishopsgate.	Whenever	I	was	in	the	station,	said	Austerlitz,	I	kept	almost
obsessively	trying	to	imagine—through	the	ever-changing	maze	of	walls—the
location	in	that	huge	space	of	the	rooms	where	the	asylum	inmates	
were
confined,	and	I	often	wondered	whether	the	pain	and	suffering	accumulated	on
this	site	over	the	centuries	had	ever	really	ebbed	away,	or	whether	they	might
not	still,	as	I	sometimes	thought	when	I	felt	a	cold	breath	of	air	on	my	forehead,
be	sensed	as	we	passed	through	them.	Or	I	imagined	the	bleachfields	stretching
westwards	from	Bedlam,	saw	the	white	lengths	of	linen	spread	out	on	the	green
grass	and	the	diminutive	figures	of	weavers	and	washerwomen,	and	on	the	far
side	of	the	bleachfields	the	places	where	the	dead	were	buried	once	the
churchyards	of	London	could	hold	no	more.	When	space	becomes	too	cramped,
the	dead,	like	the	living,	move	out	into	less	densely	populated	districts	where
they	can	rest	at	a	decent	distance	from	each	other.	But	more	and	more	keep
coming,	a	neverending	succession	of	them,	and	in	the	end,	when	the	space	is
entirely	occupied,	graves	are	dug	through	existing	graves	to	accommodate	them,
until	all	the	bones	in	the	cemetery	lie	jumbled	up	together.	At	Broad	Street
Station,	built	in	1865	on	the	site	of	the	former	burial	grounds	and	bleachfields,
excavations	during	the	demolition	work	of	1984	brought	to	light	over	four
hundred	skeletons	underneath	a	taxi	rank.	I	went	there	quite	often	at	the	time,
said	Austerlitz,	partly	because	of	my	interest	in	architectural	history	and	partly
for	other	reasons	which	I	could	not	explain	even	to	myself,	and	I	took
photographs	of	the	remains	of	the	dead.	I	remember	falling	into	conversation
with	one	of	the	archaeologists,	who	told	me	that	on	average	the	skeletons	of
eight	people	had	been	found	in	every	cubic	meter	of	earth	removed	from	the
trench.	In	the	course	of	the	seventeenth	and	eighteenth	centuries	the	city	had
grown	above	these	strata	of	soil	mingled	with	the	dust	and	bones	of	decayed
bodies	into	a	warren	
of	putrid	streets	and	houses	for	the	poorest	Londoners,
cobbled	together	out	of	beams,	clods	of	clay,	and	any	other	building	material
that	came	to	hand.
	
	
Around	1860	and	1870,	before	work	on	the	construction	of	the	two	northeast
terminals	began,	these	poverty-stricken	quarters	were	forcibly	cleared	and	vast
quantities	of	soil,	together	with	the	bones	buried	in	them,	were	dug	up	and
removed,	so	that	the	railway	lines,	which	on	the	engineers’	plans	looked	like
muscles	and	sinews	in	an	anatomical	atlas,	could	be	brought	to	the	outskirts	of
the	City.	Soon	the	site	in	front	of	Bishopsgate	was	nothing	but	a	gray-brown
morass,	a	no-man’s-land	where	not	a	living	soul	stirred.	The	little	river
Wellbrook,	the	ditches	and	ponds,	the	crakes	and	snipe	and	herons,	the	elms	and
mulberry	trees,	Paul	Pindar’s	deer	park,	the	inmates	of	Bedlam	and	the	starving
paupers	of	Angel	Alley,	Peter	Street,	Sweet	Apple	Court,	and	Swan	Yard	had	all
gone,	and	gone	now	too	are	the	millions	and	millions	of	people	who	passed
through	Broadgate	and	Liverpool	Street	stations	day	in,	day	out,	for	an	entire
century.	As	for	me,	said	Austerlitz,	I	felt	at	this	time	as	if	the	dead	were
returning	from	their	exile	and	filling	the	twilight	around	me	with	their	strangely
slow	but	incessant	to-ing	and	fro-ing.	I	remember,	for	instance,	that	one	quiet
Sunday	morning	I	was	sitting	on	a	bench	on	the	particularly	gloomy	platform
where	the	boat	trains	from	Harwich	came	in,	watching	a	man	who	wore	a	snow-
white	turban	with	his	shabby	porter’s	uniform	as	he	wielded	a	broom,	sweeping
up	the	rubbish	scattered	on	the	paving.	In	doing	this	job,	which	in	its
pointlessness	reminded	me	of	the	eternal	punishments	that	we	are	told,	said
Austerlitz,	we	must	endure	after	death,	the	white-turbaned	porter,	oblivious	of	all
around,	performed	the	same	movements	
over	and	over	again	using,	instead	of	a
proper	dustpan,	a	cardboard	box	with	one	side	removed,	and	nudging	it	along	in
front	of	him	with	his	foot,	first	up	the	platform	and	then	down	again	until	he	had
returned	to	his	point	of	departure,	a	low	doorway	in	the	builders’	fence	reaching
up	to	the	second	story	of	the	interior	façade	of	the	station.
	
	
He	had	emerged	from	this	doorway	half	an	hour	ago	and	now	disappeared
through	it	again,	with	an	odd	jerk,	as	it	seemed	to	me.	To	this	day	I	cannot
explain	what	made	me	follow	him,	said	Austerlitz.	We	take	almost	all	the
decisive	steps	in	our	lives	as	a	result	of	slight	inner	adjustments	of	which	we	are
barely	conscious.	But	in	any	case,	that	Sunday	morning	I	suddenly	found	myself
on	the	other	side	of	the	tall	fence,	facing	the	entrance	to	the	Ladies’	Waiting
Room,	the	existence	of	which,	in	this	remote	part	of	the	station,	had	been	quite
unknown	to	me.	The	man	in	the	turban	was	nowhere	to	be	seen,	and	there	was
no	one	on	the	scaffolding	either.	I	hesitated	to	approach	the	swing	doors,	but	as
soon	as	I	had	taken	hold	of	the	brass	handle	I	stepped	past	a	heavy	curtain	hung
on	the	inside	to	keep	out	drafts,	and	entered	the	large	room,	which	had	obviously
been	disused	for	years.	I	felt,	said	Austerlitz,	like	an	actor	who,	upon	making	his
entrance,	has	completely	and	irrevocably	forgotten	not	only	the	lines	he	knew	by
heart	but	the	very	part	he	has	so	often	played.	Minutes	or	even	hours	may	have
passed	while	I	stood	in	that	empty	space	beneath	a	ceiling	which	seemed	to	float
at	a	vertiginous	height,	unable	to	move	from	the	spot,	with	my	face	raised	to	the
icy	gray	light,	like	moonshine,	which	came	through	the	windows	in	a	gallery
beneath	the	vaulted	roof,	and	hung	above	me	like	a	tight-meshed	net	or	a	piece
of	thin,	fraying	fabric.	Although	this	light,	a	profusion	of	
dusty	glitter,	one	might
almost	say,	was	very	bright	near	the	ceiling,	as	it	sank	lower	it	looked	as	if	it
were	being	absorbed	by	the	walls	and	the	deeper	reaches	of	the	room,	as	if	it
merely	added	to	the	gloom	and	were	running	down	in	black	streaks,	rather	like
rainwater	running	down	the	smooth	trunks	of	beech	trees	or	over	the	cast
concrete	façade	of	a	building.	When	the	blanket	of	cloud	above	the	city	parted
for	a	moment	or	two,	occasional	rays	of	light	fell	into	the	waiting	room,	but	they
were	generally	extinguished	again	halfway	down.	Other	beams	of	light	followed
curious	trajectories	which	violated	the	laws	of	physics,	departing	from	the
rectilinear	and	twisting	in	spirals	and	eddies	before	being	swallowed	up	by	the
wavering	shadows.	From	time	to	time,	and	just	for	a	split	second,	I	saw	huge
halls	open	up,	with	rows	of	pillars	and	colonnades	leading	far	into	the	distance,
with	vaults	and	brickwork	arches	bearing	on	them	many-storied	structures,	with
flights	of	stone	steps,	wooden	stairways	and	ladders,	all	leading	the	eye	on	and
on.	I	saw	viaducts	and	footbridges	crossing	deep	chasms	thronged	with	tiny
figures	who	looked	to	me,	said	Austerlitz,	like	prisoners	in	search	of	some	way
of	escape	from	their	dungeon,	and	the	longer	I	stared	upwards	with	my	head
wrenched	painfully	back,	the	more	I	felt	as	if	the	room	where	I	stood	were
expanding,	going	on	for	ever	and	ever	in	an	improbably	foreshortened
perspective,	at	the	same	time	turning	back	into	itself	in	a	way	possible	only	in
such	a	deranged	universe.	Once	I	thought	that	very	far	away	I	saw	a	dome	of
openwork	masonry,	with	a	parapet	around	it	on	which	grew	ferns,	young
willows,	and	various	other	shrubs	where	herons	had	built	their	large,	untidy
nests,	and	I	saw	the	birds	spread	their	great	wings	and	fly	away	through	the	blue
air.	I	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	that	in	the	
middle	of	this	vision	of	imprisonment
and	liberation	I	could	not	stop	wondering	whether	it	was	a	ruin	or	a	building	in
the	process	of	construction	that	I	had	entered.	Both	ideas	were	right	in	a	way	at
the	time,	since	the	new	station	was	literally	rising	from	the	ruins	of	the	old
Liverpool	Street;	in	any	case,	the	crucial	point	was	hardly	this	speculation	in
itself,	which	was	really	only	a	distraction,	but	the	scraps	of	memory	beginning	to
drift	through	the	outlying	regions	of	my	mind:	images,	for	instance,	like	the
recollection	of	a	late	November	afternoon	in	1968	when	I	stood	with	Marie	de
Verneuil—whom	I	had	met	in	Paris,	and	of	whom	I	shall	have	more	to	say—
when	we	stood	in	the	nave	of	the	wonderful	church	of	Salle	in	Norfolk,	which
towers	in	isolation	above	the	wide	fields,	and	I	could	not	bring	out	the	words	I
should	have	spoken	then.	White	mist	had	risen	from	the	meadows	outside,	and
we	watched	in	silence	as	it	crept	slowly	into	the	church	porch,	a	rippling	vapor
rolling	forward	at	ground	level	and	gradually	spreading	over	the	entire	stone
floor,	becoming	denser	and	denser	and	rising	visibly	higher,	until	we	ourselves
emerged	from	it	only	above	the	waist	and	it	seemed	about	to	stifle	us.	Memories
like	this	came	back	to	me	in	the	disused	Ladies’	Waiting	Room	of	Liverpool
Street	Station,	memories	behind	and	within	which	many	things	much	further
back	in	the	past	seemed	to	lie,	all	interlocking	like	the	labyrinthine	vaults	I	saw
in	the	dusty	gray	light,	and	which	seemed	to	go	on	and	on	for	ever.	In	fact	I	felt,
said	Austerlitz,	that	the	waiting	room	where	I	stood	as	if	dazzled	contained	all
the	hours	of	my	past	life,	all	the	suppressed	and	extinguished	fears	and	wishes	I
had	ever	entertained,	as	if	the	black	and	white	diamond	pattern	of	the	stone	slabs
beneath	my	feet	were	the	board	on	which	the	endgame	would	be	played,	and	it
covered	the	entire	plane	of	time.	Perhaps	that	is	why,	in	the	gloomy	light	of	the
waiting	room,	I	also	saw	two	middle-aged	people	dressed	in	the	style	of	the
thirties,	a	woman	in	a	light	gabardine	coat	with	a	hat	at	an	angle	on	her	head,	and
a	thin	man	beside	her	wearing	a	dark	suit	and	a	dog	collar.	And	I	not	only	saw
the	minister	and	his	wife,	said	Austerlitz,	I	also	saw	the	boy	they	had	come	to
meet.	He	was	sitting	by	himself	on	a	bench	over	to	one	side.	His	legs,	in	white
knee-length	socks,	did	not	reach	the	floor,	and	but	for	the	small	rucksack	he	was
holding	on	his	lap	I	don’t	think	I	would	have	known	him,	said	Austerlitz.	As	it
was,	I	recognized	him	by	that	rucksack	of	his,	and	for	the	first	time	in	as	far	back
as	I	can	remember	I	recollected	myself	as	a	small	child,	at	the	moment	when	I
realized	that	it	must	have	been	to	this	same	waiting	room	I	had	come	on	my
arrival	in	England	over	half	a	century	ago.	As	so	often,	said	Austerlitz,	I	cannot
give	any	precise	description	of	the	state	of	mind	this	realization	induced;	I	felt
something	rending	within	me,	and	a	sense	of	shame	and	sorrow,	or	perhaps
something	quite	different,	something	inexpressible	because	we	have	no	words
for	it,	just	as	I	had	no	words	all	those	years	ago	when	the	two	strangers	came
over	to	me	speaking	a	language	I	did	not	understand.	All	I	do	know	is	that	when
I	saw	the	boy	sitting	on	the	bench	I	became	aware,	through	my	dull	bemusement,
of	the	destructive	effect	on	me	of	my	desolation	through	all	those	past	years,	and
a	terrible	weariness	overcame	me	at	the	idea	that	I	had	never	really	been	alive,	or
was	only	now	being	born,	almost	on	the	eve	of	my	death.	I	can	only	guess	what
reasons	may	have	induced	the	minister	Elias	and	his	wan	wife	to	take	me	to	live
with	them	in	the	summer	of	1939,	said	Austerlitz.	Childless	as	they	were,
perhaps	they	hoped	to	reverse	the	petrifaction	
of	their	emotions,	which	must
have	been	becoming	more	unbearable	to	them	every	day,	by	devoting
themselves	together	to	bringing	up	a	boy	then	aged	four	and	a	half,	or	perhaps
they	thought	they	owed	it	to	a	higher	authority	to	perform	some	good	work
beyond	the	level	of	ordinary	charity,	a	work	entailing	personal	devotion	and
sacrifice.	Or	perhaps	they	thought	they	ought	to	save	my	soul,	innocent	as	it	was
of	the	Christian	faith.	I	myself	cannot	say	what	my	first	few	days	in	Bala	with
the	Eliases	really	felt	like.	I	do	remember	new	clothes	which	made	me	very
unhappy,	and	the	inexplicable	disappearance	of	my	little	green	rucksack,	and
recently	I	have	even	thought	that	I	could	still	apprehend	the	dying	away	of	my
native	tongue,	the	faltering	and	fading	sounds	which	I	think	lingered	on	in	me	at
least	for	a	while,	like	something	shut	up	and	scratching	or	knocking,	something
which,	out	of	fear,	stops	its	noise	and	falls	silent	whenever	one	tries	to	listen	to
it.	And	certainly	the	words	I	had	forgotten	in	a	short	space	of	time,	and	all	that
went	with	them,	would	have	remained	buried	in	the	depths	of	my	mind	had	I	not,
through	a	series	of	coincidences,	entered	the	old	waiting	room	in	Liverpool
Street	Station	that	Sunday	morning,	a	few	weeks	at	the	most	before	it	vanished
for	ever	in	the	rebuilding.	I	have	no	idea	how	long	I	stood	in	the	waiting	room,
said	Austerlitz,	nor	how	I	got	out	again	and	which	way	I	walked	back,	through
Bethnal	Green	or	Stepney,	reaching	home	at	last	as	dark	began	to	fall.	Exhausted
as	I	was,	I	lay	down	in	my	drenched	clothes	and	fell	into	a	deep,	uneasy	sleep
from	which,	as	I	discovered	afterwards	by	making	the	calculation	several	times,
I	did	not	wake	until	the	middle	of	the	night	after	the	next	day.	In	that	sleep,	when
my	body	feigned	death	while	feverish	thoughts	whirled	through	my	head,	I	was
at	
the	innermost	heart	of	a	star-shaped	fortress,	a	dungeon	entirely	cut	off	from
the	outside	world,	and	I	had	to	try	finding	my	way	into	the	open,	passing	down
long,	low	passages	which	led	me	through	all	the	buildings	I	had	ever	visited	and
described.	It	was	a	nightmarish,	neverending	dream,	with	its	main	plot
interrupted	several	times	by	other	episodes.	One	of	them	gave	me	a	bird’s-eye
view	of	a	lightless	landscape	through	which	a	very	small	railway	train	was
hurrying,	twelve	earth-colored	miniature	carriages	and	a	coal-black	locomotive
under	a	plume	of	smoke	wafting	horizontally	backwards,	with	the	far	end	of	the
plume	constantly	blown	this	way	and	that,	like	the	tip	of	a	large	ostrich	feather,
by	the	speed	of	the	journey.	In	another	episode,	looking	out	of	the	window	of	my
train	compartment,	I	saw	dark	forests	of	firs,	a	deeply	carved	river	valley,
mountain	ranges	of	cloud	on	the	horizon,	and	windmills	towering	above	the
roofs	of	the	houses	clustered	around	them,	with	their	broad	sails	cutting
rhythmically	through	the	faint	light	of	dawn.	In	the	middle	of	these	dreams,	said
Austerlitz,	somewhere	behind	his	eyes,	he	had	felt	these	overwhelmingly
immediate	images	forcing	their	way	out	of	him,	but	once	he	had	woken	he	could
recall	scarcely	any	of	them	even	in	outline.	I	realized	then,	he	said,	how	little
practice	I	had	in	using	my	memory,	and	conversely	how	hard	I	must	always	have
tried	to	recollect	as	little	as	possible,	avoiding	everything	which	related	in	any
way	to	my	unknown	past.	Inconceivable	as	it	seems	to	me	today,	I	knew	nothing
about	the	conquest	of	Europe	by	the	Germans	and	the	slave	state	they	set	up,	and
nothing	about	the	persecution	I	had	escaped,	or	at	least,	what	I	did	know	was	not
much	more	than	a	salesgirl	in	a	shop,	for	instance,	knows	about	the	plague	or
cholera.	As	far	as	I	was	concerned	the	world	ended	
in	the	late	nineteenth
century.	I	dared	go	no	further	than	that,	although	in	fact	the	whole	history	of	the
architecture	and	civilization	of	the	bourgeois	age,	the	subject	of	my	research,
pointed	in	the	direction	of	the	catastrophic	events	already	casting	their	shadows
before	them	at	the	time.	I	did	not	read	newspapers	because,	as	I	now	know,	I
feared	unwelcome	revelations,	I	turned	on	the	radio	only	at	certain	hours	of	the
day,	I	was	always	refining	my	defensive	reactions,	creating	a	kind	of	quarantine
or	immune	system	which,	as	I	maintained	my	existence	in	a	smaller	and	smaller
space,	protected	me	from	anything	that	could	be	connected	in	any	way,	however
distant,	with	my	own	early	history.	Moreover,	I	had	constantly	been	preoccupied
by	that	accumulation	of	knowledge	which	I	had	pursued	for	decades,	and	which
served	as	a	substitute	or	compensatory	memory.	And	if	some	dangerous	piece	of
information	came	my	way	despite	all	my	precautions,	as	it	inevitably	did,	I	was
clearly	capable	of	closing	my	eyes	and	ears	to	it,	of	simply	forgetting	it	like	any
other	unpleasantness.	Yet	this	self-censorship	of	my	mind,	the	constant
suppression	of	the	memories	surfacing	in	me,	Austerlitz	continued,	demanded
ever	greater	efforts	and	finally,	and	unavoidably,	led	to	the	almost	total	paralysis
of	my	linguistic	faculties,	the	destruction	of	all	my	notes	and	sketches,	my
endless	nocturnal	peregrinations	through	London,	and	the	hallucinations	which
plagued	me	with	increasing	frequency	up	to	the	point	of	my	nervous	breakdown
in	the	summer	of	1992.	I	cannot	say	exactly	how	I	spent	the	rest	of	that	year,
said	Austerlitz;	all	I	know	is	that	next	spring,	when	there	was	some	improvement
in	my	state	of	health,	on	one	of	my	first	ventures	into	the	city	I	visited	an
antiquarian	bookshop	near	the	British	Museum	where	I	regularly	went	in	search
of	architectural	
engravings.	Absentmindedly,	I	leafed	through	the	various	boxes
and	drawers,	staring	sometimes	for	minutes	on	end	at	a	star-shaped	vault	or
diamond	frieze,	a	hermitage,	a	monopteros	or	a	mausoleum,	without	knowing
what	I	was	looking	at	or	why.	The	owner	of	the	bookshop,	Penelope	Peacefull,	a
very	beautiful	woman	whom	I	had	admired	for	many	years,	was	sitting	where
she	always	sat	in	the	mornings,	slightly	to	one	side	of	her	desk	with	its	load	of
books	and	papers,	solving	the	crossword	puzzle	on	the	back	of	the	
Telegraph
with	her	left	hand.	She	smiled	at	me	from	time	to	time	and	then	looked	out	at	the
street	again,	deep	in	thought.	It	was	quiet	in	the	shop	except	for	soft	voices
coming	from	the	little	radio	which	stood	beside	Penelope,	as	usual,	and	these
voices,	which	at	first	I	could	hardly	make	out	but	which	soon	became	almost	too
distinct,	cast	such	a	spell	over	me	that	I	entirely	forgot	the	engravings	lying
before	me,	and	stood	there	as	still	as	if	on	no	account	must	I	let	a	single	syllable
emerging	from	the	rather	scratchy	radio	set	escape	me.	I	was	listening	to	two
women	talking	to	each	other	about	the	summer	of	1939,	when	they	were	children
and	had	been	sent	to	England	on	a	special	transport.	They	mentioned	a	number
of	cities—Vienna,	Munich,	Danzig,	Bratislava,	Berlin—but	only	when	one	of
the	couple	said	that	her	own	transport,	after	two	days	traveling	through	the
German	Reich	and	the	Netherlands,	where	she	could	see	the	great	sails	of	the
windmills	from	the	train,	had	finally	left	the	Hook	of	Holland	on	the	ferry
Prague
	to	cross	the	North	Sea	to	Harwich,	only	then	did	I	know	beyond	any
doubt	that	these	fragments	of	memory	were	part	of	my	own	life	as	well.	I	was
too	alarmed	by	this	sudden	revelation	to	be	able	to	write	down	the	addresses	and
phone	numbers	given	at	the	end	of	the	program.	I	merely	saw	
myself	waiting	on
a	quay	in	a	long	crocodile	of	children	lined	up	two	by	two,	most	of	them
carrying	rucksacks	or	small	leather	cases.	I	saw	the	great	slabs	of	paving	at	my
feet	again,	the	mica	in	the	stone,	the	gray-brown	water	in	the	harbor	basin,	the
ropes	and	anchor	chains	slanting	upwards,	the	bows	of	the	ship,	higher	than	a
house,	the	seagulls	fluttering	over	our	heads	and	screeching	wildly,	the	sun
breaking	through	the	clouds,	and	the	red-haired	girl	in	the	tartan	cape	and	velvet
beret	who	had	looked	after	the	smaller	children	in	our	compartment	during	the
train	journey	through	the	dark	countryside.	Years	later,	as	I	now	recalled	again,	I
still	had	recurrent	dreams	of	this	girl	playing	me	a	cheerful	tune	on	a	kind	of
bandoneon,	in	a	place	lit	by	a	bluish	nightlight.	Are	you	all	right?	I	heard	a	voice
say	suddenly,	as	if	from	very	far	away,	and	it	took	me	some	time	to	remember
where	I	was	and	realize	that	Penelope	might	have	felt	concerned	by	my	sudden
seizure.	I	remember	telling	her	that	it	was	nothing,	that	my	thoughts	were
elsewhere,	in	the	Hook	of	Holland	as	a	matter	of	fact,	whereupon	Penelope
raised	her	face	slightly	with	an	understanding	smile,	as	if	she	herself	had	often
been	obliged	to	wait	in	that	cheerless	harbor.	One	way	to	live	cheaply	and
without	tears?	she	then	immediately	asked,	tapping	the	tip	of	her	ballpoint	pen
on	the	crossword	in	her	folded	newspaper,	but	just	as	I	was	about	to	confess	that
I	had	never	been	able	to	solve	even	the	simplest	clues	in	these	tortuous	English
puzzles	she	said,	Oh,	it’s	
rent	free!
	and	scribbled	the	eight	letters	swiftly	down	in
the	last	empty	spaces	on	the	grid.	When	we	had	parted	I	sat	for	an	hour	on	a
bench	in	Russell	Square	under	the	tall	plane	trees,	which	were	still	leafless.	It
was	a	sunny	day.	A	number	of	starlings	were	marching	up	and	down	on	the
grass,	pecking	desultorily	at	the	
crocuses.	I	watched	them,	noticing	how	the
green-gold	hues	in	their	dark	plumage	gleamed,	depending	which	way	they
turned	to	catch	the	light,	and	came	to	the	conclusion	that	although	I	did	not	know
whether	I	had	come	to	England	on	the	
Prague
	or	on	some	other	ferry,	the	mere
mention	of	the	city’s	name	in	the	present	context	was	enough	to	convince	me
that	I	would	have	to	go	there.	I	thought	of	the	difficulties	Hilary	had	encountered
when,	during	my	last	months	at	Stower	Grange,	he	began	taking	steps	to	have
me	naturalized,	and	how	he	had	never	been	able	to	find	out	anything	from	any	of
the	social	services	offices	in	Wales,	or	the	Foreign	Office,	or	the	Aid	Committee
under	whose	auspices	the	transports	of	refugee	children	had	come	to	England
and	who	had	lost	a	number	of	files	during	their	several	moves	and	evacuations,
carried	out	during	the	bombing	of	London	in	very	difficult	circumstances	and
almost	entirely	without	trained	staff.	I	got	the	addresses	of	authorities	who	might
be	consulted	in	a	case	like	mine	from	the	embassy	of	the	Czech	Republic,	and
then,	immediately	after	arriving	at	Ruzyně	airport	on	a	day	which	was	much	too
bright,	almost	overexposed,	a	day,	said	Austerlitz,	when	people	looked	as	ill	and
gray	as	if	they	were	all	chronic	smokers	not	far	from	death,	I	took	a	taxi	to	the
Karmelitská	in	the	Lesser	Quarter,	where	the	state	archives	are	housed	in	a	very
peculiar	building	going	far	back	in	time	if	not	even,	like	so	much	in	the	city	of
Prague,	standing	outside	time	altogether.	You	go	in	through	a	narrow	doorway
let	into	the	main	portal,	and	find	yourself	first	in	a	dim	barrel-vaulted	entrance
through	which	coaches	and	carriages	used	to	drive	into	the	inner	courtyard.	This
courtyard	measures	some	twenty	by	fifty	meters,	is	roofed	by	a	glazed	dome,
and	on	three	stories	has	galleries	running	round	it,	
giving	access	to	the	rooms
containing	the	archives,	where	the	windows	look	out	on	the	street.
	
	
The	entire	building,	from	the	outside	more	like	a	mansion	house	than	anything
else,	therefore	consists	of	four	wings,	each	not	much	more	than	three	meters
deep,	set	around	the	courtyard	in	an	almost	Illusionist	manner	and	without	any
corridors	or	passages	in	them.	It	is	a	style	resembling	the	prison	architecture	of
the	bourgeois	epoch,	when	it	was	decided	that	the	most	useful	design	for	the
penal	system	was	to	build	wings	of	cells	around	a	rectangular	or	circular
courtyard,	with	catwalks	running	along	the	interior.	And	it	was	not	just	of	a
prison	that	the	archives	building	in	the	Karmelitská	reminded	
me,	said
Austerlitz;	it	also	suggested	a	monastery,	a	riding	school,	an	opera	house,	and	a
lunatic	asylum,	and	all	these	ideas	mingled	in	my	mind	as	I	looked	at	the	twilight
coming	in	from	above,	and	thought	that	on	the	rows	of	galleries	I	saw	a	dense
crowd	of	people,	some	of	them	waving	hats	or	handkerchiefs,	as	passengers	on
board	a	steamer	used	to	do	when	it	put	out	to	sea.
	
	
At	any	rate,	it	was	a	little	while	before	I	managed	to	bring	myself	back	to	the
present,	and	turned	to	the	lodge	near	the	entrance,	from	which	the	porter	had
been	keeping	an	eye	on	me	ever	since	I	had	crossed	the	threshold	and,	attracted
by	the	light	of	the	interior	courtyard,	had	passed	by	him	without	noticing	his
presence.	If	you	wanted	to	speak	to	this	porter	you	had	to	lean	a	long	way	down
to	his	window,	which	was	so	low	that	he	appeared	to	be	kneeling	on	the	floor	of
his	lodge.	Although	I	had	soon	adopted	the	right	position,	said	Austerlitz,	I	could
not	make	myself	understood,	with	the	result	that	after	launching	into	a	long
verbal	torrent	in	which	I	could	make	out	nothing	but	the	words	
anglický
	and
Angličan
,	repeated	several	times	with	special	emphasis,	the	porter	eventually
phoned	to	request	assistance	from	one	of	the	archive’s	
officials,	who	did	indeed,
at	practically	the	next	moment,	while	I	was	still	filling	in	a	visitor’s	form	at	the
desk	opposite	the	lodge,	materialize	beside	me	as	if	she	had,	as	they	say,	sprung
out	of	the	ground.	Tereza	Ambrosová—so	she	introduced	herself	to	me,
immediately	asking	in	her	slightly	hesitant	but	otherwise	very	correct	English
what	I	wanted	to	know—Tereza	Ambrosová	was	a	pale	woman	of	almost
transparent	appearance,	and	about	forty	years	old.
	
	
As	we	went	up	to	the	third	floor	in	the	cramped	lift,	which	scraped	against	one
side	of	the	shaft,	in	silence	and	with	a	sense	of	awkwardness	because	of	the
unnatural	physical	proximity	into	which	one	is	forced	in	such	a	box,	I	saw	a
gentle	pulsation	in	the	curve	of	a	blue	vein	beneath	the	skin	of	her	right	temple,
almost	as	fast	as	the	throbbing	in	a	lizard’s	throat	when	it	lies	motionless	on	a
rock	in	the	sun.	We	reached	Mrs.	Ambrosová’s	office	
by	walking	down	one	of
the	galleries	encircling	the	courtyard.	I	hardly	dared	glance	over	the	balustrade
to	the	depths	below	where	two	or	three	cars	were	parked,	looking	curiously
elongated	from	above,	or	at	least	much	longer	than	they	would	appear	in	the
street.	The	office	which	we	entered	straight	from	this	gallery	was	full	of	stacks
of	papers	tied	up	with	string,	not	a	few	of	them	discolored	by	sunlight	and	brittle
at	the	edges,	crammed	into	roll-front	cupboards,	deposited	on	shelves	that
sagged	under	their	weight,	piled	high	on	a	rickety	little	trolley	which	seemed	to
be	specially	intended	for	the	transport	of	files,	on	an	old-fashioned	wing	chair
pushed	against	the	wall,	and	on	the	two	desks	facing	each	other	in	the	room.
There	were	a	good	dozen	houseplants	among	these	mountains	of	paper,	in	plain
clay	flowerpots	or	brightly	colored	majolica	jardinières:	mimosas	and	myrtles,
thick-leaved	aloes,	gardenias,	and	a	large	hoya	twining	its	way	around	a
trelliswork	frame.	Mrs	Ambrosová,	who	had	very	courteously	pulled	out	a	chair
for	me	beside	her	desk,	listened	attentively	with	her	head	tilted	slightly	to	one
side	as,	for	the	first	time	in	my	life,	I	began	explaining	to	someone	else	that
because	of	certain	circumstances	my	origins	had	been	unknown	to	me,	and	that
for	other	reasons	I	had	never	inquired	into	them,	but	now	felt	compelled,
because	of	a	series	of	coincidental	events,	to	conclude	or	at	least	to	conjecture
that	I	had	left	Prague	at	the	age	of	four	and	a	half,	in	the	months	just	before	the
war	broke	out,	on	one	of	the	so-called	children’s	transports	departing	from	the
city	at	the	time,	and	I	had	therefore	come	to	consult	the	archives	in	the	hope	that
people	of	my	surname	living	here	between	1934	and	1939,	who	could	not	have
been	very	numerous,	might	be	found	in	the	registers,	with	details	of	their
addresses.	I	fell	into	such	a	panic	
as	I	offered	these	explanations,	which	suddenly
struck	me	as	not	just	far	too	cursory	but	positively	absurd,	that	I	began	to
stammer	and	could	hardly	bring	out	a	word.	All	at	once	I	felt	the	heat	from	the
stout	radiator,	which	was	encrusted	with	several	layers	of	lumpy	oil	paint	and
stood	under	the	wide-open	window;	I	heard	nothing	but	the	noise	rising	from	the
Karmelitská,	the	heavy	rumble	of	the	trams,	the	wailing	sirens	of	police	cars	and
ambulances	somewhere	in	the	distance,	and	I	calmed	down	only	when	Tereza
Ambrosová,	whose	deep-set	violet	eyes	had	been	gazing	at	me	with	some
concern,	gave	me	a	glass	of	water.	As	I	took	a	few	sips	from	this	glass,	which	I
had	to	hold	in	both	hands,	she	said	that	the	registers	of	those	living	in	Prague	at
the	time	in	question	had	been	preserved	complete,	that	Austerlitz	was	indeed	one
of	the	more	unusual	surnames,	so	she	thought	there	could	be	no	particular
difficulty	in	finding	me	the	entries	I	wanted	by	tomorrow	afternoon.
	
She	would	see	to	it	personally,	she	told	me.	I	cannot	remember,	said	Austerlitz,
with	what	words	I	said	goodbye	to	Mrs.	Ambrosová,	how	I	got	out	of	the
archives	building	or	where	I	went	after	that;	all	I	know	is	that	I	took	a	room	in	a
small	hotel	on	Kampa	Island	not	far	from	the	Karmelitská	and	sat	there	by	the
window	until	darkness	fell,	looking	out	at	the	heavy,	leaden-gray	waters	of	the
Vltava,	and	over	the	river	to	the	city,	which	I	now	feared	was	entirely	alien	to
me,	a	place	with	which	I	had	no	connection	at	all.	These	thoughts	went	through
my	head	with	grinding	slowness,	each	more	confused	and	harder	to	grasp	than
the	one	that	went	before.	I	spent	the	whole	night	either	lying	awake	or	tormented
by	fearful	dreams	in	which	I	had	to	climb	up	and	down	flights	of	steps	ringing
hundreds	of	doorbells	in	vain,	until,	in	the	outermost	
suburbs,	I	came	upon	a
darkly	looming	building,	from	the	dungeon-like	basement	of	which	there
emerged	a	caretaker	called	Bartoloměj	Smečka,	a	veteran,	it	seemed,	of	long-lost
campaigns,	clad	in	a	crumpled	redingote	and	a	flowered	fancy	waistcoat	with	a
gold	watch	chain	draped	over	it,	who	having	studied	the	note	I	handed	him
shrugged	his	shoulders,	saying	that	unfortunately	the	tribe	of	the	Aztecs	had	died
out	years	ago,	and	that	at	best	an	ancient	perroquet	which	still	remembered	a	few
words	of	their	language	might	survive	here	and	there.
	
Next	day,	Austerlitz	continued,	I	went	back	to	the	state	archives	building	in
the	Karmelitská,	where,	in	order	to	compose	myself	a	little,	I	first	took	some
photographs	of	the	great	inner	court	and	the	stairway	leading	up	to	the	galleries,
which	in	its	asymmetrical	construction	reminded	me	of	the	follies	built	by	so
many	English	noblemen	in	their	parks	and	gardens.	In	the	end	I	went	up	this
stairway,	pausing	on	each	landing	for	a	while	to	look	through	one	of	the
irregular	openings	in	the	wall	and	down	at	the	empty	yard,	which	I	saw	traversed
only	once	by	one	of	the	archive’s	gray-coated	porters,	whose	right	leg	flexed
slightly	inward	as	he	walked.	When	I	entered	Tereza	Ambrosová’s	office	she
was	just	watering	her	geranium	cuttings,	which	stood	in	an	assortment	of
flowerpots	on	the	sill	between	the	inner	and	outer	windows.	They	do	better	in
this	overheated	atmosphere	than	in	the	cold	springtime	air	at	home,	said	Mrs.
Ambrosová.	We	haven’t	been	able	to	regulate	the	steam	heating	for	a	long	time,
so	it’s	often	like	a	hothouse	in	here,	particularly	at	this	time	of	year.	That	may	be
why	you	felt	unwell	yesterday,	she	said,	adding,	I’ve	already	made	a	note	of	the
addresses	of	all	those	named	Austerlitz	in	the	register.	As	I	suspected,	they
didn’t	come	to	more	than	half	
a	dozen.	Mrs.	Ambrosová	put	her	green	watering
can	down	and	gave	me	a	sheet	of	paper	from	her	desk.	Austerlitz	Leopold,
Austerlitz	Viktor,	Austerlitz	Tomáš,	Austerlitz	Jeroným,	Austerlitz	Edward,	and
Austerlitz	František	were	listed	one	beneath	another,	and	at	the	end	there	was	an
Austerlitzová	Agáta,	evidently	a	single	woman.	The	names	were	followed	by	the
professions	of	their	bearers—dealer	in	textiles	
en	gros
,	rabbi,	bandages
manufacturer,	principal	clerk,	silversmith,	printing	works	proprietor,	and	finally
opera	singer—together	with	the	number	of	the	city	district	and	the	street:	VII	U
vozovky,	II	Betlemská,	and	so	on.	Mrs.	Ambrosová	suggested	that	before
crossing	the	river	I	might	begin	my	inquiries	in	the	Lesser	Quarter,	which	wasn’t
ten	minutes’	walk	away	from	here,	she	said.	I	could	try	the	šporkova,	a	small
street	a	few	paces	uphill	from	the	Schönborn	Palace,	where	the	register	of
inhabitants	for	1938	said	that	Agáta	Austerlitzová	had	been	living	at	Number	12
in	that	year.	And	so,	said	Austerlitz,	no	sooner	had	I	arrived	in	Prague	than	I
found	myself	back	among	the	scenes	of	my	early	childhood,	every	trace	of
which	had	been	expunged	from	my	memory	for	as	long	as	I	could	recollect.	As	I
walked	through	the	labyrinth	of	alleyways,	thoroughfares,	and	courtyards
between	the	Vlašská	and	Nerudova,	and	still	more	so	when	I	felt	the	uneven
paving	of	the	šporkova	underfoot	as	step	by	step	I	climbed	uphill,	it	was	as	if	I
had	already	been	this	way	before	and	memories	were	revealing	themselves	to	me
not	by	means	of	any	mental	effort	but	through	my	senses,	so	long	numbed	and
now	coming	back	to	life.	It	was	true	that	I	could	recognize	nothing	for	certain,
yet	I	had	to	keep	stopping	now	and	then	because	my	glance	was	caught	by	a
finely	wrought	window	grating,	the	iron	handle	of	a	bell	pull,	or	the	
branches	of
an	almond	tree	growing	over	a	garden	wall.	Once	I	stood	for	a	considerable	time
outside	the	vaulted	entrance	to	a	building,	said	Austerlitz,	looking	up	at	a	half-
relief	set	in	the	smooth	plaster	above	the	keystone	of	the	arch.	The	cast	was	no
more	than	a	square	foot	in	size,	and	showed,	set	against	a	spangled	sea-green
background,	a	blue	dog	carrying	a	small	branch	in	its	mouth,	which	I	could	tell,
by	the	prickling	of	my	scalp,	it	had	brought	back	out	of	my	past.	Then	there	was
the	cool	air	as	I	entered	the	front	hall	of	Number	12	šporkova,	the	metal	box	for
the	electrics	built	into	the	wall	beside	the	entrance	with	its	lightning	symbol,	the
octofoil	mosaic	flower	in	shades	of	dove	gray	and	snow	white	set	in	the	flecked
artificial-stone	floor	of	the	hall,	the	smell	of	damp	limewash,	the	gently	rising
flight	of	stairs,	with	hazelnut-shaped	iron	knobs	placed	at	intervals	in	the
handrail	of	the	banisters—all	of	them	signs	and	characters	from	the	type	case	of
forgotten	things,	I	thought,	and	was	overcome	by	such	a	state	of	blissful	yet
anxious	confusion	that	more	than	once	I	had	to	sit	down	on	the	steps	in	the	quiet
stairwell	and	lean	my	head	against	the	wall.
	
	
It	may	have	been	as	much	as	an	hour	before	I	finally	
rang	the	bell	of	the	right-
hand	flat	on	the	top	floor,	and	then	half	an	eternity	seemed	to	pass	before	I	heard
movement	inside,	the	door	was	opened,	and	I	found	myself	facing	Vera
Ryšanová,	who—as	she	was	soon	to	tell	me—had	been	my	mother	Agáta’s
neighbor	and	my	nurserymaid	in	the	thirties	when	she,	Vera,	had	been	studying
Romance	languages	at	Prague	University.
	
	
I	think	that	the	reason	why	I	did	not	immediately	recognize	her,	said	Austerlitz,
although	despite	her	fragility	she	seemed	quite	unchanged,	was	my	agitated
condition,	in	which	I	could	hardly	believe	my	eyes.	So	I	merely	stammered	out
the	sentence	I	had	laboriously	learnt	by	heart	the	day	before:	
Promiňte,	prosím
,
že	Vás	obtě
žuji.	Hledám	paní	Agátu	Austerlitzovou,	která	zde	možná	v	roce
devatenáct	set	třicet	osm	bydlela
.	I	am	looking	for	a	Mrs.	Agáta	Austerlitzová
who	may	have	been	living	here	in	1938.	With	a	gesture	of	alarm,	Vera	covered
her	face	with	both	hands,	hands	which,	it	flashed	through	my	mind,	were
endlessly	familiar	to	me,	stared	at	me	over	her	spread	fingertips,	and	very	quietly
but	with	what	to	me	was	a	quite	singular	clarity	spoke	these	words	in	French:
Jacquot
,	she	said,	
dis,	est-ce	que	c’est	vraiment	toi?
	We	embraced,	we	held	each
other’s	hands,	we	embraced	again,	I	don’t	know	how	often,	before	Vera	led	me
through	the	dark	hall	into	a	room	where	everything	was	just	as	it	had	been
almost	sixty	years	ago.	The	furniture	she	had	inherited	in	May	1933	together
with	her	great-aunt’s	flat,	the	display	cabinet	with	a	masked	Meissen	china
Pulcinello	on	the	left	and	his	beloved	Columbine	on	the	right,	the	glass-fronted
bookcase	with	the	fifty-five	small	volumes	of	the	
Comédie	humaine
	bound	in
carmine	red,	the	writing	desk,	the	long	ottoman,	the	camel-hair	rug	lying	folded
at	one	end	of	it,	the	blue-tinged	aquatint	of	the	Bohemian	mountains—
throughout	my	entire	life,	which	was	now	unraveling	headlong	before	me,	all
this	had	stayed	in	the	same	place	because	as	Vera	told	me,	said	Austerlitz,	once
she	had	lost	me	and	my	mother,	who	was	almost	a	sister	to	her,	she	could	not
bear	to	alter	anything.	I	don’t	remember	in	what	order	Vera	and	I	told	each	other
our	stories	that	late	March	afternoon	and	evening,	said	Austerlitz,	but	I	think	that
after	I	had	given	her	a	brief	account	of	myself,	leaving	out	all	that	had	weighed
on	me	so	heavily	over	the	years,	we	spoke	first	about	my	lost	parents,	Agáta	and
Maximilian.	Maximilian	Aychenwald,	who	had	come	to	Prague	from	St.
Petersburg	where	his	father	traded	in	spices	until	the	year	of	the	revolution,	soon
established	himself	as	one	of	the	most	prominent	officials	of	the	Czech	Social
Democratic	Party,	said	Vera.	He	had	met	my	mother,	fifteen	years	
younger	than
he	was	and	then	appearing	in	various	provincial	towns	as	she	embarked	on	her
stage	career,	in	Nikolsburg	on	one	of	the	many	journeys	he	made	to	speak	at
public	gatherings	and	shop-floor	meetings.	In	May	1933,	when	I	had	only	just
settled	in	here,	said	Vera,	they	came	back	from	a	visit	to	Paris	which,	as	they
never	tired	of	repeating,	had	been	full	of	the	most	wonderful	events	and
encounters,	and	perhaps	that	was	why	they	decided,	directly	upon	their	return,	to
move	into	a	flat	in	this	house	together,	though	they	always	remained	unmarried.
Agáta	and	Maximilian,	said	Vera,	both	had	a	special	fondness	for	all	things
French.	Maximilian	was	a	lifelong	republican,	and	had	dreamt	of	making
Czechoslovakia	an	island	of	freedom	in	the	midst	of	the	tide	of	Fascism	then
inexorably	spreading	throughout	Europe,	a	kind	of	second	Switzerland,	while
Agáta’s	rather	more	colorful	notion	of	the	ideal	world	was	inspired	by	the	works
of	Jacques	Offenbach,	whom	she	admired	enormously,	which	incidentally,	said
Vera,	was	the	reason	for	my	first	name,	not	a	usual	one	among	Czechs.	It	was
through	an	interest	in	every	aspect	of	French	civilization,	she	added,	something
which	as	an	enthusiastic	student	of	Romance	culture	I	shared	with	both	Agáta
and	Maximilian,	that	a	friendship	began	to	develop	between	us	immediately	after
our	first	conversation	on	the	day	when	they	moved	in,	a	friendship	which	led	as
if	quite	naturally,	so	Vera	told	me,	said	Austerlitz,	to	her	offering,	since	unlike
Agáta	and	Maximilian	she	had	her	time	largely	at	her	own	disposal,	to	assume
the	duties	of	nanny	for	the	few	years	until	I	started	nursery	school.	It	was	an
offer	she	had	never	once	regretted	later,	said	Vera,	for	even	before	I	could	talk	it
had	always	seemed	to	her	as	if	no	one	understood	her	better	than	this	small	boy
who,	by	the	age	of	not	quite	three,	
entertained	her	in	the	most	delightful	way
with	his	conversational	gifts.	By	agreement	with	Agáta,	when	we	walked	over
the	meadow	slopes	of	the	Seminar	Garden	among	the	pear	and	cherry	trees,	or
on	hot	days	through	the	shadier	grounds	of	the	park	of	Schönborn	Palace,	we
spoke	French,	and	only	when	we	came	home	late	in	the	afternoon	and	Vera	was
making	our	supper	did	we	revert	to	Czech,	for	the	discussion	of	more	domestic
and	childish	matters,	as	it	were.	In	the	middle	of	her	account	Vera	herself,	quite
involuntarily,	had	changed	from	one	language	to	the	other,	and	I,	who	had	not
for	a	moment	thought	that	Czech	could	mean	anything	to	me,	not	at	the	airport
or	in	the	state	archives,	or	even	while	learning	by	heart	the	question	which
would	have	been	of	scant	use	to	me	addressed	to	the	wrong	quarters,	now
understood	almost	everything	Vera	said,	like	a	deaf	man	whose	hearing	has	been
miraculously	restored,	so	that	all	I	wanted	to	do	was	close	my	eyes	and	listen
forever	to	her	polysyllabic	flood	of	words.	In	the	warm	season	of	the	year	in
particular,	said	Vera,	she	had	always	had	to	move	the	geraniums	on	the	sill	aside
as	soon	as	we	came	back	from	our	daily	walk,	so	that	I	could	take	my	favorite
place	on	the	window	seat	and	look	down	on	the	garden	with	its	lilac	trees	and	the
low	building	opposite	where	the	hunchbacked	tailor	Moravec	had	his	workshop,
and	while	she,	so	Vera	said,	cut	bread	and	boiled	the	kettle,	I	used	to	give	her	a
running	commentary	on	whatever	Moravec	happened	to	be	doing:	mending	the
worn	hem	of	a	jacket,	rummaging	in	his	button	box,	or	sewing	a	quilted	lining
into	an	overcoat.	But	I	was	particularly	anxious,	Vera	told	me,	said	Austerlitz,
not	to	miss	the	moment	when	Moravec	put	down	his	needle	and	thread,	his	big
scissors,	and	the	other	tools	of	his	trade,	cleared	the	baize-covered	table,	
spread	a
double	sheet	of	newspaper	on	it,	and	laid	out	on	this	sheet	blackened	with	print
the	supper	he	must	have	been	looking	forward	to	for	some	time,	a	supper	which
varied	according	to	the	season	and	might	be	curd	cheese	with	chives,	a	long
radish,	a	few	tomatoes	with	onions,	a	smoked	herring,	or	boiled	potatoes.	He’s
putting	the	sleeve	dummy	in	the	wardrobe,	he’s	going	out	into	the	kitchen,	now
he’s	bringing	in	his	beer,	now	he’s	sharpening	his	knife,	he’s	cutting	a	slice	of
sausage,	taking	a	long	drink	from	his	glass,	wiping	the	foam	from	his	mouth
with	the	back	of	his	hand—it	was	in	this	or	some	similar	fashion,	always	the
same	yet	always	slightly	different,	that	I	used	to	describe	the	tailor’s	supper	to
her	almost	every	evening,	said	Vera,	and	I	often	had	to	be	reminded	not	to	forget
my	own	bread-and-butter	soldiers.	As	she	told	me	about	my	curious	love	of	such
observation,	Vera	had	risen	and	opened	both	the	inner	and	the	outer	windows	to
let	me	look	down	into	the	garden	next	door,	where	the	lilac	happened	to	be	in
flower,	its	blossoms	so	thick	and	white	that	in	the	gathering	dusk	it	looked	as	if
there	had	been	a	snowstorm	in	the	middle	of	spring.	And	the	sweet	fragrance
wafting	up	from	the	walled	garden,	the	waxing	moon	already	in	the	sky	above
the	rooftops,	the	sound	of	church	bells	ringing	down	in	the	city,	and	the	yellow
façade	of	the	tailor’s	house	with	its	green	balcony	where	Moravec,	who	as	Vera
told	me	had	died	long	ago,	frequently	used	to	be	seen	in	his	time,	swinging	his
heavy	iron	filled	with	red-hot	coals	through	the	air,	these	and	other	images,	said
Austerlitz,	ranged	themselves	side	by	side,	so	that	deeply	buried	and	locked
away	within	me	as	they	had	been,	they	now	came	luminously	back	to	my	mind
as	I	looked	out	of	the	window.	It	was	the	same	when	Vera,	without	a	word,
opened	the	door	to	the	room	where	
the	little	couch	on	which	I	always	slept	when
my	parents	were	away	still	stood	in	its	place,	at	the	foot	of	the	four-poster	bed
with	its	barley-sugar	uprights	and	pillows	piled	high	which,	together	with	the
rest	of	the	furniture,	she	had	inherited	from	her	great-aunt.	The	crescent	moon
shone	into	the	dark	room,	and	there	was	a	white	blouse	hanging	from	the	catch
of	the	half-open	window	just	as	it	had	always	hung	there	in	the	past,	I	now
remembered,	said	Austerlitz.	I	saw	Vera	as	she	had	been	then,	sitting	beside	me
on	the	divan	telling	me	stories	from	the	Riesengebirge	and	the	Bohemian	Forest,
I	saw	her	uncommonly	beautiful	eyes	misting	over	in	the	twilight,	so	to	speak,
when	after	reaching	the	end	of	the	story	she	took	off	her	glasses	and	bent	down
to	me.	Later,	I	now	remembered,	while	she	sat	in	the	next	room	over	her	books	I
liked	to	lie	awake	for	a	while,	safe	as	I	knew	myself	to	be	in	the	care	of	my
solicitous	guardian	and	the	pale	glow	of	the	circle	of	light	where	she	sat	reading.
With	only	the	slightest	effort	of	will	I	could	conjure	it	all	up;	the	hunchbacked
tailor,	who	would	now	be	in	his	own	bedchamber,	the	moon	traveling	round	the
building,	the	patterns	of	the	carpet	and	wallpaper,	even	the	course	traced	by	the
hairline	cracks	in	the	tiles	of	the	tall	stove.	But	when	I	got	tired	of	this	game	and
wanted	to	go	to	sleep	I	had	only	to	wait	to	hear	Vera	lift	the	next	leaf	of	her	book
in	the	other	room,	and	I	can	still	feel,	said	Austerlitz,	or	perhaps	it	is	only	now
that	I	feel	again,	the	sense	of	my	consciousness	dissolving	among	the	poppies
and	leafy	tendrils	etched	into	the	opaque	glass	of	the	door	before	I	caught	the
slight	rustle	of	the	page	turning.	On	our	walks,	Vera	continued	when	we	were
sitting	in	the	living	room	again	and	she	had	given	me	a	cup	of	peppermint	tea
with	her	two	now	unsteady	hands,	on	our	walks	we	hardly	ever	went	further	
than
the	Seminar	Garden,	the	Khotek	Gardens,	and	the	other	green	spaces	in	the
Lesser	Quarter.	Only	occasionally,	in	summer,	did	we	make	rather	longer
expeditions	with	my	little	pushchair,	which	as	I	might	perhaps	remember	had	a
small	colored	whirligig	fastened	to	it,	going	as	far	as	Sofia	Island,	the	swimming
school	on	the	banks	of	the	Vltava,	or	the	observation	platform	on	Petřín	Hill,
from	which	we	may	have	spent	an	hour	or	more	looking	at	the	city	spread	out
below	us	with	its	many	towers,	all	of	which	I	had	known	by	heart,	as	well	as	the
names	of	the	seven	bridges	spanning	the	glittering	river.	Since	I	have	been
unable	to	go	out	of	doors,	so	that	I	now	see	almost	nothing	new,	said	Vera,	the
pictures	we	enjoyed	so	much	at	the	time	come	back	to	me	with	increasing
clarity,	like	pure	fantasies.	I	often	feel,	said	Vera,	as	if	I	were	gazing	at	a
diorama	as	I	once	did	when	I	was	a	child	in	Reichenberg,	seeing	the	figures
inside	a	case	filled	with	some	strangely	translucent	aura	poised	motionless	in
mid-movement,	owing	their	lifelike	appearance,	oddly	enough,	to	their
extremely	diminutive	size.	In	later	life	I	never	set	eyes	on	anything	more	magical
than	the	yellow	Syrian	desert	in	the	Reichenberg	diorama,	the	peaks	of	the
Zillertal	Alps	rising	white	and	radiant	above	the	dark	pine	forests,	and	that
moment	frozen	in	time	when	the	young	poet	Goethe,	wearing	a	short,	light-
brown	coat	fluttering	in	the	wind,	is	about	to	climb	into	a	post-chaise	to	which
his	traveling	bags	are	already	strapped.	These	days,	Vera	continued,	the	pictures
of	our	excursions	together	from	the	šporkova	through	the	Lesser	Quarter	tend	to
go	hand	in	hand	with	such	reminiscences	of	my	own	childhood.	When	memories
come	back	to	you,	you	sometimes	feel	as	if	you	were	looking	at	the	past	through
a	glass	mountain,	and	now,	as	I	
tell	you	this,	if	I	close	my	eyes	I	see	the	two	of
us	as	it	were	disembodied,	or,	more	precisely,	reduced	to	the	unnaturally
enlarged	pupils	of	our	eyes,	looking	down	from	the	observation	platform	on	the
Petřin	Hill	at	the	green	slopes	below,	with	the	funicular	railway	making	its	way
upwards	like	a	fat	caterpillar,	while	further	out,	on	the	other	side	of	the	city,	the
railway	train	you	always	waited	so	eagerly	to	see	is	making	its	way	past	the	row
of	houses	at	the	foot	of	the	Vyšehrad	and	slowly	crossing	the	bridge	over	the
river,	trailing	a	white	cloud	of	vapor.	When	the	weather	was	bad,	said	Vera,	we
often	visited	my	aunt	Otýlie	in	the	glove	shop	on	the	šeríková	which	she	had
been	running	since	before	the	Great	War	and	in	which,	as	in	some	consecrated
shrine	or	temple,	a	muted	atmosphere	banishing	all	profane	ideas	reigned.	Aunt
Otýlie	was	a	spinster	lady	of	alarmingly	fragile	appearance.	She	always	wore	an
outer	garment	of	pleated	black	silk	with	a	detachable	white	lace	collar,	and
moved	about	in	a	little	cloud	of	lily-of-the-valley	perfume.	If	she	was	not	busy
serving	one	of	the	women	she	described	as	her	honored	lady	clients,	she	was
constantly	occupied	in	maintaining	order	among	her	stock	of	hundreds,	if	not
thousands,	of	different	pairs	of	gloves	of	all	kinds,	ranging	from	cotton	for
everyday	wear	to	the	most	elegant	velvet	or	kid	creations	from	Paris	and	Milan,
arranged	in	a	hierarchy	of	her	own	devising	which	she	had	preserved	for	decades
through	all	the	vicissitudes	of	time,	and	which	only	she	really	understood.	But
when	we	went	to	see	her,	said	Vera,	she	gave	you	her	entire	attention,	showed
you	this	and	that,	let	you	look	at	the	shallow	drawers	which	glided	out	with
extraordinary	ease,	and	allowed	you	not	just	to	pick	up	glove	after	glove	but
even	to	try	them	on,	explaining	the	niceties	of	every	model	to	you	patiently,	just
as	if	she	
saw	you	as	heir	presumptive	to	her	business.	And	I	remember,	Vera	told
me,	said	Austerlitz,	that	it	was	Aunt	Otýlie	who	taught	you	to	count	at	the	age	of
three	and	a	half,	using	a	row	of	small,	shiny	black	malachite	buttons	sewn	to	an
elbow-length	velvet	glove	which	you	particularly	liked—
jeden,	dvě,	tři
,	counted
Vera,	and	I,	said	Austerlitz,	went	on	counting—
čtyři,	pět,	šest,	sedm—
feeling
like	someone	taking	uncertain	steps	out	on	to	the	ice.	Deeply	moved	as	I	was	on
my	first	visit	to	the	šporkova,	I	do	not	remember	all	Vera’s	stories	in	precise
detail	today,	said	Austerlitz,	but	I	think	that	by	some	turn	or	other	in	our
conversation	we	went	on	from	Aunt	Otýlie’s	glove	shop	to	the	Estates	Theater,
where	Agáta	made	her	début	in	Prague	in	the	autumn	of	1938	in	the	role	of
Olympia,	a	part	she	had	dreamed	of	since	the	beginning	of	her	career.	In	mid-
October,	said	Vera,	on	the	evening	before	the	first	night,	we	went	to	the	dress
rehearsal	of	the	operetta	together,	and	as	soon	as	we	entered	the	theater	by	the
stage	door,	she	said,	I	fell	into	a	reverent	silence,	although	I	had	been	chattering
nineteen	to	the	dozen	on	our	way	through	the	city.	I	had	also	been	unusually
quiet	and	lost	in	thought	during	the	performance	of	the	somewhat	haphazard
arrangement	of	scenes,	and	on	our	way	home	by	tram	as	well.	It	was	because	of
this	more	or	less	casual	remark	of	Vera’s,	said	Austerlitz,	that	I	went	to	see	the
Estates	Theater	next	morning,	and	sat	alone	for	a	long	time	in	the	stalls	directly
under	the	top	of	the	dome,	having	obtained	permission	from	the	porter,	in
exchange	for	a	not	inconsiderable	tip,	to	take	some	photographs	in	the	recently
refurbished	auditorium.	Around	me	the	tiers	of	seats	with	their	gilded
adornments	shining	through	the	dim	light	rose	to	the	roof;	before	me	the
proscenium	arch	of	the	stage	on	which	Agáta	had	once	stood	was	like	a	
blind
eye.	And	the	harder	I	tried	to	conjure	up	at	least	some	faint	recollection	of	her
appearance,	the	more	the	theater	seemed	to	be	shrinking,	as	if	I	myself	had
shrunk	to	the	stature	of	a	little	Tom	Thumb	enclosed	in	a	sort	of	velvet-lined
casket.	Only	after	a	while,	when	someone	or	other	walked	quickly	over	the	stage
behind	the	drawn	curtain,	sending	a	ripple	through	the	heavy	folds	of	fabric	with
his	rapid	pace,	only	then,	said	Austerlitz,	did	the	shadows	begin	to	move,	and	I
saw	the	conductor	of	the	orchestra	down	in	the	pit	like	a	beetle	in	his	black
tailcoat,	and	other	black-clad	figures	busy	with	all	kinds	of	instruments,	I	heard
their	music	mingling	with	the	voices,	and	all	of	a	sudden	I	thought	that	in
between	one	of	the	musicians’	heads	and	the	neck	of	a	double	bass,	in	the	bright
strip	of	light	between	the	wooden	floorboards	and	the	hem	of	the	curtain,	I
caught	sight	of	a	sky-blue	shoe	embroidered	with	silver	sequins.	On	the	evening
of	that	day,	when	I	visited	Vera	for	the	second	time	in	her	flat	in	the	šporkova
and	she	confirmed,	in	answer	to	my	question,	that	Agáta	had	indeed	worn
sequined	sky-blue	shoes	with	her	costume	as	Olympia,	I	felt	as	if	something
were	shattering	inside	my	brain.	Vera	said	that	I	had	been	deeply	affected	by	the
dress	rehearsal	in	the	Estates	Theater,	first	and	foremost,	she	suspected,	because
I	was	afraid	Agáta	had	genuinely	changed	into	someone	who,	though	she	might
now	be	a	magical	figure,	was	also	a	complete	stranger	to	me,	and	I	myself,
Austerlitz	continued,	suddenly	remembered	that	I	had	been	filled	by	a	grief
previously	unknown	to	me	when,	long	past	my	usual	bedtime,	I	lay	with	my	eyes
wide	open	in	the	dark	on	the	divan	in	Vera’s	room,	listening	to	the	church	clocks
strike	the	quarter-hours	and	waiting	for	Agáta	to	come	home,	waiting	to	hear	the
car	bringing	her	back	from	that	other	world	stop	outside	the	
gate,	waiting	for	her
to	come	into	the	room	at	last	and	sit	down	beside	me,	enveloped	by	a	strange
theatrical	odor	in	which	dust	and	drifts	of	perfume	mingled.	I	see	her	wearing	an
ashen-gray	silk	bodice	laced	up	in	front,	but	I	cannot	make	out	her	face,	only	an
iridescent	veil	of	pale,	cloudy	milkiness	wafting	close	to	her	skin,	and	then,	said
Austerlitz,	I	see	the	scarf	slip	from	her	right	shoulder	as	she	lays	her	hand	on	my
forehead.
	
On	my	third	day	in	Prague,	so	Austerlitz	continued	his	story,	when	he	had
recovered	some	degree	of	composure,	I	went	up	to	the	Seminar	Garden	early	in
the	morning.	The	cherry	and	pear	trees	of	Vera’s	story	had	now	been	grubbed	up
and	replaced	by	young	saplings,	with	thin	branches	which	would	not	bear	fruit
for	some	time	yet	to	come.	The	path	wound	uphill,	describing	wide	curves
through	the	grass,	which	was	wet	with	dew.	Halfway	up	I	met	an	old	lady	with
an	overfed,	reddish-brown	dachshund	which	was	not	very	good	on	its	legs	and
stopped	now	and	then,	staring	with	its	brow	furrowed	at	the	ground	ahead	of	it.
The	sight	of	it	reminded	me	that	on	my	walks	with	Vera	I	often	used	to	see	old
ladies	of	this	kind	with	bad-tempered	little	dogs,	almost	always	wearing	wire
muzzles,	which	may	have	been	the	reason	for	their	mute	ill	will.	Then	I	sat	on	a
bench	in	the	sun	until	nearly	midday,	looking	out	over	the	buildings	of	the
Lesser	Quarter	and	the	river	Vltava	at	the	panorama	of	the	city,	which	seemed	to
be	veined	with	the	curving	cracks	and	rifts	of	past	time,	like	the	varnish	on	a
painting.	A	little	later,	said	Austerlitz,	I	discovered	another	such	pattern	created
by	no	discernible	law	in	the	entwined	roots	of	a	chestnut	tree	clinging	to	a	steep
slope,	through	which,	Vera	had	told	me,	said	Austerlitz,	I	liked	to	climb	as	a
child.	And	the	dark	green	yews	growing	under	the	taller	trees	were	familiar	to
me	too,	as	familiar	
as	the	cool	air	which	enveloped	me	at	the	bottom	of	the
ravine	and	the	countless	windflowers	covering	the	woodland	floor,	faded	now	in
April,	and	I	understood	why,	on	one	of	my	visits	to	a	Gloucestershire	country
house	with	Hilary	years	ago,	my	voice	failed	me	when,	in	the	park	which	was
laid	out	very	much	like	the	Schönborn	gardens,	we	unexpectedly	came	upon	a
north-facing	
slope	covered	by	the	finely	cut	leaves	and	snow-white	blooms	of
the	March-flowering	
Anemone	nemorosa
.—It	was	with	the	botanical	name	of
these	shade-loving	anemones	that	Austerlitz	concluded	another	section	of	his
story	on	that	evening	in	the	late	winter	of	1997,	when	we	sat	in	the	Alderney
Street	house	amidst	what	seemed	to	me	a	silence	of	unfathomable	profundity.
	
	
	
Quarter	or	half	an	hour	may	have	gone	by	in	the	light	of	the	blue,	evenly
flickering	flames	of	the	little	gas	fire,	before	Austerlitz	rose	and	said	it	would
probably	be	best	if	I	spent	the	night	under	his	roof.	So	saying,	he	went	upstairs
ahead	of	me,	and	led	me	into	a	room	which,	like	those	on	the	ground	floor,	was
quite	unfurnished	except	for	a	kind	of	camp	bed	standing	unfolded	against	one
wall,	with	handles	at	both	ends	so	that	it	resembled	a	stretcher.	Beside	the	bed
there	was	a	wine	crate	with	a	blackened	coat	of	arms	burnt	into	it	which	had
once	contained	Château	Gruaud-Larose,	and	on	the	crate,	in	the	gentle	light	of	a
shaded	lamp,	stood	a	glass,	a	carafe	of	water,	and	an	old-fashioned	radio	in	a
dark	brown	Bakelite	case.	Austerlitz	wished	me	good	night	and	latched	the	door
carefully	behind	him.	I	went	over	to	the	window,	looked	down	at	the	empty
street	below,	turned	back	to	the	room,	sat	down	on	the	bed,	undid	my	shoelaces,
thought	about	Austerlitz,	whom	I	could	now	hear	moving	about	the	room	next
door,	and	then,	when	I	looked	up	again,	saw	in	the	faint	light	a	small	collection
of	seven	differently	shaped	Bakelite	jars	on	the	mantelpiece.	None	of	these
containers	was	more	than	two	or	three	inches	high,	and	when	I	opened	them	one
by	one	and	held	them	in	the	light	of	the	lamp,	each	proved	to	contain	the	mortal
remains	of	one	of	the	moths	which—as	Austerlitz	had	told	me—had	
met	its	end
here	in	this	house.	I	tipped	one	of	them,	a	weightless,	ivory-colored	creature	with
folded	wings	that	might	have	been	woven	of	some	immaterial	fabric,	out	of	its
Bakelite	box	onto	the	palm	of	my	right	hand.	Its	legs,	which	it	had	drawn	up
under	its	silver-scaled	body	as	if	just	clearing	some	final	obstacle,	were	so
delicate	that	I	could	scarcely	make	them	out,	while	the	antennae	curving	high
above	the	whole	body	also	trembled	on	the	edge	of	visibility.	However,	the
staring	black	eye	projecting	somewhat	from	the	head	was	distinct	enough.
Spellbound	by	this	nocturnal	apparition,	which	although	it	might	have	died	years
ago	bore	no	sign	of	decay,	I	studied	it	intently	before	replacing	it	in	its	narrow
tomb.	As	I	lay	down	I	turned	on	the	radio	set	standing	on	the	wine	crate	beside
the	bed.	The	names	of	cities	and	radio	stations	with	which	I	used	to	link	the	most
exotic	ideas	in	my	childhood	appeared	on	its	round,	illuminated	dial—Monte
Ceneri,	Rome,	Ljubljana,	Stockholm,	Beromünster,	Hilversum,	Prague,	and
others	besides.	I	turned	the	volume	down	very	low	and	listened	to	a	language	I
did	not	understand	drifting	in	the	air	from	a	great	distance:	a	female	voice,	which
was	sometimes	lost	in	the	ether,	but	then	emerged	again	and	mingled	with	the
performance	of	two	careful	hands	moving,	in	some	place	unknown	to	me,	over
the	keyboard	of	a	Bösendorfer	or	Pleyel	and	playing	certain	musical	passages,	I
think	from	the	
Well-Tempered	Clavier
,	which	accompanied	me	far	into	the
realms	of	slumber.	When	I	woke	in	the	morning	only	a	faint	crackle	and	hiss	was
coming	from	the	narrow	brass	mesh	over	the	loudspeaker.	Soon	afterwards,
when	I	mentioned	the	mysterious	radio	at	breakfast,	Austerlitz	told	me	he	had
always	imagined	that	the	voices	moving	through	the	air	
after	the	onset	of
darkness,	only	a	few	of	which	we	could	catch,	had	a	life	of	their	own,	like	bats,
and	shunned	the	light	of	day.	In	the	long,	sleepless	nights	of	recent	years,	he
said,	when	I	was	listening	to	the	women	announcers	in	Budapest,	Helsinki,	or	La
Coruña,	I	often	saw	them	weaving	their	erratic	way	far	out	in	the	air,	and	wished
I	were	already	in	their	company.	But	to	come	back	to	my	story	…	It	was	when	I
had	returned	from	the	Schönborn	Garden,	as	we	were	sitting	in	Vera’s	flat	again,
that	she	first	told	me	about	my	parents	at	greater	length:	their	origins	so	far	as
she	knew	of	them,	the	course	of	their	lives,	and	the	annihilation,	within	the	space
of	only	a	few	years,	of	their	entire	existence.	Despite	her	dark	and	rather
melancholy	appearance,	so	I	think	Vera	began,	said	Austerlitz,	your	mother
Agáta	was	a	very	genial,	on	occasion	even	lighthearted	woman.	In	this	she	was
just	like	her	father,	old	Austerlitz,	who	owned	a	fez-and	slipper-making	factory
in	Sternberg	which	he	had	founded	while	the	country	was	still	under	Austrian
rule,	and	who	had	the	ability	of	simply	ignoring	any	unpleasantness.	Once,	when
he	was	visiting	this	house,	I	heard	him	speak	of	the	considerable	boom	in	his
business	since	Mussolini’s	men	had	taken	to	wearing	that	semi-Oriental	item	of
headgear	the	fez,	saying	that	he	could	hardly	manufacture	and	export	enough	of
them	to	Italy.	At	the	time	Agáta	herself,	secure	as	she	felt	in	the	recognition	she
had	won	much	faster	than	she	dared	to	hope	in	her	career	as	an	opera	and
operetta	singer,	thought	that	everything	would	turn	out	all	right	in	the	end,
whereas	Maximilian,	in	spite	of	the	cheerful	disposition	which	he	shared	with
Agáta,	had	been	convinced	ever	since	I	knew	him,	said	Vera,	so	Austerlitz	told
me,	that	the	parvenus	who	had	come	to	power	in	
Germany	and	the	corporate
bodies	and	other	human	swarms	endlessly	proliferating	under	the	new	regime,	a
spectacle	which	inspired	him,	as	he	often	said,	with	a	sense	of	positive	horror,
had	abandoned	themselves	from	the	first	to	a	blind	lust	for	conquest	and
destruction,	taking	its	cue	from	the	magic	word	
thousand
	which	the
Reichskanzler,	as	we	could	all	hear	on	the	wireless,	repeated	constantly	in	his
speeches.	A	thousand,	ten	thousand,	twenty	thousand,	thirty-seven	thousand,	two
hundred	and	forty	thousand,	a	thousand	times	a	thousand,	thousands	upon
thousands:	such	was	the	refrain	he	barked	out	in	his	hoarse	voice,	drumming	into
the	Germans	the	notion	that	the	promise	of	their	own	greatness	was	about	to	be
fulfilled.	Nonetheless,	said	Vera,	Austerlitz	continued,	Maximilian	did	not	in	any
way	believe	that	the	German	people	had	been	driven	into	their	misfortune;
rather,	in	his	view,	they	had	entirely	re-created	themselves	in	this	perverse	form,
engendered	by	every	individual’s	wishful	thinking	and	bound	up	with	false
family	sentiment,	and	had	then	brought	forth,	as	symbolic	exponents	of	their
innermost	desires,	so	to	speak,	the	Nazi	grandees,	whom	Maximilian	regarded
without	exception	as	muddle-headed	and	indolent.	From	time	to	time,	so	Vera
recollected,	said	Austerlitz,	Maximilian	would	tell	the	tale	of	how	once,	after	a
trade	union	meeting	in	Teplitz	in	the	early	summer	of	1933,	he	had	gone	a	little
way	up	into	the	Erzgebirge,	where	he	came	upon	some	day	trippers	in	a	beer
garden	who	had	been	buying	all	manner	of	things	in	a	village	on	the	German
side	of	the	border,	including	a	new	kind	of	boiled	sweet	which	had,	embedded	in
its	sugary	mass,	a	raspberry-colored	swastika	that	literally	melted	in	the	mouth.
At	the	sight	of	these	Nazi	treats,	
Maximilian	had	said,	he	suddenly	realized	that
the	Germans	had	wholly	reorganized	their	production	lines,	from	heavy	industry
down	to	the	manufacturing	of	items	such	as	these	vulgar	sweets,	not	because
they	had	been	ordered	to	do	so	but	each	of	his	own	accord,	out	of	enthusiasm	for
the	national	resurgence.	Vera	went	on,	said	Austerlitz,	to	tell	me	that	Maximilian
visited	Austria	and	Germany	several	times	in	the	1930s,	to	gain	a	more	accurate
idea	of	general	developments,	and	that	she	remembered	precisely	how,
immediately	after	returning	from	Nuremberg,	he	had	described	the	Führer’s
prodigious	reception	at	the	Party	rally.	Hours	before	his	arrival,	the	entire
population	of	Nuremberg	and	indeed	people	from	much	further	afield,	crowds
flocking	in	not	just	from	Franconia	and	Bavaria	but	from	the	most	remote	parts
of	the	country,	Holstein	and	Pomerania,	Silesia	and	the	Black	Forest,	stood
shoulder	to	shoulder	all	agog	with	excitement	along	the	predetermined	route,
until	at	last,	heralded	by	roars	of	acclamation,	the	motorcade	of	heavy	Mercedes
limousines	came	gliding	at	walking	pace	down	the	narrow	alley	which	parted	the
sea	of	radiant	uplifted	faces	and	the	arms	outstretched	in	yearning.	Maximilian
had	told	her,	said	Vera,	that	in	the	middle	of	this	crowd,	which	had	merged	into
a	single	living	organism	racked	by	strange,	convulsive	contractions,	he	had	felt
like	a	foreign	body	about	to	be	crushed	and	then	excreted.	From	where	he	stood
in	the	square	outside	the	Lorenzkirche,	he	said,	he	saw	the	motorcade	making	its
slow	way	through	the	swaying	masses	down	to	the	Old	Town,	where	the	houses
with	their	pointed	and	crooked	gables,	their	occupants	hanging	out	of	the
windows	like	bunches	of	grapes,	resembled	a	hopelessly	overcrowded	ghetto
into	
which,	so	Maximilian	had	said,	the	long-awaited	savior	was	now	making	his
entry.	It	was	in	just	the	same	vein,	said	Vera,	that	Maximilian	later	repeatedly
described	the	spectacular	film	of	the	Party	rally	which	he	had	seen	in	a	Munich
cinema,	and	which	confirmed	his	suspicions	that,	out	of	the	humiliation	from
which	the	Germans	had	never	recovered,	they	were	now	developing	an	image	of
themselves	as	a	people	chosen	to	evangelize	the	world.	Not	only	did	the
overawed	spectators	witness	the	Führer’s	airplane	descending	slowly	to	earth
through	towering	mountain	ranges	of	cloud;	not	only	was	the	tragic	history	they
all	shared	invoked	in	the	ceremony	honoring	the	war	dead	during	which,	as
Maximilian	described	it	to	us,	Hitler	and	Hess	and	Himmler	strode	down	the
broad	avenue	lined,	in	straight	serried	ranks,	with	columns	and	companies
created	by	the	power	of	the	new	state	out	of	a	host	of	immovable	German
bodies,	to	the	accompaniment	of	a	funeral	march	which	stirred	the	innermost
soul	of	the	entire	nation;	not	only	might	one	see	warriors	pledging	themselves	to
die	for	the	Fatherland,	and	the	huge	forests	of	flags	mysteriously	swaying	as	they
moved	away	by	torchlight	into	the	dark—no,	said	Vera,	Maximilian	told	us	that
a	bird’s-eye	view	showed	a	city	of	white	tents	extending	to	the	horizon,	from
which	as	day	broke	the	Germans	emerged	singly,	in	couples,	or	in	small	groups,
forming	a	silent	procession	and	pressing	ever	closer	together	as	they	all	went	in
the	same	direction,	following,	so	it	seemed,	some	higher	bidding,	on	their	way	to
the	Promised	Land	at	last	after	long	years	in	the	wilderness.	It	was	only	a	few
months	after	this	experience	of	Maximilian’s	in	the	Munich	cinema	that	the
Austrians	were	to	be	heard	over	the	wireless,	hundreds	of	
thousands	of	them
pouring	into	the	Heldenplatz	in	Vienna,	their	shouts	breaking	over	us	like	a	flood
tide	for	hours	on	end,	said	Vera.	In	Maximilian’s	opinion,	she	told	me,	this
collective	paroxysm	on	the	part	of	the	Viennese	crowds	marked	the	watershed.	It
was	still	a	sinister	echo	in	our	ears	when,	with	summer	hardly	over,	the	first
refugees	arrived	here	in	Prague,	expelled	from	the	now	so-called	Ostmark	region
after	being	robbed	by	their	former	fellow	citizens	of	everything	but	a	few
schillings.	In	what	they	probably	knew	was	the	false	hope	of	keeping	their	heads
above	water	in	a	foreign	country,	they	went	from	door	to	door	as	itinerant
pedlars,	offering	for	sale	hairpins	and	slides,	pencils	and	writing	paper,	ties	and
other	items	of	haberdashery,	just	as	their	ancestors	had	once	walked	the
countryside	of	Galicia,	Hungary,	and	the	Tyrol	with	packs	on	their	backs.	I
remember,	said	Vera,	Austerlitz	added,	one	such	hawker,	a	man	called	Saly
Bleyberg,	who	had	built	up	his	own	garage	business	in	the	Leopoldstadt	district
of	Vienna	not	far	from	the	Praterstern	during	the	difficult	interwar	years,	and
who	when	Agáta	invited	him	in	for	a	cup	of	coffee	told	us	the	most	appalling
tales	of	the	despicable	conduct	of	the	Viennese:	the	methods	used	to	force	him	to
make	over	his	business	to	a	certain	Herr	Haselberger,	the	manner	in	which	he
was	then	cheated	of	the	sale	price,	which	was	ridiculously	low	anyway,	how	he
was	robbed	of	his	bank	deposits	and	securities,	how	all	his	furniture	and	his
Steyr	car	were	appropriated,	and	how	at	last	he,	Saly	Bleyberg	and	his	family,
sitting	on	their	suitcases	in	the	hall	of	the	building	where	they	lived,	had	been
obliged	to	hear	the	drunken	caretaker	negotiating	with	the	young	couple,
obviously	just	married,	who	had	come	to	look	at	the	now	
vacant	flat.	Although
the	story	we	heard	from	poor	Bleyberg,	who	kept	crumpling	the	handkerchief	in
his	hand	with	helpless	rage,	was	far	worse	than	anything	we	had	imagined,	and
although	after	the	Munich	Agreement	the	situation	held	out	no	hope	at	all,	said
Vera,	Maximilian	stayed	in	Prague	throughout	the	winter,	whether	because	of
his	work	for	the	Party,	which	was	now	a	matter	of	particular	urgency,	or	because
he	refused,	for	as	long	as	was	humanly	possible,	to	give	up	his	belief	that	the	law
would	protect	a	man.	For	her	part,	Agáta	was	not	prepared	to	go	to	France	ahead
of	Maximilian,	although	he	had	repeatedly	advised	her	to	leave,	and	so	it	was
that	your	father,	Vera	told	me,	said	Austerlitz,	then	in	the	utmost	danger,	did	not
leave	until	it	was	almost	too	late,	on	the	afternoon	of	the	fourteenth	of	March,	by
plane	from	Ruzyně	to	Paris.	I	still	remember,	said	Vera,	that	when	he	said
goodbye	he	was	wearing	a	wonderful	plum-colored	double-breasted	suit,	and	a
black	felt	hat	with	a	green	band	and	a	broad	brim.	Next	morning,	at	first	light,
the	Germans	did	indeed	march	into	Prague	in	the	middle	of	a	heavy	snowstorm
which	seemed	to	make	them	appear	out	of	nowhere.	When	they	crossed	the
bridge	and	their	armored	cars	were	rolling	up	the	Narodní	a	profound	silence	fell
over	the	whole	city.	People	turned	away,	and	from	that	moment	they	walked
more	slowly,	like	somnambulists,	as	if	they	no	longer	knew	where	they	were
going.	What	particularly	upset	us,	so	Vera	remarked,	said	Austerlitz,	was	the
instant	change	to	driving	on	the	right.	It	often	made	my	heart	miss	a	beat,	she
said,	when	I	saw	a	car	racing	down	the	road	on	the	wrong	side,	since	it
inevitably	made	me	think	that	from	now	on	we	must	live	in	a	world	turned
upside	down.	Of	course,	Vera	
continued,	it	was	much	harder	for	Agáta	than	for
me	to	manage	under	the	new	regime.	Since	the	Germans	had	issued	their	decrees
on	the	Jewish	population,	she	could	go	shopping	only	at	certain	times;	she	must
not	take	a	taxi,	she	could	sit	only	in	the	last	carriage	of	the	tram,	she	could	not
visit	a	coffeehouse	or	cinema,	or	attend	a	concert	or	any	other	event.	Nor	could
she	herself	appear	onstage	anymore,	and	access	to	the	banks	of	the	Vltava	and
the	parks	and	gardens	she	had	loved	so	much	was	barred	to	her.	All	my	green
places	are	lost	to	me,	she	once	said,	adding	that	only	now	did	she	truly
understand	how	wonderful	it	is	to	stand	by	the	rail	of	a	river	steamer	without	a
care	in	the	world.	The	ever-extended	list	of	bans—before	long	it	was	forbidden
for	Jews	to	walk	on	the	pavement	on	the	side	of	the	road	next	to	the	park,	to	go
into	a	laundry	or	dry	cleaner’s,	or	to	make	a	call	from	a	public	telephone—all	of
this,	I	still	hear	Vera	telling	me,	said	Austerlitz,	soon	brought	Agáta	to	the	brink
of	despair.	I	can	see	her	now	pacing	up	and	down	this	room,	said	Vera,	I	can	see
her	striking	her	forehead	with	the	flat	of	her	hand,	and	crying	out,	chanting	the
syllables	one	by	one:	I	do	not	un	der	stand	it!	I	do	not	un	der	stand	it!	I	shall	ne
ver	un	der	stand	it!!	Nonetheless,	she	went	into	the	city	as	often	as	she	could,
applying	to	I	don’t	know	how	many	or	what	authorities,	she	stood	for	hours	in
the	sole	post	office	which	the	forty	thousand	Jews	in	Prague	were	allowed	to
use,	waiting	to	send	a	telegram;	she	made	inquiries,	pulled	strings,	left	financial
deposits,	produced	affidavits	and	guarantees,	and	when	she	came	home	she
would	sit	up	racking	her	brains	until	late	into	the	night.	But	the	more	trouble	she
took,	and	the	longer	she	went	on	trying,	the	further	did	any	hope	
of	her	getting
an	emigration	permit	recede,	so	in	the	summer,	when	there	was	already	talk	of
the	forthcoming	war	and	the	likelihood	of	even	harsher	restrictions	when	it	broke
out,	she	finally	decided,	Vera	told	me,	said	Austerlitz,	that	she	would	send	me	at
least	to	England,	having	succeeded	through	the	good	offices	of	one	of	her
theatrical	friends	in	getting	my	name	put	down	for	one	of	the	few	children’s
transports	leaving	Prague	for	London	during	those	months.	Vera	remembered,
said	Austerlitz,	that	the	happy	excitement	Agáta	felt	at	this	first	successful
outcome	of	her	efforts	was	overshadowed	by	her	grief	and	anxiety	as	she
imagined	how	I	would	feel,	a	boy	not	yet	five	years	old	who	had	always	led	a
sheltered	life,	on	my	long	railway	journey	and	then	among	strangers	in	a	foreign
country.	On	the	other	hand,	said	Vera,	Agáta	hoped	that	now	the	first	step	had
been	taken,	some	way	for	her	to	leave	too	would	surely	be	found	quite	quickly,
and	then	you	could	all	be	together	in	Paris.	So	she	was	torn	between	wishful
thinking	and	her	fear	that	she	was	doing	something	irresponsible	and
unforgivable,	and	who	knows,	Vera	said	to	me,	whether	she	might	not	have	kept
you	with	her	after	all	had	there	been	just	a	few	more	days	left	before	you	were	to
set	off	from	Prague.	I	have	only	an	indistinct,	rather	blurred	picture	of	the
moment	of	farewell	at	the	Wilsonova	Station,	said	Vera,	adding,	after	a	few
moments’	reflection,	that	I	had	my	things	with	me	in	a	little	leather	suitcase,	and
food	for	the	journey	in	a	rucksack—
un	petit	sac	à	dos	avec	quelques	viatiques
,
said	Austerlitz,	those	had	been	Vera’s	exact	words,	summing	up,	as	he	now
thought,	the	whole	of	his	later	life.	Vera	also	remembered	the	twelve-year-old
girl	with	the	bandoneon	to	whose	care	they	had	entrusted	me,	a	Charlie	Chaplin
comic	bought	at	the	last	minute,	
the	fluttering	of	white	handkerchiefs	like	a	flock
of	doves	taking	off	into	the	air	as	the	parents	who	were	staying	behind	waved	to
their	children,	and	her	curious	impression	that	the	train,	after	moving	off	very
slowly,	had	not	really	left	at	all,	but	in	a	kind	of	feint	had	rolled	a	little	way	out
of	the	glazed	hall	before	sinking	into	the	ground.	But	from	that	day	on	Agáta
was	a	changed	woman,	Vera	continued,	said	Austerlitz.	What	she	had	preserved
of	her	cheerfulness	and	confidence,	in	defiance	of	all	difficulties,	was	now
overcast	by	a	depression	which	she	was	clearly	unable	to	dispel.	I	think	she	did
make	one	more	attempt	to	buy	her	freedom,	said	Vera,	but	after	that	she	almost
never	left	the	building,	she	shrank	from	opening	the	windows,	she	would	sit
motionless	for	hours	in	the	blue	velvet	armchair	in	the	darkest	corner	of	the
drawing	room,	or	lie	on	the	sofa	with	her	hands	over	her	face.	She	was	simply
waiting	to	see	what	happened	next,	and	above	all	she	was	waiting	for	post	from
England	and	Paris.	She	had	several	addresses	for	Maximilian—a	hotel	in	the	rue
de	l’Odéon,	a	small	rented	flat	near	the	Glacière	Métro	station,	and	a	third	place,
said	Vera,	in	a	district	I	no	longer	remember—and	she	tormented	herself	by
wondering	whether	at	some	crucial	moment	she	had	mixed	up	these	addresses,
so	that	it	was	her	own	fault	if	her	correspondence	had	gone	astray,	while	at	the
same	time	she	feared	that	Maximilian’s	letters	to	her	had	been	detained	by	the
security	services	on	their	arrival	in	Prague.	And	indeed	the	letterbox	was	always
empty	up	to	the	winter	of	1941,	when	Agáta	was	still	living	in	the	šporkova,	so
that	as	she	said	to	me	once,	oddly,	it	was	as	if	those	messages	in	which	we
placed	our	last	hopes	were	misdirected	or	swallowed	up	by	the	evil	spirits
abroad	in	the	air	all	around	us.	It	
was	only	later,	said	Vera,	that	I	realized	how
well	this	remark	of	Agáta’s	conveyed	the	invisible	terrors	beneath	which	the	city
of	Prague	lay	cowering	at	the	time,	only	when	I	learned	of	the	true	extent	of	the
perversion	of	the	law	under	the	Germans,	the	acts	of	violence	they	committed
daily	in	the	basement	of	the	Petschek	Palace,	in	the	Pankrác	Prison,	and	at	the
killing	grounds	out	in	Kobylisy.	After	ninety	seconds	in	which	to	defend
yourself	to	a	judge	you	could	be	condemned	to	death	for	a	trifle,	some	offense
barely	worth	mentioning,	the	merest	contravention	of	the	regulations	in	force,
and	then	you	would	be	hanged	immediately	in	the	execution	room	next	to	the
law	court,	where	there	was	an	iron	rail	running	along	the	ceiling	down	which	the
lifeless	bodies	were	pushed	a	little	further	as	required.	The	bill	for	these	cursory
proceedings	was	sent	to	the	relations	of	the	hanged	or	guillotined	victim,	with
the	information	that	it	could	be	settled	in	monthly	installments.	Although	little
hint	of	it	made	its	way	out	at	the	time,	fear	of	the	Germans	spread	through	the
whole	city	like	a	creeping	miasma.	Agáta	said	it	even	drifted	in	through	the
closed	doors	and	windows,	taking	one’s	breath	away.	When	I	look	back	at	the
two	years	following	the	outbreak	of	the	war,	said	Vera,	it	is	as	if	at	that	time
everything	was	caught	in	a	vortex	whirling	downwards	at	ever-increasing	speed.
Bulletins	came	thick	and	fast	over	the	wireless,	read	by	the	announcers	in	a
curiously	high-pitched	tone	of	voice,	as	if	forced	out	of	the	larynx:	news	of	the
never-ending	exploits	of	the	Wehrmacht,	which	had	soon	occupied	the	entire
European	continent,	while	its	successive	campaigns,	with	apparently	conclusive
logic,	held	out	to	the	Germans	the	prospect	of	a	vast	world	empire	in	which,
thanks	to	
the	fact	that	they	belonged	to	the	chosen	people,	they	would	all	be	able
to	embark	on	the	most	glittering	careers.	I	believe,	Vera	told	me,	said	Austerlitz,
that	even	the	last	remaining	German	skeptics	were	overcome	by	a	kind	of
euphoria,	such	as	one	feels	at	high	altitude,	in	these	years	when	victory	followed
upon	victory,	while	we,	the	oppressed,	lived	below	sea	level,	as	it	were,	and	had
to	watch	as	the	SS	pervaded	the	economy	of	the	entire	country,	and	one	business
firm	after	another	was	handed	over	to	German	trustees.	They	had	even	aryanized
the	fez	and	slipper	factory	in	Sternberg.	The	means	Agáta	still	had	at	her
disposal	were	barely	enough	for	the	necessities.	Her	bank	accounts	had	been
frozen	ever	since	she	was	obliged	to	send	in	an	eight-page	statement	of	her
assets,	under	dozens	of	headings.	She	was	also	strictly	forbidden	to	dispose	of
any	valuables	such	as	pictures	or	antiques,	and	I	remember,	said	Vera,	how	she
once	showed	me	a	passage	in	one	of	those	proclamations	issued	by	the
occupying	power	stating	that	in	the	case	of	any	contravention	of	this	regulation,
both	the	Jew	concerned	in	the	transaction	and	the	person	acquiring	the	property
must	expect	the	most	severe	of	measures	to	be	taken	by	the	State	Police.	The
Jew	concerned	in	the	transaction!	Agáta	had	cried,	adding:	Really,	the	way	these
people	write!	It’s	enough	to	make	your	head	swim.	I	think	it	was	in	the	late
autumn	of	1941,	said	Vera,	that	Agáta	had	to	take	her	wireless,	her	gramophone
and	the	records	she	loved	so	much,	her	binoculars	and	opera	glasses,	musical
instruments,	jewelry,	furs,	and	the	clothes	Maximilian	had	left	behind	to	the	so-
called	Compulsory	Collection	Center.	Because	of	some	mistake	she	had	made	in
complying	with	this	order,	she	was	sent	to	shovel	snow	on	Ruzyně	airfield	on	a
freezing	
day—winter	came	very	early	that	year,	said	Vera—and	at	three	o’clock
the	next	morning,	in	the	deepest	part	of	the	night,	the	two	envoys	of	the	Israelite
religious	community	whom	she	had	been	expecting	for	some	time	arrived	with
the	news	that	Agáta	must	prepare	to	be	taken	away	within	six	days.	These
messengers,	as	Vera	described	them	to	me,	said	Austerlitz,	who	were	strikingly
alike	and	had	faces	that	seemed	somehow	indistinct,	with	flickering	outlines,
wore	jackets	furnished	with	assorted	pleats,	pockets,	button	facings,	and	a	belt,
garments	which	looked	especially	versatile	although	it	was	not	clear	what
purpose	they	served.	The	pair	spoke	quietly	to	Agáta	for	some	time,	and	gave
her	a	sheaf	of	printed	forms	and	instructions	setting	out	everything	down	to	the
very	smallest	detail:	where	and	when	the	person	summoned	must	present	herself,
what	items	of	clothing	were	to	be	brought—coat,	raincoat,	warm	headgear,
earmuffs,	mittens,	nightdress,	underclothes,	and	so	on—what	articles	of	personal
use	it	was	advisable	to	bring,	for	instance	sewing	things,	leather	grease,	a	spirit
stove,	and	candles;	the	weight	of	the	main	item	of	luggage,	which	was	not	to
exceed	fifty	kilos;	what	else	could	be	brought	in	the	way	of	hand	baggage	and
provisions;	how	the	luggage	was	to	be	labeled,	with	name,	destination,	and	the
number	allotted	to	her;	the	proviso	that	all	the	attached	forms	were	to	be	filled	in
and	signed,	that	it	was	not	permitted	to	bring	cushions	or	other	articles	of
furnishing,	or	to	make	rucksacks	and	traveling	bags	out	of	Persian	rugs,	winter
coats,	or	other	valuable	remnants	of	fabric;	and	furthermore	that	matches,
lighters,	and	smoking	were	prohibited	at	the	embarkation	point	and	thereafter	in
general,	and	all	orders	issued	by	the	official	authorities	were	to	
be	followed	to
the	letter	in	every	contingency.	Agáta	was	unable,	as	I	could	see	for	myself,	said
Vera,	to	follow	these	nauseatingly	phrased	directives;	instead,	she	simply	flung	a
few	wholly	impractical	items	into	a	bag	at	random,	like	someone	going	away	for
the	weekend,	so	that	finally,	difficult	as	it	was	for	me	and	guilty	as	it	made	me
feel,	I	did	her	packing	while	she	simply	stood	at	the	window,	turning	away	from
me	to	look	out	at	the	empty	street.	Early	in	the	morning	of	the	appointed	day	we
set	off	while	it	was	still	dark,	with	her	luggage	strapped	to	a	toboggan,	and
without	a	word	we	made	the	long	journey	through	the	snow	spinning	down
around	us,	along	the	left	bank	of	the	Vltava,	past	the	Baumgarten,	and	further
out	still	to	the	Trade	Fair	Palace	at	Holešovice.	The	closer	we	came	to	it,	the
more	often	did	small	groups	of	people	carrying	and	dragging	their	heavy	burdens
emerge	from	the	darkness,	moving	laboriously	towards	the	same	place	through
the	snow,	which	was	falling	more	thickly	now,	so	that	gradually	a	caravan	strung
out	over	a	long	distance	formed,	and	it	was	with	this	caravan	that	we	reached	the
Trade	Fair	entrance,	faintly	illuminated	by	a	single	electric	lightbulb,	towards
seven	in	the	morning.	We	waited	there	in	the	crowd	of	those	who	had	been
summoned,	a	silent	assembly	stirred	only,	now	and	then,	by	an	apprehensive
murmur	running	through	it.	There	were	men	and	there	were	women,	families
with	young	children	and	solitary	figures,	there	were	the	elderly	and	the	infirm,
ordinary	folk	and	those	who	had	been	well-to-do,	all	of	them,	in	accordance	with
the	instructions	they	had	received,	with	their	transport	numbers	round	their	necks
on	pieces	of	string.	Agáta	soon	asked	me	to	leave	her.	When	we	parted	she
embraced	me	and	said:	Stromovka	Park	is	over	
there,	would	you	walk	there	for
me	sometimes?	I	have	loved	that	beautiful	place	so	much.	If	you	look	into	the
dark	water	of	the	pools,	perhaps	one	of	these	days	you	will	see	my	face.	Well,
said	Vera,	so	then	I	went	home.	It	took	me	over	two	hours	to	walk	back	to	the
šporkova.	I	tried	to	think	where	Agáta	might	be	now,	whether	she	was	still
waiting	at	the	entrance	or	was	already	inside	the	Trade	Fair	precinct.	I	learned
only	years	later,	from	one	who	had	survived	the	ordeal,	what	it	was	like	there.
The	people	being	taken	away	were	herded	into	an	unheated	exhibition	hall,	a
great	barn-like	building	which	was	freezing	in	the	middle	of	winter.	It	was	a
bleak	place	where,	under	faint,	glaucous	lamplight,	the	utmost	confusion
reigned.	Many	of	those	who	had	just	arrived	had	to	have	their	baggage	searched,
and	were	obliged	to	hand	over	money,	watches,	and	other	valuables	to	a
Hauptscharführer	called	Fiedler	who	was	feared	for	his	brutality.	A	great	mound
of	silver	cutlery	lay	on	a	table,	along	with	fox	furs	and	Persian	lamb	capes.
Personal	details	were	taken	down,	questionnaires	handed	out,	and	identity	papers
stamped	EVACUATED	or	GHETTOIZED.	The	German	officials	and	their
Czech	and	Jewish	assistants	walked	busily	to	and	fro,	and	there	was	much
shouting	and	cursing,	and	blows	as	well.	Those	who	were	to	leave	had	to	stay	in
the	places	allotted	to	them.	Most	of	them	were	silent,	some	wept	quietly,	but
outbursts	of	despair,	loud	shouting	and	fits	of	frenzied	rage	were	not	uncommon.
They	stayed	in	this	cold	Trade	Fair	building	for	several	days,	until	finally,	early
one	morning	when	scarcely	anyone	was	out	and	about,	they	were	marched	under
guard	to	nearby	Holešovice	railway	station,	where	it	took	almost	another	three
hours	to	load	them	on	the	trucks.	Later,	said	Vera,	I	
often	walked	out	to
Holešovice,	to	Stromovka	Park	and	the	Trade	Fair	precinct.	On	these	occasions	I
usually	visited	the	lapidarium	installed	there	in	the	sixties	and	spent	hours
looking	at	the	mineral	samples	in	the	glass	cases—pyrite	crystals,	deep	green
Siberian	malachites,	specimens	of	Bohemian	mica,	granite,	quartz,	and
limestone	of	an	isabelline	yellow	hue—wondering	at	the	nature	of	the
foundations	on	which	our	world	is	built.	On	the	very	day	when	Agáta	had	been
forced	to	leave	her	flat,	Vera	told	me,	said	Austerlitz,	a	man	from	the
Trusteeship	Center	for	Requisitioned	Goods	came	to	the	šporkova	and	put	a
paper	seal	on	the	doors.	Then,	between	Christmas	and	the	New	Year,	a	troop	of
very	shady	characters	arrived	to	clear	away	everything	that	had	been	left	behind,
the	furniture,	the	lamps	and	candelabra,	the	carpets	and	curtains,	the	books	and
musical	scores,	the	clothes	from	the	wardrobes	and	drawers,	the	bed	linen,
pillows,	eiderdowns,	blankets,	china	and	kitchen	utensils,	the	pot	plants	and
umbrellas,	even	the	bottled	pears	and	cherries	which	had	been	standing	forgotten
in	the	cellar	for	years,	and	the	remaining	potatoes.	They	took	everything,	down
to	the	very	last	spoon,	off	to	one	of	the	over	fifty	depots,	where	these	abandoned
objects	were	itemized	separately	with	that	thoroughness	peculiar	to	the	Germans,
were	valued,	then	washed,	cleaned	or	mended	as	necessary,	and	finally	stored,
row	upon	row,	on	specially	made	shelves.	Last	of	all,	said	Vera,	a	pest	control
officer	turned	up	in	the	šporkova.	He	struck	me	as	a	particularly	sinister	figure,
with	an	unpleasant	look	in	his	eye	which	went	right	through	me.	To	this	day	he
sometimes	haunts	my	dreams,	in	which	I	see	him	surrounded	by	clouds	of
poisonous	white	smoke	as	he	goes	about	
fumigating	the	rooms.—When	Vera
had	come	to	the	end	of	her	story,	so	Austerlitz	continued	that	morning	in
Alderney	Street,	she	handed	me,	after	a	long	pause	in	which	the	silence	in	the
šporkova	flat	seemed	to	grow	deeper	with	every	breath	we	two	small
photographs	measuring	about	three	by	four	inches	from	the	little	occasional	table
beside	her	chair.	She	had	found	them	by	chance	the	previous	evening	inside	one
of	the	fifty-five	carmine-red	volumes	of	Balzac	which	she	had	happened	to	pick
up,	she	did	not	know	why.	Vera	said	she	could	not	remember	unfastening	the
glass	doors	and	taking	the	book	off	the	shelf	where	it	stood	with	its	companions,
she	merely	saw	herself	sitting	here	in	this	armchair	and—for	the	first	time	since
her	late	twenties,	a	point	on	which	she	laid	special	emphasis—turning	the	pages
which	tell	the	story	of	the	great	injustice	suffered	by	Colonel	Chabert.	How	the
two	pictures	had	slipped	between	the	leaves	was	a	mystery	to	her,	said	Vera.
Perhaps	Agáta	had	borrowed	the	small	volume	while	she	was	still	living	here	in
the	šporkova,	in	the	last	weeks	before	the	Germans	marched	in.	In	any	case,	one
of	the	photographs	showed	the	stage	of	a	provincial	theater,	perhaps	in
Reichenau	or	Olmütz	or	one	of	the	other	towns	where	Agáta	sometimes
performed	before	she	was	engaged	to	appear	in	Prague.	At	first	glance,	said
Austerlitz,	Vera	said	she	had	thought	the	two	figures	in	the	bottom	left-hand
corner	were	Agáta	and	Maximilian—they	were	so	tiny	that	it	was	impossible	to
make	them	out	well—but	then	of	course	she	noticed	that	they	were	other	people,
perhaps	the	impresario,	or	a	conjuror	and	his	woman	assistant.	She	had
wondered,	said	Vera,	what	kind	of	play	or	opera	had	been	staged	in	front	of	this
alarming	backdrop,	and	
because	of	the	high	mountain	range	and	the	wild	forest
background	she	thought	it	might	have	been	
Wilhelm	Tell
,	or	
La	Sonnambula
,	or
Ibsen’s	last	play.
	
	
The	Swiss	boy	with	the	apple	on	his	head	appeared	in	my	mind’s	eye,	Vera
continued;	I	sensed	in	me	the	moment	of	terror	in	which	the	narrow	bridge	gives
way	under	the	sleepwalker’s	foot,	and	imagined	that,	high	in	the	rocks	above,	an
avalanche	was	already	breaking	loose,	about	to	sweep	the	poor	folk	who	had	lost
their	way	(for	what	else	would	have	brought	them	to	these	desolate
surroundings?)	down	into	the	depths	next	moment.	Minutes	went	by,	said
Austerlitz,	in	which	I	too	thought	I	saw	the	cloud	of	snow	crashing	into	the
valley,	before	I	heard	Vera	again,	speaking	of	the	mysterious	quality	peculiar	to
such	photographs	when	they	surface	from	oblivion.	One	has	the	impression,	she
said,	of	something	stirring	in	them,	as	if	one	caught	small	sighs	of	despair,
gémissements	de	désespoir
	was	her	expression,	said	Austerlitz,	as	if	the	pictures
had	a	memory	of	their	own	and	remembered	us,	remembered	the	roles	that	we,
the	survivors,	and	those	no	longer	among	us	had	played	in	our	former	lives.	Yes,
and	the	small	boy	in	the	other	photograph,	said	Vera	after	a	while,	this	is	you,
Jacquot,	in	February	1939,	about	six	months	before	you	left	Prague.	You	were	to
accompany	Agáta	to	a	masked	ball	at	the	house	of	one	of	her	influential
admirers,	and	she	had	the	snow-white	costume	made	for	you	especially	for	the
occasion.	On	the	back	it	says	
Jacquot	Austerlitz,	pa
že	rů
žové	královny
,	in	your
grandfather’s	handwriting,	for	he	happened	to	be	visiting	at	the	time.	The	picture
lay	before	me,	said	Austerlitz,	but	I	dared	not	touch	it.	The	words	
páže	rů
žové
královny,	pa
že	růzové	královny
	went	round	and	round	in	my	head,	until	their
meaning	
came	to	me	from	far	away,	and	once	again	I	saw	the	live	tableau	with
the	Rose	Queen	and	the	little	boy	carrying	her	train	at	her	side.
	
	
Yet	hard	as	I	tried	both	that	evening	and	later,	I	could	not	recollect	myself	in	the
part.	I	did	recognize	the	unusual	hairline	running	at	a	slant	over	the	forehead,	but
otherwise	all	memory	was	extinguished	in	me	by	an	overwhelming	sense	of	the
long	years	that	had	passed.	I	have	studied	the	photograph	many	times	since,	the
bare,	level	field	where	I	am	standing,	although	I	cannot	think	where	it	was;	the
blurred,	dark	area	above	the	horizon,	the	boy’s	curly	hair,	spectrally	light	around
the	outline	of	his	head,	the	cape	over	his	arm	which	appears	to	be	held	at	an
angle	or,	as	I	once	thought,	said	Austerlitz,	might	have	been	broken	or	in	a
splint,	the	six	large	mother-of-pearl	buttons,	the	extravagant	hat	with	the	heron’s
feather	in	it,	even	the	folds	of	the	stockings.	I	examined	every	detail	under	a
magnifying	glass	without	once	finding	the	slightest	clue.	And	in	doing	so	I
always	felt	the	piercing,	inquiring	gaze	of	the	page	boy	who	had	come	to
demand	his	dues,	who	was	waiting	in	the	gray	light	of	dawn	on	the	empty	field
for	me	to	accept	the	challenge	and	avert	the	misfortune	lying	ahead	of	him.	That
evening	in	the	šporkova,	when	Vera	put	the	picture	of	the	child	cavalier	in	front
of	me,	I	was	not,	as	you	might	suppose,	moved	or	distressed,	said	Austerlitz,
only	speechless	and	uncomprehending,	incapable	of	any	lucid	thought.	Even
later	nothing	but	blind	panic	filled	me	when	I	thought	of	the	five-year-old	page.
Once	I	dreamed	of	returning	to	the	flat	in	Prague	after	a	long	absence.	All	the
furniture	is	in	its	proper	place.	I	know	that	my	parents	will	soon	be	back	from
their	holiday,	and	there	is	something	important	which	I	must	give	them.	I	am	not
aware	that	they	have	been	dead	for	years.	I	simply	think	they	must	be	
very	old,
around	ninety	or	a	hundred,	as	indeed	they	would	be	if	they	were	still	alive.	But
when	at	last	they	come	through	the	door	they	are	in	their	mid-thirties	at	the	most.
They	enter	the	flat,	walk	round	the	rooms	picking	up	this	and	that,	sit	in	the
drawing	room	for	a	while	and	talk	to	each	other	in	the	mysterious	language	of
deaf-mutes.	They	take	no	notice	of	me.	I	suspect	that	they	are	about	to	set	off
again	for	the	place	somewhere	in	the	mountains	where	they	now	live.	It	does	not
seem	to	me,	Austerlitz	added,	that	we	understand	the	laws	governing	the	return
of	the	past,	but	I	feel	more	and	more	as	if	time	did	not	exist	at	all,	only	various
spaces	interlocking	according	to	the	rules	of	a	higher	form	of	stereometry,
between	which	the	living	and	the	dead	can	move	back	and	forth	as	they	like,	and
the	longer	I	think	about	it	the	more	it	seems	to	me	that	we	who	are	still	alive	are
unreal	in	the	eyes	of	the	dead,	that	only	occasionally,	in	certain	lights	and
atmospheric	conditions,	do	we	appear	in	their	field	of	vision.	As	far	back	as	I
can	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	I	have	always	felt	as	if	I	had	no	place	in	reality,
as	if	I	were	not	there	at	all,	and	I	never	had	this	impression	more	strongly	than
on	that	evening	in	the	šporkova	when	the	eyes	of	the	Rose	Queen’s	page	looked
through	me.	Even	the	next	day,	on	my	way	to	Terezín,	I	could	not	imagine	who
or	what	I	was.	I	remember	that	I	stood	in	a	kind	of	trance	on	the	platform	of	the
bleak	station	at	Holešovice,	that	the	railway	lines	ran	away	into	infinity	on	both
sides,	that	I	perceived	everything	indistinctly,	and	then	that	I	leaned	against	a
window	in	the	corridor	of	the	train,	looking	out	at	the	northern	suburbs	as	they
passed	by,	at	the	water	meadows	of	the	Vltava	and	the	villas	and	summer	houses
on	the	opposite	bank.	Once	I	saw	a	huge	and	now	disused	stone	quarry	on	the
other	side	of	the	river,	then	a	
number	of	cherry	trees	in	blossom,	a	few	villages
far	remote	from	one	another,	nothing	else	but	the	empty	Bohemian	countryside.
When	I	got	out	of	the	train	in	Lovosice	after	about	an	hour,	I	felt	as	if	I	had	been
traveling	for	weeks,	going	further	and	further	east	and	further	and	further	back	in
time.	The	square	in	front	of	the	station	was	empty	except	for	a	peasant	woman
wearing	several	layers	of	coats,	and	waiting	behind	a	makeshift	stall	for
someone	to	think	about	buying	one	of	the	cabbages	she	had	piled	up	into	a
mighty	bulwark	in	front	of	her.	There	was	no	taxi	in	sight,	so	I	set	off	on	foot
from	Lovosice	in	the	direction	of	Terezín.	As	one	leaves	the	town,	the
appearance	of	which	I	can	no	longer	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	a	wide	panorama
opens	up	to	the	north:	a	field,	poison-green	in	color,	in	the	foreground,	behind	it
a	petrochemicals	plant	half	eaten	away	by	rust,	with	clouds	of	smoke	rising	from
its	cooling	towers	and	chimneys,	as	they	must	have	done	without	cease	for	many
long	years.	Further	away	I	saw	the	conical	Bohemian	mountains	surrounding	the
Bohuševice	basin	in	a	semicircle,	their	highest	summits	disappearing	into	the
low	sky	this	cold,	gray	morning.	I	walked	on	down	the	
straight	road,	always
looking	ahead	to	see	if	the	silhouette	of	the	fortifications,	which	could	not	be
more	than	an	hour	and	a	half’s	walk	away,	was	in	sight	yet.
	
	
The	idea	I	had	formed	in	my	mind	was	of	a	mighty	complex	rising	high	above
the	level	country,	but	in	fact	Terezín	lies	so	far	down	in	the	damp	lowlands
around	the	confluence	of	the	Eger	and	the	Elbe	that,	as	I	read	later,	there	is
nothing	to	be	seen	of	the	town,	even	from	the	hills	around	Leitmeritz	or	indeed
from	its	immediate	vicinity,	except	the	chimney	of	the	brewery	and	the	church
tower.	The	brick	walls	built	in	the	eighteenth	century	to	a	star-shaped	ground
plan,	undoubtedly	by	serf	labor,	rise	from	a	broad	moat	and	stand	not	much
higher	than	the	outlying	fields.	In	the	course	of	time,	moreover,	all	kinds	of
shrubs	and	bushes	have	covered	the	former	glacis	and	the	grass-grown	ramparts,
giving	the	impression	that	Terezín	is	not	so	much	a	fortified	town	as	one	half-
hidden	and	sunk	into	the	marshy	ground	of	the	floodplain.	At	any	rate,	as	I	made
my	way	that	morning	to	Terezín	along	the	main	road	from	Lovosice,	I	did	not
know	until	the	last	minute	how	close	I	already	was	to	my	journey’s	end.	Several
sycamores	and	chestnuts,	their	bark	blackened	
by	rain,	still	obstructed	my	view
when	I	found	myself	standing	among	the	façades	of	the	old	garrison	buildings,
and	a	few	more	steps	brought	me	out	on	the	central	square,	which	was
surrounded	by	a	double	avenue	of	trees.
	
	
	
	
From	the	first,	I	felt	that	the	most	striking	aspect	of	the	place	was	its	emptiness,
said	Austerlitz,	something	which	to	this	day	I	still	find	incomprehensible.	I	knew
from	Vera	that	for	many	years	now	Terezín	had	been	an	ordinary	
town	again.
Despite	this,	it	was	almost	a	quarter	of	an	hour	before	I	saw	the	first	human
being	on	the	other	side	of	the	square,	a	bent	figure	toiling	very	slowly	forward
and	leaning	on	a	stick,	yet	when	I	took	my	eye	off	it	for	a	moment	the	figure	had
suddenly	gone.	Otherwise	I	met	no	one	all	morning	in	the	straight,	deserted
streets	of	Terezín,	except	for	a	mentally	disturbed	man	who	crossed	my	path
among	the	lime	trees	of	the	park	with	the	fountain,	telling	I	have	no	idea	what
tale	in	a	kind	of	broken	German	while	frantically	waving	his	arms,	before	he	too,
still	clutching	the	hundred-crown	note	I	had	given	him,	seemed	to	be	swallowed
up	by	the	earth,	as	they	say,	even	as	he	was	running	off.	Although	the	sense	of
abandonment	in	this	fortified	town,	laid	out	like	Campanella’s	ideal	sun	state	to
a	strictly	geometrical	grid,	was	extraordinarily	oppressive,	yet	more	so	was	the
forbidding	aspect	of	the	silent	façades.	Not	a	single	curtain	moved	behind	their
blind	windows,	however	often	I	glanced	up	at	them.	I	could	not	imagine,	said
Austerlitz,	who	might	inhabit	these	desolate	buildings,	or	if	anyone	lived	there	at
all,	although	
on	the	other	hand	I	had	noticed	that	long	rows	of	dustbins	with
large	numbers	on	them	in	red	paint	were	ranged	against	the	walls	of	the	back
yards.
	
	
What	I	found	most	uncanny	of	all,	however,	were	the	gates	and	doorways	of
Terezín,	all	of	them,	as	I	thought	I	sensed,	obstructing	access	to	a	darkness	never
yet	penetrated,	a	darkness	in	which	I	thought,	said	Austerlitz,	there	was	no	more
movement	at	all	apart	from	the	whitewash	peeling	off	the	walls	and	the	spiders
spinning	their	threads,	scuttling	on	crooked	legs	
across	the	floorboards,	or
hanging	expectantly	in	their	webs.
	
	
	
	
	
	
Not	long	ago,	on	the	verge	of	waking	from	sleep,	I	found	myself	looking	into	the
interior	of	one	of	these	Terezín	barracks.	It	was	filled	from	floor	to	ceiling	with
layer	upon	layer	of	the	cobwebs	woven	by	those	ingenious	creatures.	I	still
remember	how,	in	my	half-conscious	state,	I	tried	to	hold	fast	to	my	powdery
gray	dream	image,	which	sometimes	quivered	in	a	slight	breath	of	air,	and	to
discover	what	it	concealed,	but	it	only	dissolved	all	the	more	and	was	overlaid
by	the	memory,	surfacing	in	my	mind	at	the	same	time,	of	the	shining	glass	in
the	display	windows	of	the	ANTIKOS	BAZAR	on	the	west	side	of	the	town
square,	where	I	had	stood	for	a	long	time	around	midday	in	what	proved	to	be
the	vain	hope	that	someone	might	arrive	and	open	this	curious	emporium.	As	far
as	I	could	see,	said	Austerlitz,	the	ANTIKOS	BAZAR	is	the	only	shop	of	any
kind	in	Terezín	apart	from	a	tiny	grocery	store.	It	occupies	the	entire	façade	of
one	of	the	largest	buildings,	and	I	think	
its	vaults	reach	back	a	long	way	as	well.
	
	
Of	course	I	could	see	nothing	but	the	items	on	display	in	the	windows,	which
can	have	amounted	to	only	a	small	part	of	the	junk	heaped	up	inside	the	shop.
But	even	these	four	still	lifes	obviously	composed	entirely	at	random,	which
appeared	to	have	grown	quite	naturally	into	the	black	branches	of	the	lime	trees
standing	around	the	square	and	reflected	in	the	glass	of	the	windows,	exerted
such	a	power	of	attraction	on	me	that	it	was	a	long	time	before	I	could	tear
myself	away	from	staring	at	the	hundreds	of	different	objects,	my	forehead
pressed	against	the	cold	window,	as	if	one	of	them	or	their	relationship	with	each
other	must	provide	an	unequivocal	answer	to	the	many	questions	I	found	it
impossible	to	ask	in	my	mind.	What	was	the	meaning	of	the	festive	white	lace
tablecloth	hanging	over	the	back	of	the	ottoman,	and	the	armchair	with	its	worn
brocade	cover?	What	secret	lay	behind	the	three	brass	mortars	of	different	sizes,
which	had	about	them	the	suggestion	of	an	oracular	
utterance,	or	the	cut-glass
bowls,	ceramic	vases,	and	earthenware	jugs,	the	tin	advertising	sign	bearing	the
words	
Theresienstädter	Wasser
,	the	little	box	of	seashells,	the	miniature	barrel
organ,	the	globe-shaped	paperweights	with	wonderful	marine	flowers	swaying
inside	their	glassy	spheres,	the	model	ship	(some	kind	of	corvette	under	full
sail),	the	oakleaf-embroidered	jacket	of	light,	pale,	summery	linen,	the	staghorn
buttons,	the	outsize	Russian	officer’s	cap	and	the	olive-green	uniform	tunic	with
gilt	epaulettes	that	went	with	it,	the	fishing	rod,	the	hunter’s	bag,	the	Japanese
fan,	the	endless	landscape	painted	round	a	lampshade	in	fine	brushstrokes,
showing	a	river	running	quietly	through	perhaps	Bohemia	or	perhaps	Brazil?
	
	
And	then	there	was	the	stuffed	squirrel,	already	moth-eaten	here	and	there,
perched	on	the	stump	of	a	branch	in	a	showcase	the	size	of	a	shoebox,	which	had
its	beady	button	eye	implacably	fixed	on	me,	and	whose	Czech	name—
veverka
—I	now	recalled	like	the	name	of	a	long-lost	friend.	What,	I	asked	myself,	said
Austerlitz,	might	be	the	significance	of	the	river	never	rising	from	any	source,
never	flowing	out	
into	any	sea	but	always	back	into	itself,	what	was	the	meaning
of	
veverka
,	the	squirrel	forever	perched	in	the	same	position,	or	of	the	ivory-
colored	porcelain	group	of	a	hero	on	horseback	turning	to	look	back,	as	his	steed
rears	up	on	its	hindquarters,	in	order	to	raise	up	with	his	outstretched	left	arm	an
innocent	girl	already	bereft	of	her	last	hope,	and	to	save	her	from	a	cruel	fate	not
revealed	to	the	observer?
	
	
They	were	all	as	timeless	as	that	moment	of	rescue,	perpetuated	but	forever	just
occurring,	these	ornaments,	utensils,	and	mementoes	stranded	in	the	Terezín
bazaar,	objects	that	for	reasons	one	could	never	know	had	outlived	their	former
owners	and	survived	the	process	of	destruction,	so	that	I	could	now	see	my	own
faint	shadow	image	barely	perceptible	among	them.	As	I	waited	outside	the
bazaar,	Austerlitz	resumed	after	a	little	while,	a	light	rain	had	begun	to	fall,	and
since	neither	the	proprietor	of	the	shop,	whose	name	was	given	as	Augustýn
Němeček,	nor	anyone	else	was	in	evidence,	I	finally	walked	on,	going	up	and
down	a	few	streets	until	suddenly,	on	the	northeast	corner	of	the	town	square,	I
found	myself	outside	the	so-called	
Ghetto	Museum,	which	I	had	overlooked
before.	I	climbed	the	steps	and	entered	the	lobby,	where	a	lady	of	uncertain	age
in	a	lilac	blouse,	her	hair	waved	in	an	old-fashioned	style,	sat	behind	a	kind	of
cash	desk.	She	put	down	the	crochet	work	she	was	doing	and	leaned	slightly
forward	to	give	me	a	ticket.	When	I	asked	if	I	was	the	only	visitor	today	she	said
that	the	museum	had	only	recently	opened	and	not	many	people	from	outside	the
town	came	to	see	it,	particularly	at	this	time	of	year	and	in	such	weather.	And	the
people	of	Terezín	didn’t	come	anyway,	she	added,	picking	up	the	white
handkerchief	she	was	edging	with	loops	like	flower	petals.	So	I	went	round	the
exhibition	by	myself,	said	Austerlitz,	through	the	rooms	on	the	mezzanine	floor
and	the	floor	above,	stood	in	front	of	the	display	panels,	sometimes	skimming
over	the	captions,	sometimes	reading	them	letter	by	letter,	stared	at	the
photographic	reproductions,	could	not	believe	my	eyes,	and	several	times	had	to
turn	away	and	look	out	of	a	window	into	the	garden	behind	the	building,	having
for	the	first	time	acquired	some	idea	of	the	history	of	the	persecution	which	my
avoidance	system	had	kept	from	me	for	so	long,	and	which	now,	in	this	place,
surrounded	me	on	all	sides.	I	studied	the	maps	of	the	Greater	German	Reich	and
its	protectorates,	which	had	never	before	been	more	than	blank	spaces	in	my
otherwise	well-developed	sense	of	topography,	I	traced	the	railway	lines	running
through	them,	felt	blinded	by	the	documentation	recording	the	population	policy
of	the	National	Socialists,	by	the	evidence	of	their	mania	for	order	and	purity,
which	was	put	into	practice	on	a	vast	scale	through	measures	partly	improvised,
partly	devised	with	obsessive	organizational	zeal.	I	was	confronted	with
incontrovertible	proof	of	the	setting	up	of	a	forcedlabor	
system	throughout
Central	Europe,	and	learned	of	the	deliberate	wastage	and	discarding	of	the	work
slaves	themselves,	of	the	origins	and	places	of	death	of	the	victims,	the	routes	by
which	they	were	taken	to	what	destinations,	what	names	they	had	borne	in	life
and	what	they	and	their	guards	looked	like.	I	understood	it	all	now,	yet	I	did	not
understand	it,	for	every	detail	that	was	revealed	to	me	as	I	went	through	the
museum	from	room	to	room	and	back	again,	ignorant	as	I	feared	I	had	been
through	my	own	fault,	far	exceeded	my	comprehension.	I	saw	pieces	of	luggage
brought	to	Terezín	by	the	internees	from	Prague	and	Pilsen,	Würzburg	and
Vienna,	Kufstein	and	Karlsbad	and	countless	other	places;	the	items	such	as
handbags,	belt	buckles,	clothes	brushes,	and	combs	which	they	had	made	in	the
various	workshops;	meticulously	worked	out	projects	and	production	plans	for
the	agricultural	exploitation	of	the	open	areas	behind	the	ramparts	and	on	the
glacis,	where	oats	and	hemp,	hops	and	pumpkins	and	maize	were	to	be	grown	on
plots	of	land	meticulously	parceled	out.	I	saw	balance	sheets,	registers	of	the
dead,	lists	of	every	imaginable	kind,	and	endless	rows	of	numbers	and	figures,
which	must	have	served	to	reassure	the	administrators	that	nothing	ever	escaped
their	notice.	And	whenever	I	think	of	the	museum	in	Terezín	now,	said
Austerlitz,	I	see	the	framed	ground	plan	of	the	star-shaped	fortifications,	color-
washed	in	soft	tones	of	gray-brown	for	Maria	Theresia,	her	Imperial	Highness	in
Vienna	who	had	commissioned	it,	and	fitting	neatly	into	the	folds	of	the
surrounding	terrain,	the	model	of	a	world	made	by	reason	and	regulated	in	all
conceivable	respects.	This	impregnable	fortress	has	never	been	besieged,	not
even	by	the	Prussians	in	1866,	but	throughout	the	nineteenth	century—if	one
disregards	the	fact	
that	a	considerable	number	of	political	prisoners	of	the
Habsburg	empire	pined	away	in	the	casemates	of	one	of	its	outworks—remained
a	quiet	garrison	for	two	or	three	regiments	and	some	two	thousand	civilians
throughout	the	nineteenth	century,	somewhat	out	of	the	way,	a	town	with
yellow-painted	walls,	galleried	courtyards,	well-clipped	trees,	bakeries,
beerhouses,	casinos,	soldiers’	quarters,	armories,	bandstand	concerts,	occasional
forays	for	the	purpose	of	military	maneuvers,	officers’	wives	who	were	bored	to
death,	and	service	regulations	which,	it	was	believed,	would	never	change	for	all
eternity.	When,	towards	the	end	of	the	day,	the	museum	guardian	came	up	to	me
and	indicated	that	she	would	soon	have	to	close,	said	Austerlitz,	I	had	just	been
reading,	several	times	over,	a	note	on	one	of	the	display	panels,	to	the	effect	that
in	the	middle	of	December	1942,	and	thus	at	the	very	time	when	Agáta	came	to
Terezín,	some	sixty	thousand	people	were	shut	up	together	in	the	ghetto,	a	built-
up	area	of	one	square	kilometer	at	the	most,	and	a	little	later,	when	I	was	out	in
the	deserted	town	square	again,	it	suddenly	seemed	to	me,	with	the	greatest
clarity,	that	they	had	never	been	taken	away	after	all,	but	were	still	living
crammed	into	those	buildings	and	basements	and	attics,	as	if	they	were
incessantly	going	up	and	down	the	stairs,	looking	out	of	the	windows,	moving	in
vast	numbers	through	the	streets	and	alleys,	and	even,	a	silent	assembly,	filling
the	entire	space	occupied	by	the	air,	hatched	with	gray	as	it	was	by	the	fine	rain.
With	this	picture	before	my	eyes	I	boarded	the	old-fashioned	bus	which	had
appeared	out	of	nowhere,	and	stopped	by	the	pavement	directly	in	front	of	me	a
few	paces	from	the	entrance	to	the	museum.	It	was	one	of	those	buses	which
travel	from	the	country	into	the	capital.	The	driver	gave	me	change	for	a
hundred-crown	
note	without	a	word,	and	I	remember	that	I	held	it	clutched
firmly	in	my	hand	all	the	way	to	Prague.	Outside,	the	darkening	Bohemian	fields
passed	by,	hop	poles,	deep	brown	fields,	flat,	empty	country	all	around.	The	bus
was	very	overheated.	I	felt	drops	of	perspiration	break	out	on	my	forehead	and	a
constriction	in	my	chest.	Once,	when	I	looked	over	my	shoulder,	I	saw	that	the
other	passengers,	without	exception,	had	fallen	asleep,	leaning	and	sprawling	at
awkward	angles	in	their	seats.	Some	had	their	heads	dropped	forward,	others
sideways	or	tipped	back.	Several	were	snoring	quietly.	Only	the	driver	looked
straight	ahead	at	the	ribbon	of	road	gleaming	in	the	rain.	As	so	often	when	one	is
traveling	south,	I	had	the	impression	of	going	steadily	downhill,	particularly
when	we	reached	the	suburbs	of	Prague	and	it	seemed	as	if	we	were	descending
a	kind	of	ramp	into	a	labyrinth	through	which	we	moved	very	slowly,	now	this
way	and	now	that,	until	I	had	lost	all	sense	of	direction.	When	we	reached	the
Prague	bus	station,	an	overcrowded	traffic	junction	at	this	early	hour	of	the
evening,	I	therefore	set	out	the	wrong	way	through	the	great	throng	of	people
waiting	there	or	getting	in	and	out	of	buses.	There	were	so	many	of	them
streaming	towards	me	out	in	the	street,	said	Austerlitz,	most	of	them	carrying
large	bags	and	with	pale,	sad	faces,	that	I	thought	they	could	only	be	coming
away	from	the	city	center.	Only	later	did	I	see	from	the	map	that	I	had	reached
the	center	not	in	a	more	or	less	straight	line,	as	I	thought	at	first,	but	by	way	of	a
wide	detour	taking	me	almost	to	the	Vyšehrad,	and	then	through	the	New	Town
and	along	the	banks	of	the	Vltava	back	to	my	hotel	on	Kampa	Island.	It	was
already	late	by	the	time	I	lay	down,	exhausted	from	the	day’s	walking,	and	tried
to	fall	asleep	by	listening	to	the	water	
rushing	down	over	the	weir	outside	my
window.	But	whether	I	kept	my	eyes	wide	open	or	closed,	all	through	the	night	I
saw	pictures	from	Terezín	and	the	Ghetto	Museum,	the	bricks	of	the	fortification
walls,	the	display	window	of	the	Bazaar,	the	endless	lists	of	names,	a	leather
suitcase	bearing	a	double	sticker	from	the	Hotels	Bristol	in	Salzburg	and	Vienna,
the	closed	gates	I	had	photographed,	the	grass	growing	between	the
cobblestones,	a	pile	of	briquettes	outside	a	cellar	entrance,	the	squirrel’s	glass
eye	and	the	two	forlorn	figures	of	Agáta	and	Vera	pulling	the	laden	toboggan
through	the	driving	snow	to	the	Trade	Fair	building	at	Holešovice.	Only	towards
morning	did	I	sleep	briefly,	but	even	then,	in	the	deepest	unconsciousness,	the
flow	of	pictures	did	not	cease	but	instead	condensed	into	a	nightmare	in	which,
from	where	I	do	not	know,	said	Austerlitz,	the	north	Bohemian	town	of	Dux
appeared	to	me	situated	in	the	middle	of	a	devastated	plain,	a	place	of	which	all	I
had	previously	known	was	that	Casanova	spent	the	last	years	of	his	life	there	in
Count	Waldstein’s	castle	writing	his	memoirs,	a	number	of	mathematical	and
esoteric	tracts,	and	his	five-volume	futuristic	novel	
Icosameron
.	In	my	dream	I
saw	the	old	roué	shrunk	to	the	size	of	a	boy,	surrounded	by	the	gold-stamped
rows	of	books	in	Count	Waldstein’s	library	of	more	than	forty	thousand
volumes,	bending	over	his	writing	desk	alone	on	a	bleak	November	afternoon.
He	had	taken	off	his	powdered	wig,	and	his	own	sparse	hair	was	wafting	above
his	head	in	a	little	white	cloud,	like	a	sign	of	the	dissolution	of	his	corporeal
being.	He	wrote	on	and	on,	his	left	shoulder	slightly	raised.	There	was	nothing	to
be	heard	but	the	scratching	of	his	pen,	which	stopped	only	when	the	writer
looked	up	for	a	couple	of	seconds,	and	his	watery	eyes,	already	half	blind	for
long-distance	vision,	
sought	what	little	brightness	was	still	left	in	the	sky	above
the	park	of	Dux.	On	the	other	side	of	the	enclosed	land,	in	deep	darkness,	lay	the
whole	region	extending	from	Teplice	to	Most	and	Chomutov.	Over	to	the	north,
from	end	to	end	of	the	horizon,	stood	the	black	wall	of	the	Grenzmark
mountains,	and	in	front	of	them,	along	their	foothills,	the	torn	and	ravaged	land,
with	slopes	and	terraces	which	dropped	far	below	what	had	formerly	been	the
surface	of	the	earth.	Where	roads	had	passed	over	firm	ground,	where	human
beings	had	lived,	foxes	had	run	across	country	and	birds	of	many	kinds	had
flown	from	bush	to	bush,	now	there	was	nothing	but	empty	space,	and	at	the
bottom	of	it	stones	and	gravel	and	stagnant	water,	untouched	even	by	the	natural
movement	of	the	air.	The	shadowy	forms	of	power	stations	with	their	glowing
furnaces	drifted	like	ships	in	the	somber	air:	chalk-colored	buildings	like	blocks,
cooling	towers	with	jagged	rims,	tall	chimneys	above	which	motionless	plumes
of	smoke	stood	white	against	the	sickly	colors	streaking	the	western	sky.	A	few
stars	showed	only	on	the	pallid,	nocturnal	side	of	the	firmament,	sooty,	smoking
lights	extinguished	one	by	one,	leaving	scab-like	traces	in	the	orbits	through
which	they	have	always	moved.	To	the	south,	in	a	broad	semicircle,	rose	the
cones	of	the	extinct	Bohemian	volcanoes,	which	I	wished	in	my	nightmare
would	erupt	and	cover	everything	around	with	black	dust.—Not	until	around
half-past	two	the	next	day,	when	I	had	to	some	degree	pulled	myself	together
again,	did	I	go	from	Kampa	Island	to	the	šporkova	to	pay	what	would	be	my	last
visit	for	the	time	being,	Austerlitz	continued.	I	had	already	told	Vera	that	I	must
retrace	my	journey	from	Prague	to	London	by	train,	all	the	way	across	Germany,
a	country	unknown	to	me,	but	that	then	I	
would	soon	come	back	and	perhaps
take	a	flat	somewhere	near	her	for	a	few	months.	It	was	one	of	those	radiant
spring	days	when	the	weather	is	clear	as	glass.	Vera	was	complaining	of	a	dull
pain	behind	her	eyes	which	had	been	troubling	her	since	early	that	morning,	and
she	asked	me	to	pull	the	curtains	over	the	windows	on	the	sunny	side	of	the
room.	Leaning	back	in	her	red	velvet	armchair	in	the	gloom,	with	her	tired
eyelids	closed,	she	listened	as	I	told	her	what	I	had	seen	in	Terezín.	I	also	asked
Vera	about	the	Czech	word	for	a	squirrel,	and	after	a	while,	with	a	smile
spreading	slowly	over	her	beautiful	face,	she	said	it	was	
veverka
.	And	then,	said
Austerlitz,	Vera	told	me	how	in	autumn	we	would	often	stand	by	the	upper
enclosure	wall	of	the	Schönborn	Garden	to	watch	the	squirrels	burying	their
treasures.	Whenever	we	came	home	afterwards,	I	had	to	read	aloud	from	your
favorite	book	about	the	changing	seasons,	said	Vera,	even	though	you	knew	it	by
heart	from	the	first	line	to	the	last,	and	she	added	that	I	never	tired	of	the	winter
pictures	in	particular,	scenes	showing	hares,	deer,	and	partridges	transfixed	with
astonishment	as	they	stared	at	the	ground	covered	with	newly	fallen	snow,	and
Vera	said	that	every	time	we	reached	the	page	which	described	the	snow	falling
through	the	branches	of	the	trees,	soon	to	shroud	the	entire	forest	floor,	I	would
look	up	at	her	and	ask:	But	if	it’s	all	white,	how	do	the	squirrels	know	where
they’ve	buried	their	hoard?	
Ale	když	všechno	zakryje	sníh,	jak	veverky	najdou	to
místo,	kde	si	schovaly	zásoby?
	Those	were	your	very	words,	the	question	which
constantly	troubled	you.	How	indeed	do	the	squirrels	know,	what	do	we	know
ourselves,	how	do	we	remember,	and	what	is	it	we	find	in	the	end?	It	was	six
years	after	their	farewell	outside	the	gates	of	the	Trade	Fair	in	Holešovice,	so
Vera	continued,	that	she	
learned	how	Agáta	was	sent	east	in	September	1944
with	one	and	a	half	thousand	others	who	had	been	interned	in	Terezín.	For	a	long
time	after	that,	said	Vera,	she	herself	had	been	almost	incapable	of	thinking	of
Agáta,	of	what	must	have	become	of	her,	and	of	her	own	life	continuing	into	a
pointless	future.	For	weeks	she	was	hardly	in	her	right	mind,	she	had	felt	a	kind
of	dragging	outside	her	body,	she	had	tried	to	pick	up	broken	threads	and	could
not	believe	that	everything	had	really	happened	as	it	did.	None	of	her	endless
attempts	later	to	find	out	my	whereabouts	in	England	or	my	father’s	in	France
had	produced	any	results.	Whatever	she	tried,	it	was	as	if	all	traces	were	lost	in
the	sand,	for	at	the	time,	with	an	army	of	censors	causing	havoc	in	the	postal
services,	it	often	took	months	to	get	an	answer	from	abroad.	Perhaps,	Vera
surmised,	said	Austerlitz,	it	would	have	been	different	if	she	could	have	turned
in	person	to	the	appropriate	authorities,	but	she	lacked	both	the	opportunity	and
the	means	to	do	so.	And	in	this	way	the	years	had	raced	by,	seeming	in
retrospect	like	a	single	leaden	day.	She	had	indeed	gone	into	the	teaching
profession	and	did	what	was	necessary	to	maintain	herself,	but	almost	all	her
feelings	had	been	extinguished,	and	she	had	not	truly	breathed	since	that	time.
Only	in	the	books	written	in	earlier	times	did	she	sometimes	think	she	found
some	faint	idea	of	what	it	might	be	like	to	be	alive.	Such	remarks	of	Vera’s	were
often	followed	by	a	long	silence,	said	Austerlitz,	as	if	neither	of	us	knew	what	to
say,	and	the	hours	passed	by	almost	imperceptibly	in	the	darkened	flat	in	the
šporkova.	Towards	evening,	when	I	said	goodbye	to	Vera,	holding	her
weightless	hands	in	mine,	she	suddenly	remembered	how,	on	the	day	of	my
departure	from	the	Wilsonova	Station,	Agáta	had	turned	to	her	when	the	train
had	disappeared	from	
view,	and	said:	We	left	from	here	for	Marienbad	only	last
summer.	And	now—where	will	we	be	going	now?	This	reminiscence,	which	I
did	not	fully	take	in	at	first,	was	soon	occupying	my	mind	so	much	that	I	made	a
call	to	Vera	from	the	hotel	on	the	island	that	evening,	although	in	the	normal
way	I	never	use	the	telephone.	Yes,	she	said,	in	a	voice	very	faint	with
weariness,	yes,	in	the	summer	of	1938	we	all	went	to	Marienbad	together,	Agáta,
Maximilian,	Vera	herself,	and	me.	We	had	spent	three	wonderful,	almost	blissful
weeks	there.	The	overweight	or	underweight	spa	guests,	moving	at	a	curiously
slow	pace	through	the	grounds	with	their	drinking	glasses,	radiated	an
extraordinary	peacefulness,	as	Agáta	once	remarked	in	passing.	We	stayed	at	the
Osborne-Balmoral	boardinghouse	behind	the	Palace	Hotel.	In	the	morning	we
generally	went	to	the	baths,	and	we	took	long	walks	in	the	country	around
Marienbad	in	the	afternoons.	I	had	retained	no	memory	at	all	of	that	summer
holiday	when	I	was	just	four	years	old,	said	Austerlitz,	and	perhaps	that	was	why
when	I	was	in	that	very	place	later,	in	Marienbad	at	the	end	of	August	1972,	I
felt	nothing	but	blind	terror	in	the	face	of	the	better	turn	my	life	should	have
taken	at	that	time.	Marie	de	Verneuil,	with	whom	I	had	been	in	correspondence
since	the	time	I	spent	in	Paris,	had	invited	me	to	accompany	her	on	a	visit	to
Bohemia,	where	she	had	to	carry	out	some	research	for	her	studies	on	the
architectural	history	of	the	spas	of	Europe,	and	I	think	I	may	now	say,	added
Austerlitz,	that	she	also	hoped	to	try	to	liberate	me	from	my	self-inflicted
isolation.	She	had	arranged	everything	to	perfection.	Her	cousin	Frédéric	Félix,
attaché	to	the	French	embassy	in	Prague,	had	sent	an	enormous	Tatra	limousine
to	meet	us	at	the	airport	and	take	us	straight	to	Marienbad.	We	sat	in	the	deeply
upholstered	back	of	the	car	for	two	or	three	hours	as	it	drove	west	through	the
empty	countryside,	on	a	road	which	ran	perfectly	straight	for	long	stretches	of
our	journey,	sometimes	dipping	down	into	valleys,	then	climbing	again	to
extended	plateaux	over	which	one	could	see	into	the	far	distance,	to	the	point,
said	Marie,	where	the	wastes	of	Bohemia	approach	the	Baltic.	Sometimes	we
drove	past	low	ranges	of	hills	covered	with	blue	forest,	standing	out	sharp	as	a
saw	blade	against	the	uniformly	gray	sky.	There	were	almost	no	other	vehicles.
Only	occasionally	did	a	small	car	of	some	kind	come	towards	us,	and	now	and
then	we	overtook	a	truck	crawling	up	the	long	gradients	and	trailing	behind	it
great	clouds	of	exhaust	fumes.	But	ever	since	leaving	Prague	airport	we	had
been	followed	by	two	uniformed	motorcyclists	who	always	preserved	the	same
distance.	They	wore	leather	crash	helmets	and	black	goggles	with	their	tunics
and	breeches,	and	their	carbines	were	slung	at	an	angle	over	their	right
shoulders.	These	two	escorts	made	me	very	uneasy,	said	Austerlitz,	particularly
when	we	went	over	the	top	of	one	of	the	low	hills	and	down	again	and	they
vanished	from	sight	for	a	while,	only	to	reappear	outlined	even	more	menacingly
against	the	light.	Marie,	who	was	not	so	easily	intimidated,	merely	laughed	and
said	that	the	two	shadowy	riders	were	obviously	the	guard	of	honor	specially
provided	by	the	čSSR	for	visitors	from	France.	As	we	approached	Marienbad
along	a	road	running	further	and	further	downhill	between	wooded	slopes,
darkness	had	fallen,	and	I	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	that	a	slight	sense	of
disquiet	brushed	me	as	we	emerged	from	the	firs	growing	all	the	way	down	to
the	outlying	houses	and	slid	into	the	town,	which	was	sparsely	illuminated	by	a
few	street	lamps.	The	car	stopped	outside	the	Palace	
Hotel.	Marie	exchanged	a
few	words	with	the	chauffeur	as	he	took	out	our	luggage,	and	then	we	were	in
the	foyer,	which	was	made	to	look	double	its	size,	so	to	speak,	by	a	row	of	tall
mirrors	along	the	walls.	The	place	was	so	deathly	still	and	deserted	that	you
might	have	thought	the	time	long	after	midnight.	It	was	some	while	before	the
reception	clerk	at	his	desk	in	a	cramped	booth	looked	up	from	what	he	was
reading	and	turned	to	his	late-come	guests	with	a	barely	audible	murmur	of
Dobrý	večer
.	This	remarkably	thin	man—the	first	thing	you	noticed	about	him
was	that	although	he	could	not	have	been	much	over	forty	his	forehead	was
wrinkled	in	fan-like	folds	above	the	root	of	his	nose—went	through	the
necessary	formalities	without	another	word,	very	slowly,	almost	as	if	he	were
moving	in	a	denser	atmosphere	than	ours,	asked	to	see	our	visas,	looked	at	our
passports	and	his	register,	made	an	entry	of	some	length	on	the	squared	paper	of
a	school	exercise	book	in	laborious	handwriting,	gave	us	a	questionnaire	to	fill
in,	looked	in	a	drawer	for	our	key,	and	finally,	ringing	a	bell,	summoned	as	it
seemed	from	nowhere	a	porter	with	a	bent	back,	who	was	wearing	a	mouse-gray
nylon	coat	that	came	down	to	his	knees	and,	like	the	clerk	at	the	reception	desk,
appeared	to	be	afflicted	by	a	chronic	lethargy	which	incapacitated	his	limbs.
When	he	preceded	us	up	to	the	third	floor	with	our	two	lightweight	suitcases—
the	paternoster	lift,	Marie	had	pointed	out	to	me	as	soon	as	we	entered	the	foyer,
had	obviously	been	out	of	order	for	a	very	long	time—he	found	it	increasingly
hard	to	climb	the	stairs	and,	like	a	mountaineer	negotiating	the	last	difficult	ridge
before	attaining	the	summit,	he	had	to	stop	several	times	for	a	rest,	whereupon
we	too	waited	for	a	while	a	couple	of	steps	below	him.	On	the	way	up	we	met
not	a	living	soul	except	
for	another	member	of	the	hotel	staff	who,	dressed	in	the
same	gray	coat	as	his	colleague	and	perhaps	worn,	I	thought	to	myself,	said
Austerlitz,	by	all	the	employees	of	the	state-owned	spa	hotels,	was	sitting	asleep
in	a	chair	on	the	top	landing	with	his	head	sunk	forward,	and	a	tin	tray	of	broken
glass	on	the	floor	beside	him.	The	room	unlocked	for	us	was	Number	38—a
large	room	resembling	a	salon.	The	walls	were	covered	with	burgundy-red
brocade	wallpaper,	very	faded	in	places.	The	portières	dated	from	a	past	time	as
well,	and	so	did	the	bed	standing	in	an	alcove	with	its	white	pillows	stacked	at	a
curiously	steep	angle.	Marie	immediately	began	settling	in,	opened	all	the
wardrobes,	went	into	the	bathroom,	turned	on	the	taps	and	the	huge	old-
fashioned	shower	to	make	sure	they	were	working,	and	inspected	the	whole
place	very	closely.	It	was	odd,	she	said	at	last,	but	she	had	the	impression	that
although	everything	else	was	in	perfect	order	the	writing	desk	had	not	been
dusted	for	years.	What	can	be	the	explanation,	she	asked	me,	said	Austerlitz,	of
this	remarkable	phenomenon?	Do	ghosts	haunt	the	desk,	I	wonder?	I	don’t
remember	what	I	replied,	said	Austerlitz,	but	I	do	recall	that	as	we	sat	together
by	the	window	for	a	couple	of	hours	that	evening	Marie	told	me	a	great	deal
about	the	history	of	the	spa,	of	the	forests	which	still	covered	the	valley	floor	at
the	beginning	of	the	nineteenth	century,	the	building	of	the	first	neo-classical
houses	and	hotels	set	haphazard	on	the	slopes,	and	the	subsequent	rapid	rise	in
the	fortunes	of	the	resort.	Architects,	masons,	decorators,	tin-and	locksmiths,	and
stucco	workers	came	from	Prague	and	Vienna	and	from	all	the	corners	of	the
Empire,	many	of	them	from	as	far	afield	as	the	Veneto.	One	of	Prince
Lobkowitz’s	court	gardeners	began	turning	what	had	once	been	woodland	into	a
landscaped	park	in	the	English	style,	planted	rare	and	native	trees,	laid	out	lawns
surrounded	by	bushes	and	shrubs,	avenues,	arbored	walks,	and	pavilions	from
which	to	admire	the	view.	More	and	prouder	hotels	constantly	rose	from	the
ground,	and	so	did	assembly	rooms,	baths,	reading	rooms,	a	concert	hall,	and	a
theater	where	all	manner	of	eminent	artistes	were	soon	appearing.	In	1873	the
great	cast-iron	colonnade	was	built,	and	by	now	Marienbad	was	one	of	the	most
fashionable	of	European	resorts.	Marie	claimed—and	here,	said	Austerlitz,	she
launched,	with	her	strong	sense	of	the	comical,	into	a	positive	verbal	coloratura
of	medical	and	diagnostic	terms—Marie	claimed	that	the	mineral	waters	and
particularly	the	so-called	Auschowitz	Springs	had	gained	a	great	reputation	for
curing	the	obesity	then	so	common	among	the	middle	classes,	as	well	as
digestive	disturbances,	sluggishness	of	the	intestinal	canal	and	other	stoppages
of	the	lower	abdomen,	irregular	menstruation,	cirrhosis	of	the	liver,	disorders	of
bile	secretion,	gout,	hypochondriacal	spleen,	diseases	of	the	kidneys,	the
bladder,	and	the	urinary	system,	glandular	swellings	and	scrofulous	deformities,
not	to	mention	weakness	of	the	nervous	and	muscular	systems,	fatigue,
trembling	of	the	limbs,	paralysis,	mucous	and	bloody	fluxes,	unsightly	eruptions
on	the	skin,	and	practically	every	other	medical	disorder	known	to	the	human
race.	I	can	just	see	them	in	my	mind’s	eye,	said	Marie,	a	set	of	very	corpulent
men	disregarding	their	doctors’	advice	and	giving	themselves	up	to	the	pleasures
of	the	table,	which	even	at	a	spa	were	lavish	at	the	time,	in	order	to	suppress,	by
dint	of	their	increasing	girth,	the	anxiety	for	the	security	of	their	social	position
constantly	stirring	within	them,	and	I	see	other	patients,	most	of	them	ladies	and
rather	pale	and	sallow	already,	deep	in	their	own	
thoughts	as	they	walk	along	the
winding	paths	from	one	of	the	little	temples	which	house	fountains	to	the	next,
or	else	in	elegiac	mood,	watching	the	play	of	the	clouds	moving	over	the	narrow
valley	from	the	viewing	points	of	the	Amalienhöhe	or	Schloss	Miramont.	The
rare	sense	of	happiness	that	I	felt	as	I	listened	to	my	companion	talking,	said
Austerlitz,	paradoxically	enough	gave	me	the	idea	that	I	myself,	like	the	guests
staying	in	Marienbad	a	hundred	years	ago,	had	contracted	an	insidious	illness,
and	together	with	that	idea	came	the	hope	that	I	was	now	beginning	to	be	cured.
Indeed,	I	had	never	in	my	life	passed	over	the	threshold	into	sleep	more	securely
than	on	that	first	night	I	spent	with	Marie.	I	listened	to	her	regular	breathing,	and
saw	her	beautiful	face	next	to	me	every	so	often	for	a	split	second	in	the	summer
lightning	that	flashed	across	the	sky.	Then	the	rain	fell	steadily	outside,	the	white
curtains	blew	into	the	room,	and	as	my	mind	became	gradually	submerged	I	felt,
like	a	slight	easing	behind	my	forehead,	the	belief	rise	within	me	that	I	had
found	release	at	last.	But	nothing	came	of	it.	I	woke	before	dawn	with	such	an
abysmal	sense	of	distress	that	without	even	being	able	to	look	at	Marie	I	sat	up
and,	like	a	man	seasick,	had	to	perch	on	the	edge	of	the	bed.	I	had	dreamed	that
one	of	the	hotel	servants	brought	us	a	drink	of	a	virulent	green	color	for
breakfast	on	a	tin	tray,	with	a	French	newspaper	bearing	an	article	on	the	front
page	which	held	forth	on	the	necessity	of	reforming	the	spas,	speaking	several
times	of	the	sad	lot	of	the	hotel	employees	
qui	portent
,	so	my	dream	newspaper
put	it,	said	Austerlitz,	
ces	longues	blouses	grises	comme	en	portent	les
quincailliers
.	The	rest	of	the	newspaper	consisted	almost	entirely	of	death
announcements	the	size	of	postage	stamps,	in	tiny	print	which	I	could	decipher
only	with	great	difficulty.	
The	announcements	were	not	just	in	French	but	also	in
German,	Polish,	and	Dutch.	I	still	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	Frederieke	van
Wincklmann,	whose	death	notice	said	that	she	had	
kalm	en	rustig	van	ons
heengegaan
,	I	remember	the	strange	word	
rouwkamer
	and	the	information	that
De	bloemen	worden	na	de	crematieplechtigheid	neergelegd	aan	de	voet	van	het
Indisch	Monument	te	Den	Haag
.	I	had	gone	over	to	the	window,	where	I	looked
down	the	main	street,	still	wet	with	rain,	and	saw	the	grand	hotels	ranged	in	a
semicircle	rising	to	the	heights,	the	Pacifik,	the	Atlantic,	the	Metropole,	the
Polonia	and	Bohemia	with	their	rows	of	balconies,	their	corner	turrets	and	roof
ridges	emerging	from	the	morning	mist	like	oceangoing	steamers	from	a	dark
sea.	At	some	time	in	the	past,	I	thought,	I	must	have	made	a	mistake,	and	now	I
am	living	the	wrong	life.	Later,	on	a	walk	through	the	deserted	town	and	up	to
the	fountain	colonnade,	I	kept	feeling	as	if	someone	else	were	walking	beside
me,	or	as	if	something	had	brushed	against	me.	Every	new	view	that	opened	out
before	us	as	we	turned	a	corner,	every	façade,	every	flight	of	steps	looked	to	me
both	familiar	and	utterly	alien.	I	felt	that	the	decrepit	state	of	these	once
magnificent	buildings,	with	their	broken	gutters,	walls	blackened	by	rainwater,
crumbling	plaster	revealing	the	coarse	masonry	beneath	it,	windows	boarded	up
or	clad	with	corrugated	iron,	precisely	reflected	my	own	state	of	mind,	which	I
could	not	explain	either	to	myself	or	to	Marie,	not	on	this	first	walk	we	took
through	the	deserted	park	nor	in	the	late	afternoon,	when	we	sat	in	the	dimly	lit
kavárna
	of	the	Město	Moskva	under	a	picture	of	pink	water	lilies	measuring	at
least	four	square	yards.	I	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	that	we	ordered	an	ice
cream,	or	rather,	as	it	turned	out,	a	confection	resembling	an	ice	cream,	
a	plaster-
like	substance	tasting	of	potato	starch	and	notable	chiefly	for	the	fact	that	even
after	more	than	an	hour	it	did	not	melt.	Apart	from	us	the	only	customers	in	the
Město	Moskva	were	two	old	gentlemen	playing	chess	at	one	of	the	tables	at	the
back.	The	waiter	who	was	standing	by	the	net	curtains,	which	were	discolored
with	smoke,	his	hands	behind	his	back	and	looking	out,	lost	in	thought,	at	the
rubbish	dump	overgrown	with	giant	hogweed	on	the	other	side	of	the	road,	was
himself	advanced	in	age.	His	white	hair	and	moustache	were	carefully	trimmed,
and	although	he	too	wore	one	of	those	mouse-gray	nylon	coats	it	was	easy	to
imagine	him	in	deep	black,	well-cut	tails,	with	a	velvet	bow	tie	above	a	starched
shirtfront	radiant	with	supernatural	cleanliness,	wearing	shiny	patent-leather
shoes	which	reflected	the	lamplight	of	a	grand	hotel	lobby.	When	he	brought
Marie	a	flat	pack	of	forty	Cuban	cigarettes	displaying	a	pretty	palm-frond	motif,
and	then	gave	her	a	light	with	an	elegantly	executed	gesture,	I	could	see	that	she
greatly	admired	him.	The	Cuban	tobacco	smoke	hung	in	blue	drifts	in	the	air
between	us,	and	some	time	went	by	before	Marie	asked	what	was	in	my	mind,
why	I	was	so	abstracted,	so	lost	in	thought;	how	could	I	have	lapsed	so	suddenly
from	the	happy	mood	which	she	had	sensed	in	me	yesterday?	And	all	I	could	say
was	that	I	didn’t	know.	I	think,	said	Austerlitz,	I	tried	to	explain	that	something
or	other	unknown	wrenched	at	my	heart	here	in	Marienbad,	something	very
obvious	like	an	ordinary	name	or	a	term	which	one	cannot	remember	for	the
sake	of	anyone	or	anything	in	the	world.	I	do	not	now	recall	in	detail	how	we
spent	those	few	days	in	Marienbad,	said	Austerlitz.	I	know	that	I	often	lay	for
hours	in	the	bubbling	mineral	baths	and	the	retiring	rooms,	which	did	me	good
in	
one	way	but	in	another	may	have	weakened	the	resistance	I	had	put	up	for	so
many	years	against	the	emergence	of	memory.	Once	we	went	to	a	concert	at	the
Gogol	Theater,	where	a	Russian	pianist	called	Bloch	played	the	
Papillons
	and
Kinderszenen
	to	an	audience	of	half	a	dozen.	On	the	way	back	to	the	hotel	Marie
spoke,	almost	as	a	warning,	so	it	seemed	to	me,	said	Austerlitz,	of	the	clouding
of	Schumann’s	mind	as	his	madness	came	on	and	how	at	last,	in	the	middle	of
carnival	crowds	in	Düsseldorf,	he	took	a	leap	over	the	parapet	of	the	bridge	into
the	icy	waters	of	the	Rhine,	from	which	he	was	pulled	out	by	two	fishermen.	He
lived	for	a	number	of	years	after	that,	said	Marie,	in	a	private	asylum	for	the
mentally	deranged	near	Bonn	or	Bad	Godesberg,	where	he	was	visited	by	Clara
and	the	young	Brahms	at	intervals,	and	since	it	was	impossible	to	converse	with
him	anymore,	withdrawn	from	the	world	as	he	was	and	humming	tunelessly	to
himself,	they	generally	contented	themselves	with	looking	into	his	room	for	a
while	through	a	small	trap	in	the	door.	As	I	listened	to	Marie	and	tried	to
imagine	poor	Schumann	in	his	Bad	Godesberg	cell	I	had	another	picture
constantly	before	my	eyes,	that	of	the	pigeon	loft	we	had	passed	on	an	excursion
to	Königswart.	Like	the	country	estate	to	which	it	belonged,	this	dovecote,
which	may	have	dated	from	the	Metternich	period,	was	in	an	advanced	state	of
decay.	The	floor	inside	the	brick	walls	was	covered	with	pigeon	droppings
compressed	under	their	own	weight,	yet	already	over	two	feet	high,	a	hard,
desiccated	mass	on	which	lay	the	bodies	of	some	of	the	birds	who	had	fallen
from	their	niches,	mortally	sick,	while	their	companions,	surviving	in	a	kind	of
senile	dementia,	cooed	at	one	another	in	tones	of	quiet	complaint	in	the	darkness
under	the	roof,	and	a	few	downy	feathers,	spinning	round	in	a	little	whirlwind,
slowly	sank	
through	the	air.	The	torment	inherent	in	both	these	images	that	came
into	my	mind	in	Marienbad,	the	mad	Schumann	and	the	pigeons	immured	in	that
place	of	horror,	made	it	impossible	for	me	to	attain	even	the	lowest	step	on	the
way	to	self-knowledge.	On	the	final	day	of	our	visit,	Austerlitz	continued	at	last,
in	the	evening	and	as	if	to	say	goodbye,	we	walked	through	the	park	and	down	to
the	Auschowitz	Springs.	There	is	a	prettily	built	and	fully	glazed	pump	room
there,	all	painted	white	inside.	In	this	pump	room,	illuminated	by	the	rays	of	the
setting	sun,	where,	apart	from	the	regular	splashing	of	the	water,	silence	reigned
entirely,	Marie	moved	closer	to	me	and	asked	whether	I	had	remembered	that
tomorrow	was	my	birthday.
	
	
When	we	wake	up	tomorrow,	she	said,	I	shall	wish	you	every	happiness,	and	it
will	be	like	telling	a	machine	working	by	some	unknown	mechanism	that	I	hope
it	will	run	well.	Can’t	you	tell	me	the	reason,	she	asked,	said	Austerlitz,	why	you
remain	so	unapproachable?	Why,	she	said,	have	you	been	like	a	pool	of	frozen
water	ever	since	we	came	
here?	Why	do	I	see	your	lips	opening	as	if	you	were
about	to	say	something,	maybe	even	cry	out	loud,	and	then	I	hear	not	the
slightest	sound?	Why	did	you	never	unpack	when	we	arrived,	always	preferring
to	live	out	of	a	rucksack,	as	it	were?	We	stood	there	a	couple	of	paces	apart,	like
two	actors	on	stage.	The	color	of	Marie’s	eyes	changed	as	the	light	dimmed.	And
once	again	I	tried	to	explain	to	her	and	to	myself	what	incomprehensible	feelings
had	been	weighing	on	me	over	the	last	few	days;	how	I	kept	thinking,	like	a
madman,	that	there	were	mysterious	signs	and	portents	all	around	me	here;	how
it	even	seemed	to	me	as	if	the	silent	façades	of	the	buildings	knew	something
ominous	about	me,	how	I	had	always	believed	I	must	be	alone,	and	in	spite	of
my	longing	for	her	I	now	felt	it	more	than	ever	before.	But	it	isn’t	true,	said
Marie,	it	isn’t	true	that	we	need	absence	and	loneliness.	It	isn’t	true.	It’s	only	in
your	mind.	You	are	afraid	of	I	don’t	know	what.	You	have	always	been	rather
remote,	of	course,	I	could	tell	that,	but	now	it’s	as	if	you	stood	on	a	threshold
and	you	dared	not	step	over	it.	That	evening	in	Marienbad,	said	Austerlitz,	I
could	not	admit	to	myself	how	right	everything	Marie	said	was,	but	today	I
know	why	I	felt	obliged	to	turn	away	when	anyone	came	too	close	to	me,	I	know
that	I	thought	this	turning	away	made	me	safe,	and	that	at	the	same	time	I	saw
myself	transformed	into	a	frightful	and	hideous	creature,	a	man	beyond	the	pale.
Dusk	was	gathering	as	we	walked	back	through	the	park.	Dark	trees	and	bushes
lined	both	sides	of	the	white	sandy	path	curving	ahead	of	us,	and	Marie,	whom	I
lost	entirely	soon	afterwards,	by	my	own	fault,	was	murmuring	something
quietly	to	herself.	All	I	remember	of	it	now	is	a	phrase	about	the	poor	lovers	
qui
se	promenaient	dans	les	allées	désertes	du	parc
.	We	were	almost	back	in	the
town,	
said	Austerlitz,	when	a	little	company	of	some	ten	or	a	dozen	small	people
emerged	from	the	dark	as	if	out	of	nowhere,	at	a	place	where	white	mist	was
already	rising	from	the	ground,	and	crossed	our	path.	They	were	the	sort	of
visitors	sent	to	the	spa	because	of	their	failing	health	by	some	Czech	enterprise
or	other,	or	perhaps	they	came	from	one	of	the	neighboring	Socialist	countries.
They	were	strikingly	short,	almost	dwarfish	figures,	slightly	bent,	moving	along
in	single	file,	and	each	of	them	held	one	of	those	pitiful	plastic	mugs	from	which
the	water	of	the	springs	was	drunk	in	Mariánské	Lázně	at	the	time.	I	also
remember,	added	Austerlitz,	that	without	exception	they	wore	raincoats	of	thin
blue-gray	Perlon,	the	kind	of	thing	that	had	been	fashionable	in	the	West	in	the
late	1950s.	To	this	day	I	can	sometimes	hear	the	dry	rustling	with	which,	as
suddenly	as	they	had	appeared	on	one	side	of	the	path,	they	vanished	again	on
the	other.—I	dwelt	on	my	memories	of	Marienbad	all	night	after	my	last	visit	to
the	šporkova,	continued	Austerlitz.	As	soon	as	it	began	to	grow	light	outside	I
packed,	left	the	hotel	on	Kampa	Island,	and	crossed	the	Charles	Bridge,	which
was	wrapped	in	early	mist,	walked	through	the	streets	of	the	Old	Town	and	over
the	still	deserted	Wenceslas	Square,	making	my	way	to	the	main	station	on
Wilsonova	which,	as	it	turned	out,	did	not	correspond	in	the	least	to	the	idea	I
had	formed	of	it	from	Vera’s	narrative.	Its	Jugendstil	architecture,	once	famous
far	beyond	Prague,	had	been	surrounded,	obviously	in	the	1960s,	by	ugly	glass
façades	and	concrete	blocks,	and	it	took	me	some	time	to	find	a	way	into	this
forbidding	complex	over	a	taxi	ramp	leading	down	to	the	basement	story.	The
low-ceilinged	hall	I	now	entered	was	crowded	with	throngs	of	people	who	had
spent	the	night	there	among	piles	
of	luggage,	huddled	together	in	groups	of
various	sizes,	most	of	them	still	asleep.	A	sickening	red-hued	light	immersed	the
entire	apparently	boundless	encampment	in	a	positively	infernal	glare	as	it	shone
from	a	slightly	raised	platform	measuring	at	least	ten	by	twenty	meters,	on	which
about	a	hundred	games	machines	were	arranged	in	several	batteries,	idling	to	no
purpose	and	chanting	inanely	to	themselves.	I	stepped	over	some	of	the
motionless	bodies	on	the	floor,	went	upstairs	and	downstairs	but	failed	to	find
my	way	through	this	labyrinthine	station,	which	seemed	to	consist	of	nothing	but
sales	booths	and	stands	of	all	kinds.	Eventually	I	asked	a	uniformed	man	who
came	towards	me:	
Hlavní	nádráží?	Wilsonovo	nádráží?
	whereupon	he	took	me
carefully	by	the	sleeve,	like	a	lost	child,	guided	me	to	a	dark	recess	in	a	remote
corner,	and	there	showed	me	a	memorial	plaque	saying	that	the	station	had	been
named	in	1919	after	the	freedom-loving	American	president	Wilson.	When	I	had
deciphered	the	memorial	and	nodded	my	thanks	to	the	railway	official,	who	had
patiently	stayed	beside	me,	he	led	me	round	a	few	more	corners	and	up	several
steps	to	a	kind	of	mezzanine	floor,	from	which	I	could	look	up	at	the	mighty
dome	of	the	former	Wilsonova	Station,	or	more	accurately	at	half	the	dome,
since	the	other	half	had	been	sliced	away,	so	to	speak,	by	the	new	construction
towering	up	into	it.	Along	the	semicircular	lower	rim	of	the	dome	ran	a	gallery
with	small	café	tables	on	it.	When	I	had	bought	myself	a	ticket	for	the	Hook	of
Holland	I	sat	there	for	half	an	hour,	until	it	was	time	for	my	train	to	leave,	trying
to	think	my	way	back	through	the	decades,	to	remember	what	it	had	been	like
when,	carried	in	Agáta’s	arms—as	Vera	had	told	me,	said	Austerlitz—I	craned
my	neck,	unable	to	take	my	eyes	off	the	vault	reaching	
such	a	vast	height	above
us.	But	neither	Agáta	nor	Vera	nor	I	myself	emerged	from	the	past.	Sometimes	it
seemed	as	if	the	veil	would	part;	I	thought,	for	one	fleeting	instant,	that	I	could
feel	the	touch	of	Agáta’s	shoulder	or	see	the	picture	on	the	front	of	the	Charlie
Chaplin	comic	which	Vera	had	bought	me	for	the	journey,	but	as	soon	as	I	tried
to	hold	one	of	these	fragments	fast,	or	get	it	into	better	focus,	as	it	were,	it
disappeared	into	the	emptiness	revolving	over	my	head.	It	was	all	the	more
surprising	and	indeed	alarming	a	little	later,	said	Austerlitz,	when	I	looked	out	of
the	corridor	window	of	my	carriage	just	before	the	train	left	at	seven-thirteen,	to
find	it	dawning	upon	me	with	perfect	certainty	that	I	had	seen	the	pattern	of	the
glass	and	steel	roof	above	the	platforms	before,	made	up	as	it	was	of	triangles,
round	arches,	horizontal	and	vertical	lines	and	diagonals,	and	in	the	same	half-
light.	As	the	train	rolled	very	slowly	out	of	the	station,	through	a	passage
between	the	backs	of	blocks	of	flats	and	into	the	dark	tunnel	running	under	the
New	Town,	and	then	I	crossed	the	Vltava	with	a	regular	beat,	it	really	seemed	to
me,	said	Austerlitz,	as	if	time	had	stood	still	since	the	day	when	I	first	left
Prague.	It	was	a	dark,	oppressive	morning.	A	small	lamp	with	a	pink	pleated
shade,	the	kind	of	thing	one	used	to	see	in	the	windows	of	Belgian	brothels,
stood	on	the	white	cloth	covering	the	little	table	in	the	Czech	State	Railways
dining	car,	where	I	was	sitting	in	order	to	get	a	better	view.	The	chef,	his	toque
at	an	angle	on	his	head,	leaned	in	the	entrance	to	his	galley	smoking	and	talking
to	the	waiter,	a	curly-haired,	slight	little	man	in	a	check	waistcoat	and	yellow
bow	tie.	Outside,	under	the	lowering	sky,	meadows	and	fields	passed	by,
fishponds,	woods,	the	curve	of	a	bend	in	a	river,	a	stand	of	alders,	hills	and
valleys,	and	at	Beroun,	if	I	remember	correctly,	a	limeworks	extending	
over	a
square	mile	or	more,	with	chimneys	and	towering	silos	disappearing	into	the	low
clouds	above,	huge	square	buildings	of	crumbling	concrete	roofed	with	rusty
corrugated	iron,	conveyor	belts	moving	up	and	down,	mills	to	grind	the	stone,
conical	mounds	of	gravel,	huts	and	freight	trucks,	all	of	it	uniformly	covered
with	pale	gray	sinter	and	dust.
	
	
Then	the	wide	countryside	opened	out	again,	and	all	the	time	I	was	looking	out	I
never	saw	a	vehicle	on	the	roads,	or	a	single	human	being	except	for	the
stationmasters	who,	whether	from	boredom	or	habit	or	because	of	some
regulation	which	they	had	to	observe,	had	come	out	on	the	platform	at	even	the
smallest	stations	such	as	Holoubkov,	Chrást,	or	Rokycany	in	their	red	uniform
caps,	most	of	them,	it	seemed	to	me,	sporting	blond	moustaches,	and	determined
not	to	miss	the	Prague	express	as	it	thundered	by	on	this	pallid	April	morning.
All	I	remember	of	Pilsen,	where	we	stopped	for	some	time,	said	Austerlitz,	is
that	I	went	out	on	the	platform	to	photograph	the	capital	of	a	cast-iron	column
which	had	touched	some	chord	of	recognition	in	me.	What	made	me	uneasy	at
the	sight	of	it,	however,	was	not	the	question	whether	the	complex	form	of	the
capital,	now	covered	with	a	puce-tinged	encrustation,	had	really	impressed	itself
on	my	mind	when	I	passed	through	Pilsen	with	the	children’s	transport	in	the
summer	of	1939,	but	the	idea,	ridiculous	in	itself,	that	this	cast-iron	column,
which	with	its	scaly	surface	seemed	almost	to	approach	the	nature	of	a	living
being,	might	remember	me	and	was,	if	I	may	so	put	it,	said	Austerlitz,	a	witness
to	what	I	could	no	longer	recollect	for	myself.	Beyond	Pilsen	the	line	ran
towards	the	mountains	dividing	Bohemia	from	Bavaria.	Soon	the	gradient	was
delaying	the	tempo	of	the	train,	and	dark	forests	were	almost	encroaching	on	the
railway	embankment.	
Swathes	of	mist	or	low,	drifting	cloud	hung	among	the
dripping	pines,	until	after	about	an	hour	the	line	went	downhill	again,	the	valley
gradually	broadened,	and	we	came	out	into	pleasant	countryside.	I	don’t	know
what	I	had	expected	of	Germany,	said	Austerlitz,	but	wherever	I	looked	I	saw
trim	towns	and	villages,	neat	yards	around	factories	and	industrial	buildings,
lovingly	tended	gardens,	piles	of	firewood	tidily	stacked	under	cover,	level
asphalted	cart	tracks	running	through	the	meadows,	roads	with	brightly	colored
cars	purring	along	them	at	great	speed,	well-managed	woodland,	regulated
watercourses,	and	new	railway	buildings	where	the	stationmasters	obviously	felt
under	no	obligation	to	come	out.	Parts	of	the	sky	had	cleared,	cheerful	patches	of
sunlight	lit	up	the	country	here	and	there,	and	the	train,	which	had	often	seemed
to	be	having	difficulty	in	making	any	progress	on	the	Czech	side	of	the	border,
was	now	suddenly	racing	along	with	almost	improbable	ease.	Around	midday
we	reached	Nuremberg,	and	when	I	saw	the	name	on	a	signal	box	in	its	German
spelling	of	Nürnberg,	which	was	unfamiliar	to	me,	I	remembered	what	Vera	had
said	about	my	father’s	account	of	the	National	Socialist	Party	rally	of	1936	and
the	roars	of	acclamation	rising	from	the	people	who	had	gathered	here	at	the
time.	Although	I	had	really	meant	to	do	no	more	than	ask	about	my	next
connections,	said	Austerlitz,	that	recollection	may	have	been	why	I	walked	out
of	Nuremberg	Station	without	pausing	to	think,	and	on	into	that	unknown	city.	I
had	never	before	set	foot	on	German	soil,	I	had	always	avoided	learning
anything	at	all	about	German	topography,	German	history,	or	modern	German
life,	and	so,	said	Austerlitz,	Germany	was	probably	more	unfamiliar	to	me	than
any	other	country	in	the	world,	more	foreign	even	than	
Afghanistan	or	Paraguay.
As	soon	as	I	had	emerged	from	the	underpass	in	front	of	the	station	I	was	swept
along	by	a	huge	crowd	of	people	who	were	streaming	down	the	entire	breadth	of
the	street,	rather	like	water	in	a	riverbed,	going	in	not	just	one	but	both
directions,	as	if	flowing	simultaneously	up	and	down	stream.	I	think	it	was	a
Saturday,	the	day	when	people	go	to	shop	in	town,	inundating	these	pedestrian
zones	which	apparently,	as	I	was	told	later,	said	Austerlitz,	exist	in	more	or	less
the	same	form	in	all	German	cities.	The	first	thing	that	caught	my	eye	on	this
excursion	was	the	great	number	of	gray,	brown,	and	green	loden	coats	and	hats,
and	how	well	and	sensibly	everyone	was	dressed	in	general,	how	remarkably
solid	were	the	shoes	of	the	pedestrians	of	Nuremberg.	I	avoided	looking	closely
at	the	faces	coming	towards	me,	and	thought	it	odd	that	few	of	these	people
raised	their	voices	as	they	moved	quietly	through	the	city.	Looking	up	at	the
façades	on	both	sides	of	the	street,	even	those	of	the	older	buildings	which,
judging	by	their	style,	must	date	from	the	sixteenth	or	fifteenth	century,	I	was
troubled	to	realize	that	I	could	not	see	a	crooked	line	anywhere,	not	at	the
corners	of	the	houses	or	on	the	gables,	the	window	frames	or	the	sills,	nor	was
there	any	other	trace	of	past	history.	I	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	that	the	paving
under	my	feet	sloped	slightly	downhill,	that	once,	looking	over	the	parapet	of	a
bridge,	I	caught	sight	of	two	snow-white	swans	swimming	on	black	water,	and
then,	high	above	the	rooftops,	of	the	castle,	somehow	miniaturized	and	in
postage-stamp	format,	so	to	speak.	I	could	not	bring	myself	to	go	into	a	café	or
buy	anything	from	one	of	the	many	stalls	and	booths.	When	I	turned	to	go	back
to	the	station	after	about	an	hour,	I	felt	increasingly	as	if	I	had	to	struggle	against
a	current	growing	ever	
stronger,	perhaps	because	I	was	now	going	uphill,	or
maybe	there	were	in	fact	more	people	moving	one	way	than	the	other.	In	any
case,	said	Austerlitz,	I	felt	more	panic-stricken	with	every	passing	minute,	so
that	at	last,	although	I	was	not	at	all	far	from	the	station,	I	had	to	stop	under	the
red	sandstone	arch	of	a	window	displaying	the	pages	of	the	local	Nuremberg
newspaper,	where	I	waited	until	the	crowds	of	shoppers	had	to	some	extent
thinned	out.	I	cannot	now	say	for	certain	how	long	I	stood	there,	my	senses
dazed,	on	the	outer	edge	of	this	flood	of	Germans	moving	endlessly	past	me,
said	Austerlitz,	but	I	think	it	was	four	or	five	o’clock	by	the	time	an	elderly
woman	wearing	a	kind	of	Tyrolean	hat	with	a	cockerel’s	feather	in	it	stopped
beside	me,	probably	taking	me	for	one	of	the	homeless	because	of	my	old
rucksack,	fetched	a	one-mark	coin	out	of	her	purse	with	arthritic	fingers,	and
carefully	handed	it	to	me	as	alms.	I	was	still	holding	this	coin,	minted	in	1956
with	the	head	of	Chancellor	Adenauer	on	it,	when	I	was	finally	in	the	train	again
late	that	afternoon,	traveling	towards	Cologne,	said	Austerlitz.	I	stood	in	the
corridor	looking	out	of	the	window	almost	throughout	this	part	of	the	journey.	I
think	it	was	between	Würzburg	and	Frankfurt	that	the	line	ran	through	a	densely
forested	region	with	leafless	stands	of	oak	and	beech	trees,	and	mile	upon	mile
of	conifers.	As	I	gazed	out,	a	distant	memory	came	to	me	of	a	dream	I	often	had
both	in	the	manse	at	Bala	and	later,	a	dream	of	a	nameless	land	without	borders
and	entirely	overgrown	by	dark	forests,	which	I	had	to	cross	without	any	idea
where	I	was	going,	and	it	dawned	upon	me,	said	Austerlitz,	that	what	I	now	saw
going	past	outside	the	train	was	the	original	of	the	images	that	had	haunted	me
for	so	many	years.	Then	I	recollected	another	idea	which	had	obsessed	me	over	a
long	period:	the	image	of	a	twin	brother	who	had	been	with	me	on	that	long
journey,	sitting	motionless	by	the	window	of	the	compartment,	staring	out	into
the	dark.	I	knew	nothing	about	him,	not	even	his	name,	and	I	had	never
exchanged	so	much	as	a	word	with	him,	but	whenever	I	thought	of	him	I	was
tormented	by	the	notion	that	towards	the	end	of	the	journey	he	had	died	of
consumption	and	was	stowed	in	the	baggage	net	with	the	rest	of	our	belongings.
And	then,	Austerlitz	continued,	somewhere	beyond	Frankfurt,	when	I	entered
the	Rhine	valley	for	the	second	time	in	my	life,	the	sight	of	the	Mäuseturm	in	the
part	of	the	river	known	as	the	Binger	Loch	revealed,	with	absolute	certainty,
why	the	tower	in	Lake	Vyrnwy	had	always	seemed	to	me	so	uncanny.	I	could
not	take	my	eyes	off	the	great	river	Rhine	flowing	sluggishly	along	in	the	dusk,
the	apparently	motionless	barges	lying	low	in	the	water,	which	almost	lapped
over	their	decks,	the	trees	and	bushes	on	the	other	bank,	the	fine	cross-hatching
of	the	vineyards,	the	stronger	transverse	lines	of	the	walls	supporting	the
terraces,	the	slate-gray	rocks	and	ravines	leading	off	sideways	into	what	seemed
to	me	a	prehistoric	and	unexplored	realm.
	
	
While	I	was	still	under	the	spell	of	this	landscape,	to	me	a	truly	mythological
one,	said	Austerlitz,	the	setting	sun	broke	through	the	clouds,	filled	the	entire
valley	with	its	radiance,	and	illuminated	the	heights	on	the	other	side	where	three
gigantic	chimneys	towered	into	the	sky	at	the	place	we	were	just	passing,
making	the	steep	slopes	on	the	eastern	mountains	look	like	hollow	shells,	mere
camouflage	for	an	underground	industrial	site	covering	many	square	miles.
Passing	through	the	valley	of	the	Rhine,	said	Austerlitz,	you	can	scarcely	tell
what	century	it	is.	As	you	look	out	of	the	train	window	it	is	difficult	to	say	even
of	the	castles	standing	high	above	the	river,	bearing	such	strange	and	somehow
preposterous	names	as	Reichenstein,	Ehrenfels,	and	Stahleck,	whether	they	are
medieval	or	were	built	by	the	industrial	barons	of	the	nineteenth	century.	Some
of	them,	for	instance	Burg	Katz	and	Burg	Maus,	seem	to	be	rooted	in	legend,
and	even	the	ruins	resemble	a	romantic	stage	set.	At	least,	I	no	longer	knew	in
what	period	of	my	life	I	was	living	as	I	journeyed	down	the	Rhine	valley.
Through	the	evening	sunlight	I	saw	the	glow	of	a	fiery	dawn	rising	from	my	past
above	the	other	bank,	pervading	the	whole	sky.	Even	today,	Austerlitz
continued,	when	I	think	of	my	Rhine	journeys,	the	second	of	them	hardly	less
terrifying	than	the	first,	everything	becomes	confused	in	my	head:	my
experiences	of	that	time,	what	I	have	read,	memories	surfacing	and	then	sinking
out	of	sight	again,	consecutive	images	and	distressing	blank	spots	where	nothing
at	all	is	left.	I	see	that	German	landscape,	said	Austerlitz,	as	it	was	described	by
earlier	travelers,	the	great	river	not	yet	regulated	in	any	way,	flooding	its	banks
in	places,	salmon	
leaping	in	the	water,	crayfish	crawling	over	the	fine	sand;	I	see
Victor	Hugo’s	somber	pen-and-ink	drawings	of	the	Rhine	castles,	and	Joseph
Mallord	Turner	sitting	on	a	folding	stool	not	far	from	the	murderous	town	of
Bacharach,	swiftly	painting	his	watercolors;	I	see	the	deep	waters	of	Lake
Vyrnwy	and	the	people	of	Llanwyddyn	submerged	in	them;	and	I	see,	said
Austerlitz,	the	great	army	of	mice,	a	gray	horde	said	to	have	plagued	the	German
countryside,	plunging	into	the	river	and	swimming	desperately,	their	little	throats
raised	only	just	above	the	water,	to	reach	the	safety	of	the	island.
	
Imperceptibly,	the	day	had	begun	drawing	to	a	close	as	Austerlitz	talked,	and
the	light	was	already	fading	when	we	left	the	house	in	Alderney	Street	together
to	walk	a	little	way	out	of	town,	along	the	Mile	End	Road	to	the	large	Tower
Hamlets	cemetery,	which	is	surrounded	by	a	tall,	dark	brick	wall	and,	like	the
adjoining	complex	of	St.	Clement’s	Hospital,	according	to	a	remark	made	by
Austerlitz	in	passing,	was	one	of	the	scenes	of	this	phase	of	his	story.	In	the
twilight	slowly	falling	over	London	we	walked	along	the	paths	of	the	cemetery,
past	monuments	erected	by	the	Victorians	to	commemorate	their	dead,	past
mausoleums,	marble	crosses,	stelae	and	obelisks,	bulbous	urns	and	statues	of
angels,	many	of	them	wingless	or	otherwise	mutilated,	turned	to	stone,	so	it
seemed	to	me,	at	the	very	moment	when	they	were	about	to	take	off	from	the
earth.	Most	of	these	memorials	had	long	ago	been	tilted	to	one	side	or	thrown
over	entirely	by	the	roots	of	the	sycamores	which	were	shooting	up	everywhere.
The	sarcophagi	covered	with	pale	green,	gray,	ocher	and	orange	lichens	were
broken,	some	of	the	graves	themselves	had	risen	above	the	ground	or	sunk	into
it,	so	that	you	might	think	an	
earthquake	had	shaken	this	abode	of	the	departed,
or	else	that,	summoned	to	the	Last	Judgment,	they	had	upset,	as	they	rose	from
their	resting	places,	the	neat	and	tidy	order	we	impose	on	them.
	
In	the	first	few	weeks	after	his	return	from	Bohemia,	Austerlitz	continued	his
tale	as	we	walked	on,	he	had	learnt	by	heart	the	names	and	dates	of	birth	and
death	of	those	buried	here,	he	had	taken	home	pebbles	and	ivy	leaves	and	on	one
occasion	a	stone	rose,	and	the	stone	hand	broken	off	one	of	the	angels,	but
however	much	my	walks	in	Tower	Hamlets	might	soothe	me	during	the	day,
said	Austerlitz,	at	night	I	was	plagued	by	the	most	frightful	anxiety	attacks
which	sometimes	lasted	for	hours	on	end.	It	was	obviously	of	little	use	that	I	had
discovered	the	sources	of	my	distress	and,	looking	back	over	all	the	past	years,
could	now	see	myself	with	the	utmost	clarity	as	that	child	suddenly	cast	out	of
his	familiar	surroundings:	reason	was	powerless	against	the	sense	of	rejection
and	annihilation	which	I	had	always	suppressed,	and	which	was	now	breaking
through	the	walls	of	its	confinement.	Soon	I	would	be	overcome	by	this	terrible
anxiety	in	the	midst	of	the	simplest	actions:	tying	my	shoelaces,	washing	up
teacups,	waiting	for	the	kettle	to	boil.	All	of	a	sudden	my	tongue	and	palate
would	be	as	dry	as	if	I	had	been	lying	in	the	desert	for	
days,	more	and	more	I	had
to	fight	harder	and	harder	for	breath,	my	heart	began	to	flutter	and	palpitate	in
my	throat,	cold	sweat	broke	out	all	over	my	body,	even	on	the	back	of	my
trembling	hand,	and	everything	I	looked	at	was	veiled	by	a	black	mist.
	
	
I	felt	like	screaming	but	could	not	utter	a	sound,	I	wanted	to	walk	out	into	the
street	but	was	unable	to	move	from	the	spot;	once,	after	
a	long	and	painful
contraction,	I	actually	visualized	myself	being	broken	up	from	within,	so	that
parts	of	my	body	were	scattered	over	a	dark	and	distant	terrain.	I	cannot	say
now,	said	Austerlitz,	how	many	such	attacks	I	suffered	at	the	time,	but	one	day,
when	I	collapsed	on	my	way	to	the	kiosk	at	the	end	of	Alderney	Street,	striking
my	head	against	the	edge	of	the	pavement,	I	was	taken	to	St.	Clement’s	as	the
last	in	a	series	of	various	casualty	departments	and	hospitals,	and	there	found
myself	in	one	of	the	men’s	wards	when	at	last	I	returned	to	my	senses,	after	what
I	was	told	later	had	been	nearly	three	weeks	of	mental	absence	which,	though	it
did	not	impair	the	bodily	functions,	paralyzed	all	thought	processes	and
emotions.	I	walked	around	in	this	place,	said	Austerlitz,	his	left	hand	pointing	to
the	tall	brick	façade	of	the	hospital	building	towering	behind	the	wall,	in	the
curiously	remote	state	of	mind	induced	by	the	drugs	I	was	being	given;	both
desolate	and	weirdly	contented	I	wandered,	all	through	that	winter,	up	and	down
the	long	corridors,	staring	out	for	hours	through	one	of	the	dirty	windows	at	the
cemetery	below,	where	we	are	standing	now,	feeling	nothing	inside	my	head	but
the	four	burnt-out	walls	of	my	brain.	Later,	when	there	had	been	some
improvement	in	my	condition,	I	looked	through	a	telescope	given	to	me	by	one
of	the	nurses	and	watched	the	foxes	running	wild	in	the	cemetery	in	the	gray
dawn.	I	would	see	squirrels	dodging	back	and	forth,	or	sitting	quite	still,
arrested,	as	it	were,	in	mid-motion.	I	studied	the	faces	of	those	solitary	people
who	visited	the	graveyard	now	and	then,	or	I	observed	the	slow	wingbeats	of	an
owl	in	its	curving	flight	over	the	tombstones	at	nightfall.	Occasionally	I	talked	to
one	of	the	other	hospital	patients,	a	roofer,	
for	instance,	who	said	he	could
recollect	with	perfect	clarity	the	moment	when,	just	as	he	was	about	to	fix	a	slate
in	place,	something	that	had	been	stretched	too	taut	inside	him	snapped	at	a
particular	spot	behind	his	forehead,	and	for	the	first	time	he	heard,	coming	over
the	crackling	transistor	wedged	into	the	batten	in	front	of	him,	the	voices	of
those	bearers	of	bad	tidings	which	had	haunted	him	ever	since.
	
	
While	I	was	there	I	also	thought	quite	often	of	Elias	the	minister	lapsing	into
madness,	and	of	the	stone-built	asylum	in	Denbigh	where	he	died.	But	I	found	it
impossible	to	think	of	myself,	my	own	history,	or	my	present	state	of	mind.	I
was	not	discharged	until	the	beginning	of	April,	a	year	after	returning	from
Prague.	The	last	doctor	whom	I	saw	at	the	hospital	advised	me	to	look	for	some
kind	of	light	physical	occupation,	perhaps	in	horticulture,	she	suggested,	and	so
for	the	next	two	years,	at	the	time	of	day	when	office	staff	are	pouring	into	the
City,	I	went	out	the	other	way	to	Romford	and	my	new	place	of	work,	a	council-
run	nursery	garden	on	the	outskirts	of	a	large	
park	which	employed,	as	well	as
the	trained	gardeners,	a	certain	number	of	assistants	who	suffered	from
disabilities	or	required	to	have	their	minds	set	at	rest	by	some	quiet	pursuit.	I
cannot	say,	said	Austerlitz,	why	I	began	to	recover	in	some	degree	out	at
Romford	in	the	course	of	those	months,	whether	it	was	because	of	the	people	in
whose	company	I	found	myself,	who	though	they	all	bore	the	scars	of	their
mental	sufferings	often	seemed	carefree	and	very	cheerful,	or	the	constant	warm,
humid	atmosphere	in	the	greenhouses,	the	mossy,	forest-ground	fragrance	filling
the	air,	the	rectilinear	patterns	presented	to	the	eye,	or	simply	the	even	tenor	of
the	work	itself,	the	careful	pricking	out	and	potting	up	of	seedlings,	transplanting
them	when	they	had	grown	larger,	looking	after	the	cold	frames	and	watering	the
trays	with	a	fine	hose,	which	I	liked	perhaps	best	of	all.	At	the	time	when	I	was
working	as	an	assistant	gardener	in	Romford,	said	Austerlitz,	I	began	to	spend
my	evenings	and	weekends	poring	over	the	heavy	tome,	
running	to	almost	eight
hundred	close-printed	pages,	which	H.	G.	Adler,	a	name	previously	unknown	to
me,	had	written	between	1945	and	1947	in	the	most	difficult	of	circumstances,
partly	in	Prague	and	partly	in	London,	on	the	subject	of	the	setting	up,
development,	and	internal	organization	of	the	Theresienstadt	ghetto,	and	which
he	had	revised	several	times	before	it	was	brought	out	by	a	German	publishing
house	in	1955.
	
	
	
Reading	this	book,	which	line	by	line	gave	me	an	insight	into	matters	I	could
never	have	imagined	when	I	myself	visited	the	fortified	town,	almost	entirely
ignorant	as	I	was	at	that	time,	was	a	painstaking	business	because	of	my	poor
knowledge	of	German,	and	indeed,	said	Austerlitz,	I	might	well	say	it	was
almost	as	difficult	for	me	as	deciphering	an	Egyptian	or	Babylonian	text	in
hieroglyphic	or	cuneiform	script.	The	long	compounds,	not	listed	in	my
dictionary,	which	were	obviously	being	spawned	the	whole	time	by	the	pseudo-
technical	jargon	governing	everything	in	Theresienstadt	had	to	be	unraveled
syllable	by	syllable.	When	I	had	finally	discovered	the	meaning	of	such	terms
and	concepts	as	
Barackenbestandteillager,	Zusatzkostenberechnungsschein
,
Bagatellreparaturwerkstätte,	 Menagetransportkolonnen,
Küchenbeschwerdeorgane,	 Reinlichkeitsreihenuntersuchung
,	 and
Entwesungsübersiedlung
—to	my	surprise,	Austerlitz	articulated	these
heterogeneous	German	compounds	unhesitatingly	and	without	the	slightest	trace
of	an	accent—when	I	had	worked	out	what	they	meant,	he	continued,	I	had	to
make	just	as	much	of	an	effort	to	fit	the	presumptive	sense	of	my	reconstructions
into	the	sentences	and	the	wider	context,	which	kept	threatening	to	elude	me,
first	because	it	quite	often	took	me	until	midnight	to	master	a	single	page,	and	a
good	deal	was	lost	in	this	lengthy	process,	and	second	because	in	its	almost
futuristic	deformation	of	social	life	the	ghetto	system	had	something
incomprehensible	and	unreal	about	it,	even	though	Adler	describes	it	down	to
the	last	detail	in	its	objective	actuality.
	
	
It	seems	unpardonable	to	me	today	that	I	had	blocked	off	the	investigation	of	my
most	distant	past	for	so	many	years,	not	on	principle,	to	be	sure,	but	still	of	my
own	accord,	and	that	now	it	is	too	late	for	me	to	seek	out	Adler,	who	had	lived	in
London	until	his	death	in	the	summer	of	1988,	and	talk	to	him	about	that	extra-
territorial	place	where	at	the	time,	as	I	think	I	have	mentioned	before,	said
Austerlitz,	some	sixty	thousand	people	were	crammed	together	in	an	area	little
more	than	a	square	kilometer	in	size—industrialists	and	manufacturers,	lawyers
and	doctors,	rabbis	and	university	professors,	singers	and	composers,	bank
managers,	businessmen,	shorthand	typists,	housewives,	farmers,	labourers	and
millionaires,	people	from	Prague	and	the	rest	of	the	Protectorate,	from	Slovakia,
from	Denmark	and	Holland,	from	Vienna	and	Munich,	Cologne	and	Berlin,	from
the	Palatinate,	from	Lower	Franconia	and	Westphalia—each	of	whom	had	to
make	do	with	about	two	square	
meters	of	space	in	which	to	exist	and	all	of	them,
in	so	far	as	they	were	in	any	condition	to	do	so	or	until	they	were	loaded	into
trucks	and	sent	on	east,	obliged	to	work	entirely	without	remuneration	in	one	of
the	primitive	factories	set	up,	with	a	view	to	generating	actual	profit,	by	the
External	Trade	Section,	assigned	to	the	bandage-weaving	workshop,	to	the
handbag	and	satchel	assembly	line,	the	production	of	horn	buttons	and	other
haberdashery	items,	the	manufacturing	of	wooden	soles	for	footwear	and	of
cowhide	galoshes;	to	the	charcoal	yard,	the	making	of	such	board	games	as	Nine
Men’s	Morris	and	Catch	the	Hat,	the	splitting	of	mica,	the	shearing	of	rabbit	fur,
the	bottling	of	ink	dust,	or	the	silkworm-breeding	station	run	under	the	aegis	of
the	SS;	or,	alternatively,	employed	in	one	of	the	operations	serving	the	ghetto’s
internal	economy,	in	the	clothing	store,	for	instance,	in	one	of	the	precinct
mending	and	darning	rooms,	the	shredding	section,	the	rag	depot,	the	book
reception	and	sorting	unit,	the	kitchen	brigade,	the	potato-peeling	platoon,	the
bone-crushing	mill,	the	glue-boiling	plant,	or	the	mattress	department,	as
medical	and	nursing	auxiliaries,	in	the	disinfestation	and	rodent	control	service,
the	floor	space	allocation	office,	the	central	registration	bureau,	the	self-
administration	housed	in	barrack	block	BV,	known	as	“The	Castle,”	or	in	the
transport	of	goods	maintained	within	the	walls	of	the	fortress	by	means	of	a
medley	of	carts	of	every	conceivable	kind	and	four	dozen	ancient	hearses
brought	from	the	now	defunct	Jewish	communities	in	the	Bohemian	countryside
to	Terezín,	where	they	moved	along	the	crowded	streets	with	two	men	harnessed
between	the	shafts	and	four	to	eight	pushing	or	putting	their	weight	against	the
spokes	of	the	wheels	of	these	oddly	swaying	conveyances,	which	were	covered
by	ulcerations	of	peeling	black	varnish	and	from	which,	before	long,	the	rickety
superstructures,	high-built	coach	boxes,	and	silver-bronzed	canopies	resting	on
turned	columns	had	been	roughly	sawn	away,	so	that	the	lower	parts,	on	the
sides	of	which	rows	of	letters	and	numbers	were	coarsely	painted	in	lime-wash,
scarcely	betrayed	their	former	function,	a	function,	said	Austerlitz,	for	which
they	were	still	frequently	employed	even	now,	since	much	of	the	load	carted
round	Theresienstadt	every	day	was	made	up	by	the	dead,	of	whom	there	were
always	a	great	many	because	the	high	population	density	and	poor	diet	rendered
it	impossible	for	the	course	of	such	infectious	diseases	as	scarlet	fever,	enteritis,
diphtheria,	jaundice,	and	tuberculosis	to	be	stemmed,	and	because	the	average
age	of	those	brought	from	all	regions	of	the	German	Reich	to	the	ghetto	was
over	seventy,	and	these	people,	who	before	they	were	sent	away	had	been	led	to
believe	some	tale	about	a	pleasant	resort	in	Bohemia	called	Theresienbad,	with
beautiful	gardens,	promenades,	boardinghouses,	and	villas,	and	many	of	whom
had	been	persuaded	or	forced	to	sign	contracts,	so-called	
Heimeinkaufsverträge
,
said	Austerlitz,	offering	them,	against	deposits	of	up	to	eighty	thousand
Reichsmarks,	the	right	of	residence	in	what	was	described	to	them	as	a	most
salubrious	place,	these	people,	Austerlitz	continued,	had	come	to	Theresienstadt,
completely	misled	by	the	illusions	implanted	in	their	minds,	carrying	in	their
luggage	all	manner	of	personal	items	and	mementoes	which	could	be	of	no
conceivable	use	in	the	life	that	awaited	them	in	the	ghetto,	often	arriving	already
ravaged	in	body	and	spirit,	no	longer	in	their	right	minds,	delirious,	frequently
unable	to	remember	their	own	names,	surviving	
the	procedure	of	being	sluiced
in,	as	it	was	termed,	either	not	at	all	or	only	by	a	few	days,	in	which	latter	case,
on	account	of	the	extreme	psychopathic	personality	changes	which	they	had
undergone	and	which	generally	resulted	in	a	kind	of	infantilism	divorcing	them
from	reality	and	entailing	an	almost	total	loss	of	the	ability	to	speak	and	act,	they
were	immediately	sectioned	in	the	casemate	of	the	Cavalier	Barracks,	which
served	as	a	psychiatric	ward	and	where	they	usually	perished	within	a	week
under	the	dreadful	conditions	prevailing	there,	so	that	although	there	was	no
shortage	of	doctors	and	surgeons	in	Theresienstadt	who	cared	for	their	fellow
prisoners	as	well	as	they	could,	and	in	spite	of	the	steam	disinfection	boiler
installed	in	the	malting	kiln	of	the	former	brewery,	the	hydrogen	cyanide
chamber,	and	other	hygienic	measures	introduced	by	the	Kommandantur	in	an
all-out	campaign	against	infestation	with	lice,	the	number	of	the	dead—entirely
in	line,	said	Austerlitz,	with	the	intentions	of	the	masters	of	the	ghetto—rose	to
well	above	twenty	thousand	in	the	ten	months	between	August	1942	and	May
1943	alone,	as	a	result	of	
which	the	joiner’s	workshop	in	the	former	riding
school	could	no	longer	make	enough	deal	coffins,	there	were	sometimes	more
than	five	hundred	dead	bodies	stacked	in	layers	on	top	of	each	other	in	the
central	morgue	in	the	casemate	by	the	gateway	to	the	Bohusevice	road,	and	the
four	naphtha-fired	incinerators	of	the	crematorium,	kept	going	day	and	night	in
cycles	of	forty	minutes	at	a	time,	were	stretched	to	the	utmost	limits	of	their
capacity,	said	Austerlitz,	and	this	comprehensive	system	of	internment	and
forced	labor	which,	in	Theresienstadt	as	elsewhere,	was	ultimately	directed,	so
he	continued,	solely	at	the	extinction	of	life	and	was	built	on	an	organizational
plan	regulating	all	functions	and	responsibilities,	as	Adler’s	reconstruction
shows,	with	a	crazed	administrative	zeal—from	the	use	of	whole	troops	of
workers	in	building	the	branch	railway	line	from	Bohusevice	to	the	fort,	to	the
one	man	whose	job	it	was	to	keep	the	clock	mechanism	in	the	closed	Catholic
church	in	order—this	system	had	to	be	constantly	supervised	and	statistically
accounted	for,	particularly	with	respect	to	the	total	number	of	inmates	of	the
ghetto,	an	uncommonly	time-consuming	business	going	far	beyond	civilian
requirements	when	you	remember	that	new	transports	were	arriving	all	the	time,
and	people	were	regularly	weeded	out	to	be	sent	elsewhere	with	their	files
marked	
R.n.e
.	for	
Rückkehr	nicht	erwünscht
,	Return	Not	Desired,	a	purpose	for
which	the	SS	men	responsible,	who	regarded	numerical	accuracy	as	one	of	their
highest	principles,	had	a	census	taken	several	times,	on	one	occasion,	if	I
remember	correctly,	said	Austerlitz,	on	10	November	1943	outside	the	gates	in
the	open	fields	of	the	Bohusevice	basin,	when	the	entire	population	of	the	ghetto
—children,	old	people,	and	any	of	the	sick	at	all	able	to	walk	not	excepted—was
marched	out	after	assembling	in	the	barracks	yards	at	dawn	to	be	drawn	up	in
block	formation	behind	numbered	wooden	boards,	and	there,	through	the	whole
of	this	cold	and	damp	day,	as	the	fog	drifted	over	the	fields,	they	were	forced	to
wait,	guarded	by	armed	police,	and	not	permitted	to	step	out	of	line	even	for	a
minute,	for	the	SS	men	to	arrive,	as	they	eventually	did	on	their	motorbikes	at
three	o’clock,	to	carry	out	the	count	of	heads	and	then	repeat	it	twice	before	they
could	feel	convinced	that	the	final	result,	including	those	few	still	within	the
walls,	did	in	fact	tally	with	the	expected	number	of	forty	thousand	one	hundred
and	forty-five,	whereupon	they	rode	away	again	in	some	haste,	entirely
forgetting	to	give	any	orders	for	the	inmates’	return,	so	that	this	great	crowd	of
many	thousands	stood	out	in	the	Bohusevice	basin	on	that	gray	tenth	of
November	drenched	to	the	skin	and	increasingly	distressed	until	well	after	dark,
bowed	and	swaying	like	reeds	in	the	showers	that	now	swept	over	the
countryside,	before	finally,	driven	to	it	by	a	wave	of	panic,	they	poured	back	into
the	town	from	which	most	of	them	had	never	emerged	except	for	this	one	time
since	their	transfer	to	Theresienstadt,	where	soon	after	the	beginning	of	the	new
year,	said	Austerlitz,	what	was	described	as	a	
Verschönerungsaktion
	or	general
improvement	campaign	was	undertaken,	with	an	eye	to	the	imminent	visit	in	the
early	summer	of	1944	of	a	Red	Cross	commission,	an	event	regarded	by	those
authorities	of	the	Reich	responsible	as	a	good	opportunity	to	dissimulate	the	true
nature	of	their	deportation	policy,	and	consequently	it	was	decided	to	organize
the	ghetto	inmates	under	the	command	of	the	SS	for	the	purpose	of	a	vast
cleaning-up	program:	pathways	and	a	grove	with	a	columbarium	were	laid	out,
park	benches	and	signposts	were	set	up,	the	
latter	adorned	in	the	German	fashion
with	jolly	carvings	and	floral	decoration,	over	a	thousand	rosebushes	were
planted,	a	children’s	nursery	and	crèche	or	
Kriechlingskrippe
,	as	it	was	termed,
said	Austerlitz,	in	one	of	those	perverse	formulations,	were	adorned	with	pretty
fairy-tale	friezes	and	equipped	with	sandboxes,	paddling	pools,	and	merry-go-
rounds,	whilst	the	former	OREL	cinema,	which	until	now	had	served	as	a
dumping	ground	for	the	oldest	inmates	of	the	ghetto	and	where	a	huge
chandelier	still	hung	from	the	ceiling	in	the	dark	space	inside,	was	converted
within	a	few	weeks	into	a	concert	hall	and	theater,	and	elsewhere	shops	stocked
with	goods	from	the	SS	storehouses	were	opened	for	the	sale	of	food	and
household	utensils,	ladies’	and	gentlemen’s	clothing,	shoes,	underwear,	travel
requisites,	and	suitcases;	there	were	also	a	convalescent	home,	a	chapel,	a
lending	library,	a	gymnasium,	a	post	office,	a	bank	where	the	manager’s	office
was	furnished	with	a	sort	of	field	marshal’s	desk	and	a	suite	of	easy	chairs,	not
to	mention	a	coffeehouse	with	sun	umbrellas	and	folding	chairs	outside	it	to
suggest	the	agreeable	atmosphere	of	a	resort	inviting	all	passersby	to	linger	for	a
while,	and	indeed	there	was	no	end	to	the	improvements	and	embellishments,
with	much	sawing,	hammering,	and	painting	until	the	time	of	the	visit	itself
approached	and	Theresienstadt,	after	another	seven	and	a	half	thousand	of	the
less	presentable	inmates	had	been	sent	east	amidst	all	this	busy	activity,	to	thin
out	the	population,	so	to	speak,	became	a	Potemkin	village	or	sham	Eldorado
which	may	have	dazzled	even	some	of	the	inhabitants	themselves	and	where,
when	the	appointed	day	came,	the	commission	of	two	Danes	and	one	Swiss
official,	having	been	guided,	in	conformity	with	a	precise	plan	and	a	timetable
drawn	up	by	the	Kommandant’s	office,	
through	the	streets	and	over	the	spotless
pavements,	scrubbed	with	soap	early	that	morning,	could	see	for	themselves	the
friendly,	happy	folk	who	had	been	spared	the	horrors	of	war	and	were	looking
out	of	the	windows,	could	see	how	smartly	they	were	all	dressed,	how	well	the
few	sick	people	were	cared	for,	how	they	were	given	proper	meals	served	on
plates,	how	the	bread	ration	was	handed	out	by	people	in	white	drill	gloves,	how
posters	advertising	sporting	events,	cabarets,	theatrical	performances,	and
concerts	were	being	put	up	on	every	corner	and	how,	when	the	day’s	work	was
over,	the	residents	of	the	town	flocked	out	in	their	thousands	on	the	ramparts	and
bastions	to	take	the	air,	almost	as	if	they	were	passengers	enjoying	an	evening
stroll	on	the	deck	of	an	oceangoing	steamer,	a	most	reassuring	spectacle,	all
things	considered,	which	the	Germans,	whether	for	propaganda	purposes	or	in
order	to	justify	their	actions	and	conduct	to	themselves,	thought	fit	after	the	end
of	the	Red	Cross	visit	to	record	in	a	film,	which	Adler	tells	us,	said	Austerlitz,
was	given	a	sound	track	of	Jewish	folk	music	in	March	1945,	when	a
considerable	number	of	the	people	who	had	appeared	in	it	were	no	longer	alive,
and	a	copy	of	which,	again	according	to	Adler,	had	apparently	turned	up	in	the
British-occupied	zone	after	the	war,	although	he,	Adler	himself,	said	Austerlitz,
never	saw	it,	and	thought	it	was	now	lost	without	trace.
	
	

	
For	months,	said	Austerlitz,	I	tried	in	vain,	through	the	good	offices	of	the
Imperial	War	Museum	and	other	agencies,	to	find	any	clue	to	the	present
location	of	that	film,	since	although	I	had	been	to	Theresienstadt	before	leaving
Prague,	and	despite	Adler’s	meticulous	account,	which	I	had	read	down	to	the
last	footnote	with	the	greatest	attention,	I	found	myself	unable	to	cast	my	mind
back	to	the	ghetto	
and	picture	my	mother	Agáta	there	at	the	time.	I	kept	thinking
that	if	only	the	film	could	be	found	I	might	perhaps	be	able	to	see	or	gain	some
inkling	of	what	it	was	really	like,	and	then	I	imagined	recognizing	Agáta,
beyond	any	possibility	of	doubt,	a	young	woman	as	she	would	be	by	comparison
with	me	today,	perhaps	among	the	guests	outside	the	fake	coffeehouse,	or	a
saleswoman	in	the	haberdashery	shop,	just	taking	a	fine	pair	of	gloves	carefully
out	of	one	of	the	drawers,	or	singing	the	part	of	Olympia	in	the	
Tales	of
Hoffmann
	which,	so	Adler	says,	was	staged	in	Theresienstadt	in	the	course	of	the
improvements	campaign.	I	imagined	seeing	her	walking	down	the	street	in	a
summer	dress	and	lightweight	gabardine	coat,	said	Austerlitz:	among	a	group	of
ghetto	residents	out	for	a	stroll,	she	alone	seemed	to	make	straight	for	me,
coming	closer	with	every	step,	until	at	last	I	thought	I	could	sense	her	stepping
out	of	the	frame	and	passing	over	into	me.	It	was	wishful	fantasies	such	as	these
which	cast	me	into	a	state	of	great	excitement	when	the	Imperial	War	Museum
finally	succeeded,	through	the	Federal	Archives	in	Berlin,	in	obtaining	a	cassette
copy	of	the	film	of	Theresienstadt	for	which	I	had	been	searching.	I	remember
very	clearly,	said	Austerlitz,	how	I	sat	in	one	of	the	museum’s	video	viewing
rooms,	placed	the	cassette	in	the	black	opening	of	the	recorder	with	trembling
hands,	and	then,	although	unable	to	take	in	any	of	it,	watched	various	tasks	being
carried	out	at	the	anvil	and	forge	of	a	smithy,	in	the	pottery	and	wood-carving
workshop,	in	the	handbag-making	and	shoe-manufacturing	sections—a	constant,
pointless	to-do	of	hammering,	metal-beating,	and	welding,	cutting,	gluing,	and
stitching;	I	saw	an	unbroken	succession	of	strangers’	faces	emerge	before	me	for
a	few	seconds,	I	saw	workers	leaving	the	huts	when	the	siren	
had	sounded	and
crossing	an	empty	field	beneath	a	sky	filled	with	motionless	white	clouds,	a
game	of	football	in	the	inner	court	of	one	of	the	barrack	buildings,	with	hundreds
of	cheerful	spectators	crowding	the	arcades	and	the	galleries	on	the	first	and
second	floors,	I	saw	men	under	the	showers	in	the	central	bathhouse,	books
being	borrowed	from	the	library	by	gentlemen	of	soigné	appearance,	I	saw	a
full-scale	orchestral	concert	and,	in	the	moat	surrounding	the	fortified	town,
kitchen	gardens	neatly	laid	out	where	several	dozen	people	were	raking	the
vegetable	beds,	watering	beans	and	tomatoes,	searching	brassica	leaves	for
Cabbage	White	caterpillars,	whilst	at	the	end	of	the	day	others	were	sitting	on
benches	outside	the	houses,	apparently	in	perfect	contentment,	letting	the
children	play	a	little	longer,	one	man	reading	a	book,	a	woman	talking	to	her
neighbor,	many	of	them	just	taking	their	ease	at	their	windows,	arms	folded,	in	a
way	once	common	at	the	onset	of	dusk.	At	first	I	could	get	none	of	these	images
into	my	head;	they	merely	flickered	before	my	eyes	as	the	source	of	continual
irritation	or	vexation,	which	was	further	reinforced	when,	to	my	horror,	it	turned
out	that	the	Berlin	cassette	inscribed	with	the	original	title	of	
Der	Führer	schenkt
den	Juden	eine	Stadt
	had	on	it	only	a	patchwork	of	scenes	cobbled	together	and
lasting	some	fourteen	minutes,	scarcely	more	than	an	opening	sequence	in
which,	despite	the	hopes	I	had	entertained,	I	could	not	see	Agáta	anywhere,
however	often	I	ran	the	tape	and	however	hard	I	strained	to	make	her	out	among
those	fleeting	faces.	In	the	end	the	impossibility	of	seeing	anything	more	closely
in	those	pictures,	which	seemed	to	dissolve	even	as	they	appeared,	said
Austerlitz,	gave	me	the	idea	of	having	a	slow-motion	copy	of	this	fragment	from
Theresienstadt	made,	one	which	
would	last	a	whole	hour,	and	indeed	once	the
scant	document	was	extended	to	four	times	its	original	length,	it	did	reveal
previously	hidden	objects	and	people,	creating,	by	default	as	it	were,	a	different
sort	of	film	altogether,	which	I	have	since	watched	over	and	over	again.	The	men
and	women	employed	in	the	workshops	now	looked	as	if	they	were	toiling	in
their	sleep,	so	long	did	it	take	them	to	draw	needle	and	thread	through	the	air	as
they	stitched,	so	heavily	did	their	eyelids	sink,	so	slowly	did	their	lips	move	as
they	looked	wearily	up	at	the	camera.	They	seemed	to	be	hovering	rather	than
walking,	as	if	their	feet	no	longer	quite	touched	the	ground.	The	contours	of	their
bodies	were	blurred	and,	particularly	in	the	scenes	shot	out	of	doors	in	broad
daylight,	had	dissolved	at	the	edges,	resembling,	as	it	occurred	to	me,	said
Austerlitz,	the	frayed	outlines	of	the	human	hand	shown	in	the	fluidal	pictures
and	electrographs	taken	by	Louis	Draget	in	Paris	around	the	turn	of	the	century.
The	many	damaged	sections	of	the	tape,	which	I	had	hardly	noticed	before,	now
melted	the	image	from	its	center	or	from	the	edges,	blotting	it	out	and	instead
making	patterns	of	bright	white	sprinkled	with	black	which	reminded	me	of
aerial	photographs	taken	in	the	far	north,	or	a	drop	of	water	seen	under	the
microscope.	Strangest	of	all,	however,	said	Austerlitz,	was	the	transformation	of
sounds	in	this	slow-motion	version.	In	a	brief	sequence	at	the	very	beginning,
showing	red-hot	iron	being	worked	in	a	smithy	to	shoe	a	draft	ox,	the	merry
polka	by	some	Austrian	operetta	composer	on	the	sound	track	of	the	Berlin	copy
had	become	a	funeral	march	dragging	along	at	a	grotesquely	sluggish	pace,	and
the	rest	of	the	musical	pieces	accompanying	the	film,	among	which	I	could
identify	only	the	can-can	from	
La	Vie	Parisienne
	and	the	scherzo	from
Mendelssohn’s	
Midsummer	Night’s	Dream
,	also	moved	in	a	kind	of
subterranean	world,	through	the	most	nightmarish	depths,	said	Austerlitz,	to
which	no	human	voice	has	ever	descended.
	
	
None	of	the	words	of	the	commentary	could	be	distinguished	anymore.	At	the
point	where,	on	the	original	Berlin	copy,	a	male	voice,	in	high-pitched,	strenuous
tones	forced	through	the	larynx,	had	spoken	of	task	forces	and	cohorts	of
workers	deployed,	as	circumstances	required,	in	various	different	ways,	or	if
necessary	retrained,	so	that	everyone	willing	to	work—
jeder	Arbeitswillige!
,	so
Austerlitz	interrupted	himself—had	an	opportunity	of	fitting	seamlessly	into	the
production	process,	at	this	point	of	the	tape	all	that	could	now	be	made	out,
Austerlitz	continued,	was	a	menacing	growl	such	as	I	had	heard	only	once	before
in	my	life,	on	an	unseasonably	hot	May	Day	many	years	ago	in	the	Jardin	des
Plantes	in	Paris	when,	after	one	of	the	peculiar	turns	that	often	came	over	me	in
those	days,	I	rested	for	a	while	on	a	park	bench	beside	an	aviary	not	far	from	the
big	cats’	house,	where	the	lions	and	tigers,	invisible	from	my	vantage	point	and,
as	it	struck	me	at	the	time,	said	Austerlitz,	driven	out	of	their	minds	in	captivity,
raised	their	hollow	roars	of	lament	hour	after	hour	without	ceasing.	And	then,
Austerlitz	continued,	towards	the	end	of	the	film	there	was	the	comparatively
long	sequence	showing	the	first	performance	of	a	piece	of	music	composed	in
Theresienstadt,	Pavel	Haas’s	study	for	string	orchestra,	if	I	am	not	mistaken.	The
series	of	frames	begins	with	a	view	into	the	hall	from	the	back.	The	windows	are
wide	open,	and	a	large	audience	is	sitting	not	in	rows	as	usual	at	a	concert,	but	as
if	they	were	in	some	sort	of	tavern	or	hotel	dining	room,	in	groups	of	four
around	tables.	The	chairs,	probably	made	specially	for	the	occasion	in	the
carpentry	workshop	
of	the	ghetto,	are	of	pseudo-Tyrolean	design	with	heart
shapes	sawn	out	of	their	backs.	In	the	course	of	the	performance	the	camera
lingers	in	close-up	over	several	members	of	the	audience,	including	an	old
gentleman	whose	cropped	gray	head	fills	the	right-hand	side	of	the	picture,	while
at	the	left-hand	side,	set	a	little	way	back	and	close	to	the	upper	edge	of	the
frame,	the	face	of	a	young	woman	appears,	barely	emerging	from	the	black
shadows	around	it,	which	is	why	I	did	not	notice	it	at	all	at	first.	Around	her
neck,	said	Austerlitz,	she	is	wearing	a	three-stringed	and	delicately	draped
necklace	which	scarcely	stands	out	from	her	dark,	high-necked	dress,	and	there
is,	I	think,	a	white	flower	in	her	hair.	She	looks,	so	I	tell	myself	as	I	watch,	just
as	I	imagined	the	singer	Agáta	from	my	faint	memories	and	the	few	other	clues
to	her	appearance	that	I	now	have,	and	I	gaze	and	gaze	again	at	that	face,	which
seems	to	me	both	strange	and	familiar,	said	Austerlitz,	I	run	the	tape	back
repeatedly,	looking	at	the	time	indicator	in	the	top	left-hand	corner	of	the	screen,
where	the	figures	
covering	part	of	her	forehead	show	the	minutes	and	seconds,
from	10:53	to	10:57,	while	the	hundredths	of	a	second	flash	by	so	fast	that	you
cannot	read	and	capture	them.
	
	
—At	the	beginning	of	this	year,	Austerlitz	finally	continued	his	narrative,	after
lapsing,	as	so	often,	into	deep	abstraction	in	the	middle	of	it,	at	the	beginning	of
this	year,	he	said,	not	long	after	our	last	meeting,	I	went	to	Prague	for	a	second
time,	resumed	my	conversations	with	Vera,	set	up	a	kind	of	pension	fund	at	a
bank	for	her,	and	did	what	else	I	could	to	ease	her	life	in	the	šporkova.	When	it
was	not	too	cold	out	of	doors	we	called	a	taxi	driver,	whom	I	had	engaged	to	be
at	Vera’s	disposal	should	she	need	him,	to	take	us	to	some	of	the	places	she	had
mentioned	and	which	she	herself	had	not	seen,	as	she	put	it,	for	an	eternity.	We
looked	down	at	the	city	again	from	the	observation	tower	on	Petřín	Hill,
watching	the	cars	and	trains	crawling	slowly	along	the	banks	of	the	Vltava	and
over	the	bridges.	We	walked	for	a	little	while	through	the	Baumgarten	by	the
river	in	the	pale	winter	sunlight,	we	sat	for	an	hour	or	so	in	the	planetarium	on
the	Holešovice	exhibition	grounds,	repeating	the	names	of	those	heavenly
constellations	we	could	recognize,	first	in	French	and	then	in	Czech	or	vice
versa,	and	once	we	went	out	to	the	game	park	at	Liboc	where,	surrounded	on	all
sides	by	lovely	meadows,	there	is	a	star-shaped	house	built	as	his	summer
residence	by	Archduke	Ferdinand	of	the	Tyrol,	which	Vera	had	told	me	was	a
favorite	destination	of	Agáta	and	Maximilian	on	their	excursions	out	of	the	city.
I	also	spent	several	days	searching	the	records	for	the	years	1938	and	1939	in	the
Prague	theatrical	archives	in	the	Celetná,	and	there,	among	letters,	files	on
employees,	programs,	
and	faded	newspaper	cuttings,	I	came	upon	the
photograph	of	an	anonymous	actress	who	seemed	to	resemble	my	dim	memory
of	my	mother,	and	in	whom	Vera,	who	had	already	spent	some	time	studying	the
face	of	the	woman	in	the	concert	audience	which	I	had	copied	from	the
Theresienstadt	film,	before	shaking	her	head	and	putting	it	aside,	immediately
and	without	a	shadow	of	doubt,	as	she	said,	recognized	Agáta	as	she	had	then
been.
	
	
—During	this	part	of	his	tale,	we	walked	from	the	cemetery	behind	St.
Clement’s	Hospital	all	the	way	back	to	Liverpool	Street.	When	we	took	leave	of
each	other	outside	the	railway	station,	Austerlitz	gave	me	an	envelope	which	he
had	with	him	and	which	contained	the	photograph	from	the	theatrical	archives	in
Prague,	as	a	memento,	he	said,	for	he	told	me	that	he	was	now	about	to	go	to
Paris	to	search	for	traces	of	his	father’s	last	movements,	and	to	transport	himself
back	to	the	time	
when	he	too	had	lived	there,	in	one	way	feeling	liberated	from
the	false	pretenses	of	his	English	life,	but	in	another	oppressed	by	the	vague
sense	that	he	did	not	belong	in	this	city	either,	or	indeed	anywhere	else	in	the
world.
	
*
	
It	was	in	September	of	the	same	year	that	I	received	a	postcard	from	Austerlitz
giving	me	his	new	address	(6	rue	des	cinq	Diamants,	in	the	Thirteenth
Arrondissement),	which	I	knew	was	in	the	nature	of	an	invitation	to	visit	him	as
soon	as	it	could	be	arranged.	When	I	arrived	at	the	gare	du	Nord,	high	summer
temperatures	still	prevailed,	at	the	end	of	a	drought	which	had	been	parching
large	parts	of	the	country	for	over	two	months,	and	they	did	not	begin	to	drop
until	October.	The	thermometer	rose	to	over	twenty-five	degrees	quite	early	in
the	morning,	and	towards	midday	the	city	was	groaning	beneath	the	heavy	haze
of	lead	and	petrol	fumes	weighing	down	like	a	bell	jar	on	the	entire	Ile	de
France.	The	blue-gray	air	was	motionless	and	took	one’s	breath	away.	The
traffic	inched	along	the	boulevards,	the	tall	stone	façades	quivered	like	mirages
in	the	shimmering	light,	the	leaves	of	the	trees	in	the	Tuileries	and	the	Jardin	du
Luxembourg	were	scorched,	the	passengers	in	the	Métro	trains	and	the	endless
underpasses	through	which	a	hot	desert	wind	blew	were	exhausted.	I	met
Austerlitz,	as	agreed,	on	the	day	after	my	arrival,	in	the	Le	Havane	bistro	bar	on
the	boulevard	Auguste	Blanqui,	not	far	from	the	Glacière	Métro	station.	As	I
entered	the	bar,	which	was	rather	dark	even	in	the	middle	of	the	day,	a	television
screen	measuring	at	least	two	square	meters	and	fixed	high	on	the	wall	was	just
transmitting	pictures	of	the	great	palls	of	smoke	
which	had	been	stifling	the
towns	and	villages	of	Indonesia	for	weeks	on	end,	and	dusting	gray	ash	over	the
heads	of	all	who	for	any	reason	ventured	out	of	doors,	wearing	masks	to	protect
their	faces.	We	both	watched	these	calamitous	images	from	the	other	end	of	the
earth	for	some	time	before	Austerlitz,	as	usual	without	any	preamble,	continued
his	story.	When	I	was	first	in	Paris	at	the	end	of	the	1950s,	he	said,	turning	to
me,	I	had	a	room	in	the	apartment	of	an	elderly	lady	of	almost	transparent
appearance	called	Amélie	Cerf,	who	lived	at	Number	6,	rue	Émile	Zola,	not	far
from	the	pont	Mirabeau,	a	shapeless	concrete	block	which	I	still	sometimes	see
in	my	nightmares	today.	On	my	return	now	I	had	really	meant	to	find
somewhere	to	stay	in	the	same	street,	but	then	after	all	I	decided	to	rent	a	place
here	in	the	Thirteenth	Arrondissement,	since	my	father,	Maximilian
Aychenwald,	whose	last	known	address	was	in	the	rue	Barrault,	must	have
frequented	this	area	at	least	for	a	while	before,	as	it	seems,	he	disappeared
irrevocably	and	without	trace.	At	any	rate,	my	inquiries	at	the	house	in	the	rue
Barrault,	most	of	which	is	now	empty,	were	fruitless,	and	so	were	my	inquiries
at	various	agencies	in	the	prefecture,	partly	because	of	the	proverbially	unhelpful
attitude	of	Parisian	officials,	which	was	even	more	marked	than	usual	on	account
of	the	interminable	hot	summer	weather,	and	partly	because	I	myself	found	it
increasingly	difficult	to	go	from	one	bureau	to	another	making	what	I	was
coming	to	conclude	were	useless	requests	for	further	information.	Soon	I	was
merely	wandering	without	any	aim	or	plan	in	mind	down	the	streets	leading
away	from	the	boulevard	Auguste	Blanqui,	up	to	the	place	d’Italie	on	one	side
and	back	down	to	the	Glacière	on	the	other,	always	thinking,	against	all	reason,
that	I	might	suddenly	see	my	father	
appear	out	of	nowhere,	coming	towards	me
or	stepping	out	of	an	entrance.
	
	
I	sat	in	this	bar	too	for	hours	on	end,	trying	to	imagine	him	in	his	plum-colored
double-breasted	suit,	perhaps	a	little	threadbare	now,	bent	over	one	of	the	café
tables	and	writing	those	letters	to	his	loved	ones	in	Prague	which	never	arrived.	I
kept	wondering	whether	he	had	been	interned	in	the	half-built	housing	estate	out
at	Drancy	after	the	first	police	raid	in	Paris	in	August	1941,	or	not	until	July	of
the	following	year,	when	a	whole	army	of	French	gendarmes	took	thirteen
thousand	of	their	Jewish	fellow	citizens	from	their	homes,	in	what	was	called	the
grande	rafle
,	during	which	over	a	hundred	of	their	victims	jumped	out	of	the
windows	in	desperation	or	found	some	other	way	of	committing	suicide.	I
sometimes	thought	I	saw	the	windowless	police	cars	racing	through	a	city	frozen
with	terror,	the	crowd	of	detainees	camping	out	in	the	open	in	the	Vélodrome
d’Hiver,	and	the	trains	on	which	they	were	soon	deported	from	Drancy	and
Bobigny;	I	pictured	their	journey	through	the	Greater	German	Reich,	I	saw	my
father	still	in	his	good	suit	and	his	black	velour	hat,	calm	and	upright	among	all
those	frightened	people.	Then	again,	I	thought	that	Maximilian	would	surely
have	left	Paris	in	time,	had	gone	south	on	foot	across	the	Pyrenees,	and	perished
somewhere	along	his	way.	Or	I	felt,	as	I	was	saying,	said	Austerlitz,	as	if	my
father	were	still	in	Paris	and	just	waiting,	so	to	speak,	for	a	good	opportunity	to
reveal	himself.	Such	ideas	infallibly	come	to	me	in	places	which	have	more	of
the	past	about	them	than	the	present.	For	instance,	if	I	am	walking	through	the
city	and	look	into	one	of	those	quiet	courtyards	where	nothing	has	changed	for
decades,	I	feel,	almost	physically,	the	current	of	time	slowing	down	in	the
gravitational	field	of	oblivion.	It	seems	to	me	
then	as	if	all	the	moments	of	our
life	occupy	the	same	space,	as	if	future	events	already	existed	and	were	only
waiting	for	us	to	find	our	way	to	them	at	last,	just	as	when	we	have	accepted	an
invitation	we	duly	arrive	in	a	certain	house	at	a	given	time.	And	might	it	not	be,
continued	Austerlitz,	that	we	also	have	appointments	to	keep	in	the	past,	in	what
has	gone	before	and	is	for	the	most	part	extinguished,	and	must	go	there	in
search	of	places	and	people	who	have	some	connection	with	us	on	the	far	side	of
time,	so	to	speak?	For	instance,	one	curiously	gloomy	morning	recently	I	was	in
the	Cimetière	de	Montparnasse,	laid	out	by	the	Hospitalers	in	the	seventeenth
century	on	land	belonging	to	the	Hôtel	de	Dieu	and	now	surrounded	by	towering
office	blocks,	walking	among	the	gravestones	erected	in	a	vaguely	segregated
part	in	memory	of	members	of	the	Woelfflin,	Wormser,	Mayerbeer,	Ginsberg,
Franck,	and	many	other	Jewish	families,	and	I	felt	as	if,	despite	knowing	nothing
of	my	origins	for	so	long,	I	had	lingered	among	them	before,	or	as	if	they	were
still	accompanying	me.	I	read	all	their	euphonious	German	names	and	retained
them	in	my	mind—thinking	of	my	landlady	in	the	rue	Émile	Zola	and	of	a
certain	Hippolyte	Cerf	who	was	born	in	Neuf-Brisach	in	1807,	probably	as
Hippolyt	Hirsch,	and	according	to	the	inscription	had	died	in	Paris	on	the	eighth
of	March	1890,	the	sixteenth	of	Adar	5650,	many	years	after	his	marriage	to	one
Antoinette	Fulda	of	Frankfurt.	Among	the	children	of	these	forebears	who	had
moved	from	Germany	to	the	French	capital	were	Adolphe	and	Alfonse,	together
with	Jeanne	and	Pauline,	who	had	brought	Messrs.	Lanzberg	and	Ochs	into	the
family	as	sons-in-law,	and	a	generation	later	came	Hugo	and	Lucie	Sussfeld,	née
Ochs,	who	had	a	memorial	plaque	half-hidden	by	a	dried-up	asparagus	fern
inside	the	cramped	mausoleum,	informing	visitors	to	the	grave	that	the	couple
had	died	on	being	deported	in	1944.
	
	
Since	that	time,	which,	as	I	told	myself	while	attempting	to	decipher,	through	the
sparse	stems	of	the	asparagus	fern,	the	letters	forming	the	words	
morts	en
déportation
,	was	now	half	a	century	ago,	since	that	time,	said	Austerlitz,	not
much	more	than	a	dozen	years	had	passed	before	I	moved	into	Amélie	Cerf’s
apartment	in	the	rue	Émile	Zola	with	my	few	belongings.	What,	I	wondered,	are
twelve	or	thirteen	such	years,	if	not	a	single	moment	of	unalterable	pain?	Was
Amélie	Cerf,	whom	I	remember	as	physically	almost	nonexistent,	perhaps	the
last	surviving	member	of	her	tribe?	Was	there	no	one	left	to	put	up	a	memorial	to
her	in	the	family	mausoleum?	Did	she	ever	come	to	lie	in	that	tomb	at	all,	or	did
she	dissolve	into	the	empty	air	like	Hugo	and	Lucie?
As	for	myself,	Austerlitz	continued	his	story	after	a	long	pause,	during	my
first	stay	in	Paris,	and	indeed	later	in	my	life	as	well,	I	tried	not	to	let	anything
distract	me	from	my	studies.	In	the	week	I	went	daily	to	the	Bibliothèque
Nationale	in	the	rue	Richelieu,	and	usually	remained	in	my	place	there	until
evening,	in	silent	solidarity	with	the	many	others	immersed	in	their	intellectual
labors,	losing	myself	in	the	small	print	of	the	footnotes	to	the	works	I	was
reading,	in	the	books	I	found	mentioned	in	those	notes,	then	in	the	footnotes	to
those	books	in	their	own	turn,	and	so	escaping	from	factual,	scholarly	accounts
to	the	strangest	of	details,	in	a	kind	of	continual	regression	expressed	in	the	form
of	my	own	marginal	remarks	and	glosses,	which	increasingly	diverged	into	the
most	varied	and	impenetrable	of	ramifications.	My	neighbor	was	usually	an
elderly	gentleman	with	carefully	trimmed	hair	and	sleeve	protectors,	who	had
been	working	for	
decades	on	an	encyclopedia	of	church	history,	a	project	which
had	now	reached	the	letter	
K
,	so	that	it	was	obvious	he	would	never	be	able	to
complete	it.	Without	the	slightest	hesitation,	and	never	making	any	corrections,
he	filled	in	one	after	another	of	his	index	cards	in	tiny	copperplate	handwriting,
subsequently	setting	them	out	in	front	of	him	in	meticulous	order.	Some	years
later,	said	Austerlitz,	when	I	was	watching	a	short	black	and	white	film	about	the
Bibliothèque	Nationale	and	saw	messages	racing	by	pneumatic	post	from	the
reading	rooms	to	the	stacks,	along	what	might	be	described	as	the	library’s
nervous	system,	it	struck	me	that	the	scholars,	together	with	the	whole	apparatus
of	the	library,	formed	an	immensely	complex	and	constantly	evolving	creature
which	had	to	be	fed	with	myriads	of	words,	in	order	to	bring	forth	myriads	of
words	in	its	own	turn.	I	think	that	this	film,	which	I	saw	only	once	but	which
assumed	ever	more	monstrous	and	fantastic	dimensions	in	my	imagination,	was
entitled	
Toute	la	mémoire	du	monde
	and	was	made	by	Alain	Resnais.	Even
before	then	my	mind	often	dwelt	on	the	question	of	whether	there	in	the	reading
room	of	the	library,	which	was	full	of	a	quiet	humming,	rustling,	and	clearing	of
throats,	I	was	on	the	Islands	of	the	Blest	or,	on	the	contrary,	in	a	penal	colony,
and	that	conundrum,	said	Austerlitz,	was	going	round	in	my	head	again	on	a	day
which	has	lodged	itself	with	particular	tenacity	in	my	memory,	a	day	when	I
spent	perhaps	as	much	as	an	hour	in	the	manuscripts	and	records	department	on
the	first	floor,	where	I	was	temporarily	working,	looking	out	at	the	tall	rows	of
windows	on	the	opposite	side	of	the	building,	which	reflected	the	dark	slates	of
the	roof,	at	the	narrow	brick-red	chimneys,	the	bright	and	icy	blue	sky,	and	the
snow-white	metal	weathervane	with	the	shape	of	a	swallow	
cut	out	of	it,	soaring
upwards	and	as	blue	as	the	azure	of	the	sky	itself.	The	reflections	in	the	old	glass
panes	were	slightly	irregular	or	undulating,	and	I	remember,	said	Austerlitz,	that
at	the	sight	of	them,	for	some	reason	I	could	not	understand,	tears	came	to	my
eyes.	It	was	on	the	same	day,	added	Austerlitz,	that	Marie	de	Verneuil,	who	was
working	in	the	records	department	too	and	must	have	noticed	my	strange	fit	of
melancholy,	pushed	a	note	over	to	me	asking	me	to	join	her	for	a	cup	of	coffee.
In	the	state	I	was	in	at	the	time	I	did	not	stop	to	reflect	on	the	unconventionality
of	her	conduct,	but	nodded	in	silent	acceptance	of	her	invitation	and	went	out
with	her,	almost	obediently,	one	might	say,	said	Austerlitz,	downstairs,	across
the	inner	courtyard,	and	through	the	library	gates,	down	several	of	the	streets	so
full	of	pleasant	air	that	fresh	and	somehow	festive	morning,	and	over	to	the
Palais-Royal,	where	we	sat	for	a	long	time	under	the	arcades	beside	a	shop
window	in	which,	as	I	recollect,	said	Austerlitz,	hundreds	and	hundreds	of	tin
soldiers	in	the	brightly	colored	uniforms	of	the	Napoleonic	army	were	drawn	up
in	marching	order	and	battle	formation.	On	that	first	encounter,	and	indeed	later,
Marie	told	me	very	little	about	herself	and	her	background,	perhaps	because	she
came	from	a	very	distinguished	family,	while	as	she	probably	guessed	I	was
from	nowhere,	so	to	speak.	Once	we	had	discovered	our	common	interests,	our
conversation	in	the	café	under	the	arcade,	during	which	Marie	alternately
ordered	peppermint	tea	and	vanilla	ice	cream,	turned	mainly	on	subjects	of
architectural	history,	including,	as	I	still	remember	very	clearly,	said	Austerlitz,
a	paper	mill	in	the	Charente	which	Marie	had	visited	with	a	cousin	of	hers	not
long	before	and	which	by	her	account	of	it	was	one	of	the	strangest	places	she
had	ever	seen.	This	
enormous	building,	made	of	oak	beams	and	sometimes
groaning	under	its	own	weight,	said	Marie,	stands	half	hidden	among	trees	and
bushes	on	the	bend	of	a	river	with	waters	of	a	deep,	almost	unnatural	green.
Inside	the	mill	two	brothers,	each	proficient	in	his	own	skills,	one	of	whom	had	a
squint	and	the	other	a	crooked	shoulder,	turn	great	masses	of	soaked	paper	and
rags	of	fabric	into	clean	sheets	of	blank	paper,	which	are	then	dried	on	the	racks
of	a	large	airing	loft	at	the	top	of	the	mill.	You	are	surrounded	by	a	quiet	twilight
there,	said	Marie,	you	see	the	light	of	day	outside	through	cracks	in	the	slatted
blinds,	you	hear	water	running	gently	over	the	weir,	and	the	heavy	turning	of	the
millwheel,	and	you	wish	for	nothing	more	but	eternal	peace.	Everything	Marie
meant	to	me	from	then	on,	said	Austerlitz,	was	summed	up	in	this	tale	of	the
paper	mill	in	which,	without	speaking	of	herself,	she	revealed	her	inner	being	to
me.	In	the	weeks	and	months	that	followed,	Austerlitz	continued,	we	often
strolled	together	in	the	Jardin	du	Luxembourg,	the	Tuileries,	and	the	Jardin	des
Plantes,	walking	up	and	down	the	esplanade	between	the	well-pruned	plane	trees
with	the	west	front	of	the	Natural	History	Museum	now	on	our	right	and	now	on
our	left,	going	into	the	palm	house	and	coming	out	of	it	again,	tracing	the
convoluted	paths	of	the	Alpine	garden,	or	traversing	the	dreary	terrain	of	the	old
zoo	where	large	animals	from	the	African	colonies	had	once	been	put	on	display,
said	Austerlitz,	elephants,	giraffes,	rhinoceroses,	dromedaries,	and	crocodiles,
although	most	of	the	enclosures,	decked	out	with	pitiful	remnants	of	natural
objects—tree	stumps,	artificial	rocks,	and	pools	of	water—were	now	empty	and
deserted.	On	these	walks	it	was	not	unusual	for	us	to	hear	one	of	the	children
whose	adult	companions	still	took	them	
to	the	zoo	calling	out,	in	some
exasperation:	
Mais	il	est	où?	Pourquoi	il	se	cache?	Pourquoi	il	ne	bouge	pas?
Est-ce	qu’il	est	mort?
	I	recollect	that	I	myself	saw	a	family	of	fallow	deer
gathered	together	by	a	manger	of	hay	near	the	perimeter	fence	of	a	dusty
enclosure	where	no	grass	grew,	a	living	picture	of	mutual	trust	and	harmony
which	also	had	about	it	an	air	of	constant	vigilance	and	alarm.
	
	
Marie	particularly	asked	me	to	take	a	photograph	of	this	beautiful	group,	and	as
she	did	so,	said	Austerlitz,	she	said	something	which	I	have	never	forgotten,	she
said	that	captive	animals	and	we	ourselves,	their	human	counterparts,	view	one
another	
à	travers	une	brèche	d’incompréhension
.	Marie	spent	every	second	or
third	weekend,	continued	Austerlitz,	his	narrative	taking	another	direction,	with
her	parents	or	wider	family,	who	owned	several	estates	in	the	wooded	country
around	Compiègne	or	further	north	in	Picardy.	At	those	times	when	she	was	not
in	Paris,	which	always	cast	me	into	an	anxious	mood,	I	regularly	set	off	to
explore	the	outlying	districts	of	the	city,	taking	the	Métro	out	to	Montreuil,
Malakoff,	Charenton,	Bobigny,	Bagnolet,	Le	Pré	St.	
Germain,	St.	Denis,	St.
Mandé,	or	elsewhere,	to	walk	through	the	empty	Sunday	streets	taking	hundreds
of	banlieu-photographs,	as	I	called	them,	pictures	which	in	their	very	emptiness,
as	I	realized	only	later,	reflected	my	orphaned	frame	of	mind.	It	was	on	such	a
suburban	expedition,	one	unusually	oppressive	Sunday	in	September	when	gray
storm	clouds	were	rolling	over	the	sky	from	the	southwest,	that	I	went	out	to
Maisons-Alfort	and	there	discovered	the	museum	of	veterinary	medicine,	of
which	I	had	never	heard	before,	in	the	extensive	grounds	of	the	École
Vétérinaire,	itself	founded	two	hundred	years	ago.	An	old	Moroccan	sat	at	the
entrance,	wearing	a	kind	of	burnoose,	with	a	fez	on	his	head.	I	still	have	the
twenty-franc	ticket	he	sold	me	in	my	wallet,	said	Austerlitz,	and	taking	it	out	he
handed	it	to	me	over	the	table	of	the	bistro	where	we	were	sitting	as	if	there	were
something	very	special	about	it.
	
	
Inside	the	museum,	Austerlitz	continued,	I	did	not	meet	another	living	soul,
either	in	the	well-proportioned	stairway	or	in	the	three	exhibition	rooms	on	the
first	floor.	All	the	more	uncanny	in	the	ambient	silence,	which	was	merely
emphasized	by	the	creaking	of	the	floorboards	beneath	my	feet,	seemed	the
exhibits	assembled	in	the	glass-fronted	cases	reaching	almost	to	the	ceiling,	and
dating	without	exception	from	the	end	of	the	eighteenth	or	the	beginning	of	the
nineteenth	century.	There	
were	plaster	casts	of	the	jaws	of	many	different	kinds
of	ruminants	and	rodents;	kidney	stones	which	had	been	found	in	circus	camels,
as	large	and	spherically	perfect	as	skittle	balls;	the	cross	section	of	a	piglet	only
a	few	hours	old,	its	organs	rendered	transparent	by	a	process	of	chemical
diaphanization	and	now	floating	in	the	liquid	around	it	like	a	deep-sea	fish	which
would	never	see	the	light	of	day;	the	pale	blue	fetus	of	a	foal,	where	the
quicksilver	injected	as	a	contrast	medium	into	the	network	of	veins	beneath	its
thin	skin	had	formed	patterns	like	frost	flowers	as	it	leached	out;	the	skulls	and
skeletons	of	many	different	creatures;	whole	digestive	systems	in	formaldehyde;
pathologically	malformed	organs,	shrunken	hearts	and	bloated	livers;	trees	of
bronchial	tubes,	some	of	them	three	feet	high,	their	petrified	and	rust-colored
branches	looking	like	coral	growths;	and	in	the	teratological	department	there
were	monstrosities	of	every	imaginable	and	unimaginable	kind,	Janus-faced	and
two-headed	calves,	Cyclopean	beasts	with	outsized	foreheads,	a	human	infant
born	in	Maisons-Alfort	on	the	day	when	the	Emperor	was	exiled	to	the	island	of
St.	Helena,	its	legs	fused	together	so	that	it	resembled	a	mermaid,	a	ten-legged
sheep,	and	truly	horrific	creatures	consisting	of	little	more	than	a	scrap	of	skin,	a
crooked	wing,	and	half	a	claw.	Far	the	most	awesome	of	all,	however,	so	said
Austerlitz,	was	the	exhibit	in	a	glass	case	at	the	back	of	the	last	cabinet	of	the
museum,	the	life-sized	figure	of	a	horseman,	very	skillfully	flayed	in	the	post-
Revolutionary	period	by	the	anatomist	and	dissector	Honoré	Fragonard,	who
was	then	at	the	height	of	his	fame,	so	that	every	strand	in	the	tensed	muscles	of
the	rider	and	his	mount,	which	was	racing	forward	with	a	panic-stricken
expression,	
was	clearly	visible	in	the	colors	of	congealed	blood,	together	with
the	blue	of	the	veins	and	the	ocher	yellow	of	the	sinews	and	ligaments.
	
	
Fragonard,	who	was	descended	from	the	famous	family	of	Provençal	perfumiers,
said	Austerlitz,	had	apparently	dissected	over	three	thousand	bodies	and	parts	of
bodies	in	the	course	of	his	career,	and	consequently	he,	an	agnostic	who	did	not
believe	in	the	immortality	of	the	soul,	must	have	spent	all	the	hours	of	his	days
and	nights	intent	upon	death,	surrounded	by	the	sweet	smell	of	decay,	and,	as	I
imagine,	moved	by	a	desire	to	secure	for	the	frail	body	at	least	some	semblance
of	eternal	life	through	a	process	of	vitrification,	by	translating	its	so	readily
corruptible	substance	into	a	miracle	of	pure	glass.	In	the	weeks	following	my
visit	to	the	museum	of	veterinary	science,	Austerlitz	continued	his	story,	gazing
now	at	the	boulevard	outside,	I	was	unable	to	recall	any	of	what	I	have	just	told
you,	for	it	was	in	the	Métro	on	my	way	back	from	Maisons-Alfort	that	I	had	the
first	of	the	several	fainting	fits	I	was	to	suffer,	causing	temporary	but	complete
loss	of	memory,	a	condition	described	in	psychiatric	textbooks,	as	far	as	I	am
aware,	Austerlitz	added,	as	hysterical	epilepsy.	Only	when	I	developed	the
photographs	I	had	taken	that	Sunday	in	September	at	Maisons-Alfort	was	I	able,
with	their	aid	and	guided	by	Marie’s	patient	questioning,	to	reconstruct	my
buried	experiences.	Then	I	remembered	the	courtyards	of	the	veterinary	school
lying	white	in	the	afternoon	heat	as	I	left	the	museum,	I	recollected	that	as	I
walked	along	beside	the	wall	I	felt	that	I	had	reached	steep	and	impassable
terrain,	and	that	I	had	wanted	to	sit	down	but	nonetheless	walked	on,	into	the
bright	rays	of	the	sun,	until	I	came	to	the	Métro	station	where	I	had	to	
wait
endlessly,	as	it	seemed	to	me,	in	the	brooding	darkness	of	the	tunnel	for	the	next
train	to	come	in.	The	carriage	in	which	I	traveled	towards	the	Bastille,	said
Austerlitz,	was	not	very	full.	Later	I	remembered	a	Gypsy	playing	the	accordion,
and	a	very	dark	Indochinese	woman	with	an	alarmingly	thin	face	and	eyes	sunk
deep	in	their	sockets.	Of	the	few	other	passengers,	I	could	recollect	only	that
they	were	all	looking	out	of	the	side	windows	of	the	train	into	the	darkness,
where	there	was	nothing	to	be	seen	but	a	pallid	reflection	of	the	carriage	where
they	sat.	Gradually	I	also	came	to	remember	suddenly	feeling	unwell	during	the
journey,	with	a	phantom	pain	spreading	through	my	chest,	and	thinking	I	was
about	to	die	of	the	weak	heart	I	have	inherited,	from	whom	I	do	not	know.	I	did
not	return	to	my	senses	until	I	was	in	the	Salpêtrière,	to	which	I	had	been	taken
and	where	I	was	now	lying	in	one	of	the	men’s	wards,	containing	perhaps	forty
patients	or	more,	somewhere	in	that	gigantic	complex	of	buildings	where	the
borders	between	hospital	and	penitentiary	have	always	been	blurred,	and	which
seems	to	have	grown	and	spread	of	its	own	volition	over	the	centuries	until	it
now	forms	a	universe	of	its	own	between	the	Jardin	des	Plantes	and	the	gare
d’Austerlitz.	I	lay	there	in	my	semi-conscious	condition	for	several	days,	and	in
that	state	I	saw	myself	wandering	around	a	maze	of	long	passages,	vaults,
galleries	and	grottoes	where	the	names	of	various	Métro	stations—Campo
Formio,	Crimée,	Elysée,	Iéna,	Invalides,	Oberkampf,	Simplon,	Solferino,
Stalingrad—and	certain	discolorations	and	shadings	in	the	air	seemed	to	indicate
that	this	was	a	place	of	exile	for	those	who	had	fallen	on	the	field	of	honor,	or
lost	their	lives	in	some	other	violent	way.	I	saw	
armies	of	these	unredeemed
souls	thronging	over	bridges	to	the	opposite	bank,	or	coming	towards	me	down
the	tunnels,	their	eyes	fixed,	cold,	and	dead.	Sometimes	they	manifested
themselves	in	one	of	the	dark	catacombs	where,	covered	in	frayed	and	dusty
plumage,	they	were	crouching	on	the	stony	floor	and,	turning	silently	towards
one	another,	made	digging	motions	with	their	earth-stained	hands.	And	when	at
last	I	began	to	improve,	said	Austerlitz,	I	also	recollected	how	once,	while	my
mind	was	still	quite	submerged,	I	had	seen	myself	standing,	filled	with	a	painful
sense	that	something	within	me	was	trying	to	surface	from	oblivion,	in	front	of	a
poster	painted	in	bold	brushstrokes	which	was	pasted	to	the	tunnel	wall	and
showed	a	happy	family	on	a	winter	holiday	in	Chamonix.	The	peaks	of	the
mountains	towered	snow-white	in	the	background,	with	a	wonderful	blue	sky
above	them,	the	straight	upper	edge	of	which	did	not	entirely	hide	a	yellowed
notice	issued	by	the	Paris	city	council	in	July	1943.	Who	knows,	said	Austerlitz,
what	would	have	become	of	me	there	in	the	Salpêtrière—when	I	could
remember	nothing	about	myself,	or	my	own	previous	history,	or	anything	else
whatsoever,	and	as	I	was	told	later	I	kept	babbling	disconnectedly	in	various
languages—who	knows	what	would	have	become	of	me	had	it	not	been	for	one
of	the	nursing	staff,	a	man	with	fiery	red	hair	and	flickering	eyes	called	Quentin
Quignard,	who	looked	in	my	notebook	and	under	the	barely	legible	initials	
M.	de
V
.	found	the	address	
7,	place	des	Vosges
,	written	by	Marie	in	a	blank	space
among	my	notes	after	our	first	conversation	at	the	café	in	the	arcades	of	the
Palais-Royal?	When	they	had	fetched	her,	said	Austerlitz,	she	sat	beside	my	bed
for	hours	and	days	on	end,	talking	
calmly	to	me,	whilst	at	first	I	remained	quite
unaware	of	who	she	was,	even	though	I	felt	a	deep	longing	for	her,	particularly
when	I	sank	into	the	weariness	that	weighed	so	heavily	on	me	and	tried,	in	a	last
stirring	of	consciousness,	to	bring	my	hand	out	from	under	the	blankets,	as	a	sign
of	both	farewell	and	the	hope	that	she	would	soon	return.	On	one	of	her	regular
visits	to	my	sickbed	in	the	Salpêtrière,	Marie	brought	me	a	book	from	her
grandfather’s	library,	published	in	Dijon	in	1755,	a	little	medical	work	
pour
toutes	sortes	de	maladies,	internes	et	externes,	invétérées	et	difficiles	à	guérir
,	as
the	title	page	said,	a	beautiful	specimen	of	the	art	of	printing,	in	the	preface	to
which	the	printer	himself,	one	Jean	Ressayre,	reminds	the	pious	and	charitable
ladies	of	the	upper	classes	that	they	had	been	chosen	as	instruments	of	divine
mercy	by	the	highest	authority	governing	our	fate,	and	that	if	they	turned	their
hearts	to	the	abandoned	and	afflicted	in	their	misery,	it	would	draw	upon
themselves	and	their	families	the	heavenly	rewards	of	grace,	prosperity,	and
happiness.	I	read	every	line	of	this	delightful	foreword	several	times,	said
Austerlitz,	and	studied	the	prescriptions	for	making	aromatic	oils,	powders,
essences,	and	infusions	to	soothe	overwrought	nerves,	cleanse	the	blood	from
secretions	of	black	bile	and	dispel	melancholy	by	means	of	such	ingredients	as
pale	and	dark	rose	leaves,	March	violets,	peach	blossom,	saffron,	melissa,	and
eyebright,	and	indeed	by	immersing	myself	in	the	better	world	of	this	little	book,
whole	passages	of	which	I	still	know	by	heart,	said	Austerlitz,	I	regained	my	lost
sense	of	myself	and	my	memory,	gradually	mastering	the	crippling	physical
weakness	which	had	overcome	me	after	my	visit	to	the	veterinary	museum,	so
that	I	could	soon	walk	on	Marie’s	arm	
down	the	long	corridors	of	the
Salpêtrière,	through	the	diffuse,	dusty	gray	light	which	pervades	everything	in
that	institution.	After	I	had	been	discharged	from	the	fortress-like	hospital,
which	covers	a	site	of	thirty	hectares	and,	with	its	four	thousand	patients,
represents	at	any	given	time	almost	the	entire	range	of	disorders	from	which
humanity	can	suffer,	so	Austerlitz	continued,	we	resumed	our	walks	in	the	city.
Among	the	images	I	have	retained	in	my	memory	from	these	excursions	is	one
of	a	little	girl	with	a	rebellious	mop	of	hair	and	green	eyes	the	color	of	iced
water	who	stumbled	over	the	hem	of	her	raincoat,	which	was	much	too	long	for
her,	as	she	was	playing	with	her	skipping	rope	in	one	of	the	lime-white	squares
in	the	Luxembourg	Gardens	and	grazed	her	right	knee,	a	scene	regarded	by
Marie	as	a	
déjà	vu
	because,	she	said,	over	twenty	years	ago	just	the	same
accident	had	happened	to	her	at	exactly	the	same	place,	an	incident	which	at	the
time	seemed	to	her	shameful	and	aroused	in	her	the	first	premonitions	of	death.
Not	long	afterwards,	one	Saturday	afternoon	when	a	cold	mist	hung	low	in	the
air,	we	wandered	through	the	half-deserted	area	between	the	tracks	of	the	gare
d’Austerlitz	and	the	quai	d’Austerlitz	on	the	left	bank	of	the	Seine,	slowly
finding	our	way	among	abandoned	dockyards,	boarded-up	warehouses,	goods
depots,	customs	halls,	and	a	few	garages	and	car	repair	shops.	In	one	of	the
empty	spaces	not	far	from	the	station	itself,	the	Bastiani	Traveling	Circus	had
erected	its	small	tent,	much	mended	and	wreathed	in	strings	of	orange	electric
lights.	By	tacit	agreement,	we	entered	just	as	the	performance	was	coming	to	a
close.	A	few	dozen	women	and	children	were	seated	on	low	stools	round	the
ring—not	that	it	was	really	a	ring,	said	Austerlitz,	
rather	it	was	a	vague	sort	of
rondelle	on	which	a	few	shovelfuls	of	sawdust	had	been	thrown,	so	hemmed	in
by	the	front	row	of	spectators	that	even	a	pony	could	hardly	have	trotted	round	it
in	a	circle.	We	were	just	in	time	for	the	last	number,	featuring	a	conjuror	in	a
dark	blue	cloak	who	produced	from	his	top	hat	a	bantam	cockerel	with
wonderfully	colored	plumage,	not	much	bigger	than	a	magpie	or	a	raven.	This
brightly	hued	bird,	obviously	completely	tame,	went	over	a	kind	of	miniature
show-jumping	course	consisting	of	all	manner	of	little	steps,	ladders,	and	other
obstacles	which	he	had	to	negotiate,	gave	the	right	answer	to	sums	such	as	two
times	three	or	four	minus	one	by	clattering	his	beak	when	the	conjurer	showed
him	cards	with	the	figures	written	on	them,	at	a	whispered	command	lay	down
on	the	ground	to	fall	asleep,	resting	in	a	curious	position	on	his	side	with	his
wings	outspread,	and	finally	disappeared	into	the	top	hat	again.	After	the
conjuror’s	exit	the	lights	slowly	dimmed,	and	when	our	eyes	were	used	to	the
darkness	we	saw	a	quantity	of	stars	traced	in	luminous	paint	inside	the	top	of	the
tent,	giving	the	impression	that	we	were	really	out	of	doors.	We	were	still
looking	up	with	a	certain	sense	of	awe	at	this	artificial	firmament	which,	as	I
recollect,	said	Austerlitz,	was	almost	close	enough	for	us	to	touch	its	lower	rim,
when	the	whole	circus	troupe	came	in	one	by	one,	the	conjuror	and	his	wife,
who	was	very	beautiful,	with	their	equally	beautiful,	black-haired	children,	the
last	of	them	carrying	a	lantern	and	accompanied	by	a	snow-white	goose.	Each	of
these	artistes	had	a	musical	instrument.	If	I	remember	correctly,	said	Austerlitz,
they	played	a	transverse	flute,	a	rather	battered	tuba,	a	drum,	a	bandoneon,	and	a
fiddle,	and	they	all	
wore	Oriental	clothing	with	long,	fur-edged	cloaks,	while	the
men	had	pale	green	turbans	on	their	heads.	At	a	signal	between	themselves	they
began	playing	in	a	restrained	yet	penetrating	manner	which,	although	or	perhaps
because	I	have	been	left	almost	untouched	by	any	kind	of	music	all	my	life,
affected	me	profoundly	from	the	very	first	bar.	I	cannot	say	what	it	was	that	the
five	circus	performers	played	that	Saturday	afternoon	in	the	circus	tent	beyond
the	gare	d’Austerlitz	for	their	tiny	audience,	drawn	from	heaven	knows	where,
said	Austerlitz,	but	it	seemed	to	me,	he	added,	as	if	the	music	came	from
somewhere	very	distant,	from	the	East,	I	thought,	from	the	Caucasus	or	Turkey.
Nor	can	I	say	what	was	suggested	to	my	mind	by	the	sounds	produced	by	the
players,	none	of	whom,	I	am	sure,	could	read	musical	notation.	Sometimes	I
seemed	to	hear	a	long-forgotten	Welsh	hymn	in	their	melodies,	or	then	again,
very	softly	yet	making	the	senses	swirl,	the	revolutions	of	a	waltz,	a	ländler
theme,	or	the	slow	sound	of	a	funeral	march,	which	put	me	in	mind	of	the
curiously	halting	progress	of	a	uniformed	guard	of	honor	escorting	a	body	to	its
last	resting	place,	and	of	how,	in	their	ceremonious	manner,	they	pause	every
time	before	taking	the	next	step,	with	one	foot	suspended	an	inch	above	the
ground	for	the	briefest	of	moments.	I	still	do	not	understand,	said	Austerlitz,
what	was	happening	within	me	as	I	listened	to	this	extraordinarily	foreign
nocturnal	music	conjured	out	of	thin	air,	so	to	speak,	by	the	circus	performers
with	their	slightly	out-of-tune	instruments,	nor	could	I	have	said	at	the	time
whether	my	heart	was	contracting	in	pain	or	expanding	with	happiness	for	the
first	time	in	my	life.	Why	certain	tonal	colors,	subtleties	of	key,	and
syncopations	can	take	such	
a	hold	on	the	mind	is	something	that	an	entirely
unmusical	person	like	myself	can	never	understand,	said	Austerlitz,	but	today,
looking	back,	it	seems	to	me	as	if	the	mystery	which	touched	me	at	the	time	was
summed	up	in	the	image	of	the	snow-white	goose	standing	motionless	and
steadfast	among	the	musicians	as	long	as	they	played.	Neck	craning	forward
slightly,	pale	eyelids	slightly	lowered,	it	listened	there	in	the	tent	beneath	that
shimmering	firmament	of	painted	stars	until	the	last	notes	had	died	away,	as	if	it
knew	its	own	future	and	the	fate	of	its	present	companions.—As	I	might	perhaps
be	aware,	said	Austerlitz	taking	up	his	tale	again	at	our	next	meeting	at	the
Brasserie	Le	Havane,	the	new	Bibliothèque	Nationale	bearing	the	name	of	the
French	President	now	stands	on	what	over	the	years	had	become	the	increasingly
dilapidated	area	on	the	left	bank	of	the	Seine	where	he	and	Marie	de	Verneuil
had	once	attended	that	unforgettable	circus	performance.	The	old	library	in	the
rue	Richelieu	has	been	closed,	as	I	saw	for	myself	not	long	ago,	said	Austerlitz,
the	domed	hall	with	its	green	porcelain	lampshades	which	cast	such	a	soothing,
pleasant	light	is	deserted,	the	books	have	been	taken	off	the	shelves,	and	the
readers,	who	once	sat	at	the	desks	numbered	with	little	enamel	plates,	in	close
contact	with	their	neighbors	and	silent	harmony	with	those	who	had	gone	before
them,	might	have	vanished	from	the	face	of	the	earth.	I	do	not	think,	said
Austerlitz,	that	many	of	the	old	readers	go	out	to	the	new	library	on	the	quai
François	Mauriac.	In	order	to	reach	the	Grande	Bibliothèque	you	have	to	travel
through	a	desolate	no-man’s-land	in	one	of	those	robot-driven	Métro	trains
steered	by	a	ghostly	voice,	or	alternatively	you	have	to	catch	a	bus	in	the	place
Valhubert	and	
then	walk	along	the	wind-swept	riverbank	towards	the	hideous,
outsize	building,	the	monumental	dimensions	of	which	were	evidently	inspired
by	the	late	President’s	wish	to	perpetuate	his	memory	whilst,	perhaps	because	it
had	to	serve	this	purpose,	it	was	so	conceived	that	it	is,	as	I	realized	on	my	first
visit,	said	Austerlitz,	both	in	its	outer	appearance	and	inner	constitution
unwelcoming	if	not	inimical	to	human	beings,	and	runs	counter,	on	principle,
one	might	say,	to	the	requirements	of	any	true	reader.
	
	
If	you	approach	the	new	Bibliothèque	Nationale	from	the	place	Valhubert	you
find	yourself	at	the	foot	of	a	flight	of	steps	which,	made	out	of	countless	grooved
hardwood	boards	and	measuring	three	hundred	by	a	hundred	and	fifty	meters,
surrounds	the	entire	complex	on	the	two	sides	facing	the	street	like	the	lower
story	of	a	ziggurat.	Once	you	have	climbed	
the	steps,	at	least	four	dozen	in
number	and	as	closely	set	as	they	are	steep,	a	venture	not	entirely	without	its
dangers	even	for	younger	visitors,	said	Austerlitz,	you	are	standing	on	an
esplanade	which	positively	overwhelms	the	eye,	built	of	the	same	grooved	wood
as	the	steps,	and	extending	over	an	area	about	the	size	of	nine	football	pitches
between	the	four	corner	towers	of	the	library	which	thrust	their	way	twenty-two
floors	up	into	the	air.	You	might	think,	especially	on	days	when	the	wind	drives
rain	over	this	totally	exposed	platform,	as	it	quite	often	does,	said	Austerlitz,	that
by	some	mistake	you	had	found	your	way	to	the	deck	of	the	
Berengaria
	or	one
of	the	other	oceangoing	giants,	and	you	would	be	not	in	the	least	surprised	if,	to
the	sound	of	a	wailing	foghorn,	the	horizon	of	the	city	of	Paris	suddenly	began
rising	and	falling	against	the	gauge	of	the	towers	as	
the	great	steamer	pounded
onwards	through	mountainous	waves,	or	if	one	of	the	tiny	figures,	having
unwisely	ventured	on	deck,	were	swept	over	the	rail	by	a	gust	of	wind	and
carried	far	out	into	the	wastes	of	the	Atlantic	waters.	The	four	glazed	towers
themselves,	named	in	a	manner	reminiscent	of	a	futuristic	novel	
La	tour	des	lois,
La	tour	des	temps,	La	tour	des	nombres
	and	
La	tour	des	lettres
,	make	a
positively	Babylonian	impression	on	anyone	who	looks	up	at	their	façades	and
wonders	about	the	still	largely	empty	space	behind	their	closed	blinds.	When	I
first	stood	on	the	promenade	deck	of	the	new	Bibliothèque	Nationale,	said
Austerlitz,	it	took	me	a	little	while	to	find	the	place	where	the	visitor	is	carried
down	on	a	conveyor	belt	to	what	appears	to	be	a	basement	storey	but,	in	reality,
is	the	ground	floor.	This	downwards	journey,	when	you	have	just	laboriously
ascended	to	the	plateau,	struck	me	as	an	utter	absurdity,	something	that	must
have	been	devised—I	can	think	of	no	other	explanation,	said	Austerlitz—on
purpose	to	instil	a	sense	of	insecurity	and	humiliation	in	the	poor	readers,
especially	as	it	ends	in	front	of	a	sliding	door	of	makeshift	appearance	which	had
a	chain	across	it	on	the	day	of	my	first	visit,	and	where	you	have	to	let	yourself
be	searched	by	semi-uniformed	security	men.	The	floor	of	the	large	hall	which
you	then	enter	is	laid	with	rust-red	carpet,	on	which	a	few	low	seats	are	placed
far	apart,	backless	upholstered	benches	and	small	chairs	like	folding	stools
where	visitors	to	the	library	can	perch	only	in	such	a	way	that	their	knees	are
almost	level	with	their	heads,	so	that	my	first	thought	at	the	sight	of	them,	said
Austerlitz,	was	that	the	people	whom	I	saw	crouching	so	close	to	the	ground,
some	
by	themselves	and	some	in	small	groups,	were	members	of	a	wandering
tribe	encamped	here	on	their	way	through	the	Sahara	or	the	Sinai	desert	in	the
last	glow	of	the	setting	sun,	in	order	to	await	the	coming	of	darkness.
	
	
And	of	course,	Austerlitz	continued,	you	cannot	leave	the	red	Sinai	hall	for	the
inner	citadel	of	the	library	without	more	ado;	first	you	have	to	put	your	request
at	an	information	point	staffed	by	half	a	dozen	ladies,	whereupon,	if	this	request
to	any	degree	exceeds	the	very	simplest	contingency,	you	take	a	number,	like	a
visitor	to	a	tax	office;	you	then	have	to	wait,	often	for	half	an	hour	or	more,	until
another	member	of	staff	calls	you	into	a	separate	cubicle,	as	if	you	were	on
business	of	an	extremely	dubious	nature,	or	at	least	had	to	be	dealt	with	away
from	the	public	gaze,	and	here	you	must	say	again	what	it	is	you	have	come	for
and	receive	the	relevant	instructions.	Despite	such	measures	of	control	I	finally
succeeded,	said	Austerlitz,	in	gaining	admission	to	the	newly	opened	
Haut-de-
jardin
	public	reading	room,	where	I	subsequently	sat	for	many	hours	and	days
on	end,	looking	out	abstractedly,	as	my	habit	now	is,	at	the	inner	courtyard	and
the	curious	nature	reserve	cut,	so	to	speak,	from	the	surface	of	the	promenade
deck	and	sunk	two	or	three	stories	deep,	which	has	been	planted	with	about	a
hundred	full-grown	stone	pines	from	the	Forêt	de	Bord	transported,	how	I	do	not
know,	to	this	place	of	banishment.	If	one	looks	down	from	the	deck	at	the
spreading	gray-green	crowns	of	the	trees,	some	of	which	perhaps	are	still
thinking	of	their	home	in	Normandy,	it	is	like	looking	across	an	uneven	expanse
of	moorland,	while	from	the	reading	room	you	can	see	only	the	blotched	red
trunks	which,	although	
fixed	in	place	with	steel	hawsers	rising	at	an	oblique
angle,	sway	slightly	back	and	forth	on	stormy	days	like	waterweed	in	an
aquarium.	In	the	daydreams	into	which	I	fell	in	the	reading	room,	said	Austerlitz,
I	sometimes	felt	as	if	I	saw	circus	acrobats	climbing	the	cables	slanting	up	from
the	ground	to	the	evergreen	canopy,	placing	one	foot	in	front	of	the	other	as	they
made	their	way	upwards	with	the	ends	of	their	balancing	poles	quivering,	or	as
if,	always	on	the	edge	of	invisibility,	I	saw	dodging	now	here,	now	there,	those
two	mythical	squirrels	said	to	have	been	brought	to	the	library	in	the	hope	that
they	will	increase	and	multiply,	founding	a	large	colony	of	their	species	in	this
artificial	pine	grove	to	entertain	any	readers	who	look	up	from	their	books	now
and	then.	And	several	times,	said	Austerlitz,	birds	which	had	lost	their	way	in
the	library	forest	flew	into	the	mirror	images	of	the	trees	in	the	reading	room
windows,	struck	the	glass	with	a	dull	thud,	and	fell	lifeless	to	the	ground.	Sitting
at	my	place	in	the	reading	room,	said	Austerlitz,	I	thought	at	length	about	the
way	in	which	such	unforeseen	accidents,	the	fall	of	a	single	creature	to	its	death
when	diverted	from	its	natural	path,	or	the	recurrent	symptoms	of	paralysis
affecting	the	electronic	data	retrieval	system,	relate	to	the	Cartesian	overall	plan
of	the	Bibliothèque	Nationale,	and	I	came	to	the	conclusion	that	in	any	project
we	design	and	develop,	the	size	and	degree	of	complexity	of	the	information	and
control	systems	inscribed	in	it	are	the	crucial	factors,	so	that	the	all-embracing
and	absolute	perfection	of	the	concept	can	in	practice	coincide,	indeed	ultimately
must	coincide,	with	its	chronic	dysfunction	and	constitutional	instability.	At	any
rate,	as	far	as	I	
myself	was	concerned,	a	man	who,	after	all,	had	devoted	almost
the	whole	of	his	life	to	the	study	of	books	and	who	had	been	equally	at	home	in
the	Bodleian,	the	British	Museum,	and	the	rue	Richelieu,	I	for	my	part,	said
Austerlitz,	found	that	this	gigantic	new	library,	which	according	to	one	of	the
loathsome	phrases	now	current	is	supposed	to	serve	as	the	treasure	house	of	our
entire	literary	heritage,	proved	useless	in	my	search	for	any	traces	of	my	father
who	had	disappeared	from	Paris	more	than	fifty	years	ago.	Confronted	day	after
day	by	a	system	which	appeared	to	consist	entirely	of	obstructions	and	was
placing	an	increasing	strain	on	my	nerves,	I	set	aside	my	researches	for	a	while
and	one	morning,	when	for	some	reason	or	other	the	fifty-five	carmine-red
volumes	in	Vera’s	bookcase	came	into	my	mind,	I	instead	began	reading	the
novels	of	Balzac,	hitherto	unknown	to	me,	starting	with	the	story	of	Colonel
Chabert,	a	man	whose	glorious	career	in	the	service	of	the	Emperor	ends
abruptly	on	the	battlefield	of	Eylau,	when	he	receives	a	saber	blow	and	sinks
unconscious	to	the	ground.	Years	later,	after	long	wanderings	across	Germany,
the	colonel,	risen	from	the	dead,	so	to	speak,	returns	to	Paris	to	claim	his	rights
to	his	estates,	to	his	wife	the	Comtesse	Ferraud	who	has	now	remarried,	and	to
his	own	name.	He	is	presented	as	a	ghostly	figure,	said	Austerlitz,	standing	in
the	lawyer	Derville’s	office,	a	gaunt	and	desiccated	old	soldier,	as	we	are	told	at
this	point.	His	eyes	appear	half-blind,	veiled	as	they	are	by	a	mother-of-pearl
gleam,	flickering	unsteadily	like	candle	flames.	His	face	is	pale,	its	lines	sharp	as
a	knife	edge.	Around	his	neck	he	wears	a	shabby	cravat	of	black	silk.	
Je	suis	le
Colonel	Chabert,	celui	qui	est	mort	à	Eylau
	are	
the	words	with	which	he
introduces	himself,	and	then	he	tells	the	tale	of	the	mass	grave	(a	
fosse	des
morts
,	as	Balzac	describes	it,	said	Austerlitz),	into	which	he	was	thrown	the	day
after	the	battle	along	with	the	rest	of	the	fallen,	and	where	he	finally	came	to
himself,	as	he	says,	in	excruciating	pain.	
J’entendis,	ou	crus	entendre
,	Austerlitz
quoted	from	memory,	looking	out	of	the	brasserie	window	at	the	boulevard
Auguste	Blanqui,	
des	gémissements	poussés	par	le	monde	des	cadavres	au
milieu	duquel	je	gisais.	Et	quoique	la	mémoire	de	ces	moments	soit	bien
ténébreuse,	quoique	mes	souvenirs	soient	bien	confus,	malgré	les	impressions	de
souffrances	encore	plus	profondes	que	je	devais	éprouver	et	qui	ont	brouillé	mes
idées,	il	y	a	des	nuits	où	je	crois	encore	entendre	ces	soupirs	étouffés
.	Only	a
few	days	after	reading	this	book,	the	more	melodramatic	aspects	of	which,
Austerlitz	continued,	reinforced	the	suspicion	I	had	always	entertained	that	the
border	between	life	and	death	is	less	impermeable	than	we	commonly	think,	I
was	in	the	reading	room	again	and,	on	opening	an	American	architectural	journal
—this	was	at	exactly	six	in	the	evening—I	came	upon	a	large-format	photograph
showing	the	room	filled	with	open	shelves	up	to	the	ceiling	where	the	files	on
the	prisoners	in	the	little	fortress	of	Terezín,	as	it	is	called,	are	kept	today.	I
remembered,	said	Austerlitz,	that	at	the	time	of	my	first	visit	to	the	Bohemian
ghetto	I	could	not	bring	myself	to	enter	the	outworks	on	the	glacis	to	the	south	of
the	star-shaped	town,	and	perhaps	that	was	why,	at	the	sight	of	the	records	room,
a	kind	of	
idée	fixe
	forced	itself	upon	me	that,	all	along,	my	true	place	of	work
should	have	been	there	in	the	little	fortress	of	Terezín,	where	so	many	had
perished	in	the	cold,	damp	casemates,	and	it	was	my	own	fault	
that	I	had	not
taken	it	up.
	
	
As	I	was	tormenting	myself	with	such	thoughts,	distinctly	aware,	so	Austerlitz
continued,	that	my	face	was	being	marked	by	the	signs	of	that	anguish	which	so
often	assails	me,	I	was	approached	by	one	of	the	library	staff	called	Henri
Lemoine,	who	had	recognized	me	from	those	early	years	of	mine	in	Paris	when	I
went	daily	to	the	rue	Richelieu.	Jacques	Austerlitz,	inquired	Lemoine,	stopping
by	my	desk	and	leaning	slightly	down	to	me,	and	so,	said	Austerlitz,	we	began	a
long,	whispered	conversation	in	the	
Haut-de-jardin
	reading	room,	which	was
gradually	emptying	now,	about	the	dissolution,	in	line	with	the	inexorable	spread
of	processed	data,	of	our	capacity	to	remember,	and	about	the	collapse,
l’effondrement
,	as	Lemoine	put	it,	of	the	Bibliothèque	Nationale	which	is
already	under	way.	The	new	library	building,	which	in	both	its	entire	layout	and
its	near-ludicrous	internal	regulation	seeks	to	exclude	the	reader	as	a	potential
enemy,	might	be	described,	so	Lemoine	thought,	said	Austerlitz,	as	the	official
manifestation	of	the	increasingly	importunate	urge	to	break	with	everything
which	still	has	some	living	connection	to	the	past.	At	a	certain	point	in	our
conversation,	said	Austerlitz,	and	in	response	to	a	casual	request	of	mine,
Lemoine	took	me	up	to	the	eighteenth	floor	of	the	southeast	tower,	where	one
can	look	down	from	the	so-called	belvedere	at	the	entire	urban	agglomeration
which	has	risen	over	the	millennia	from	the	land	beneath	its	foundations,	which
is	now	entirely	hollowed	out:	a	pale	limestone	range,	a	kind	of	excrescence
extending	the	concentric	spread	of	its	incrustations	far	beyond	the	boulevards
Davout,	Soult,	Poniatowski,	Masséna,	and	Kellermann,	and	on	into	the
outermost	periphery	beyond	the	suburbs,	
which	now	lay	in	the	haze	of	twilight.
A	few	miles	to	the	southeast	there	was	a	faint	green	mark	in	the	even	gray,	with
a	kind	of	blunt	cone	rising	from	it	which	Lemoine	identified	as	the	monkeys’	hill
in	the	Bois	de	Vincennes.	Closer	to	hand,	we	saw	the	convoluted	traffic	routes
on	which	trains	and	cars	crawled	back	and	forth	like	black	beetles	and
caterpillars.	It	was	strange,	said	Lemoine,	but	up	here	he	always	had	the
impression	that	life	moved	silently	and	slowly	down	below,	that	the	body	of	the
city	had	been	infected	by	an	obscure	disease	spreading	underground,	and	I
remembered,	said	Austerlitz,	when	Lemoine	made	this	remark,	the	winter
months	of	the	year	1959	during	which	I	was	studying	the	six-volume	work
pointing	me	the	way	in	my	own	research,	on	
Paris,	ses	organes,	ses	fonctions	et
sa	vie	dans	la	seconde	moitié	du	XIXème	siècle
,	which	Maxime	du	Camp,	who
had	previously	traveled	the	deserts	of	the	Orient	that	are	formed,	as	he	said,	from
the	dust	of	the	dead,	began	to	write	around	1890,	after	he	was	inspired	by	an
overwhelming	vision	on	the	pont	Neuf,	and	which	he	finished	only	seven	years
later.	From	the	other	side	of	the	belvedere	story,	said	Austerlitz,	you	looked
north	over	the	transverse	ribbon	of	the	Seine,	the	Marais	quarter,	and	the
Bastille.	An	inky	wall	of	stormclouds	was	building	up	above	the	city	as	it	sank
into	shadow,	and	soon	no	more	could	be	distinguished	of	its	towers,	palaces,	and
monuments	than	the	spectral	white	dome	of	the	Sacré-Coeur.	We	were	standing
only	a	foot	behind	the	glass	panels	which	reach	all	the	way	to	the	ground.	As
soon	as	you	looked	down	at	the	light-colored	promenade	deck	and	the	darker
crowns	of	the	trees	emerging	from	it,	the	pull	exerted	by	the	abyss	below	took
hold	of	you,	forcing	you	to	step	
back.	Sometimes,	so	Lemoine	told	me,	said
Austerlitz,	he	felt	the	current	of	time	streaming	round	his	temples	and	brow
when	he	was	up	here,	but	perhaps,	he	added,	that	is	only	a	reflex	of	the
awareness	formed	in	my	mind	over	the	years	of	the	various	layers	which	have
been	superimposed	on	each	other	to	form	the	carapace	of	the	city.	Thus,	on	the
waste	land	between	the	marshaling	yard	of	the	gare	d’Austerlitz	and	the	pont	de
Tolbiac	where	this	Babylonian	library	now	rises,	there	stood	until	the	end	of	the
war	an	extensive	warehousing	complex	to	which	the	Germans	brought	all	the
loot	they	had	taken	from	the	homes	of	the	Jews	of	Paris.	I	believe	they	cleared
some	forty	thousand	apartments	at	that	time,	said	Lemoine,	in	an	operation
lasting	months,	for	which	purpose	they	requisitioned	the	entire	pantechnicon
fleet	of	the	Paris	Union	of	Furniture	Removers,	and	an	army	of	no	fewer	than
fifteen	hundred	removal	men	was	brought	into	action.	All	who	had	taken	part	in
any	way	in	this	highly	organized	program	of	expropriation	and	reutilization,	said
Lemoine,	the	people	in	charge	of	it,	the	sometimes	rival	staffs	of	the	occupying
power	and	the	financial	and	fiscal	authorities,	the	residents’	and	property
registries,	the	banks	and	insurance	agencies,	the	police,	the	transport	firms,	the
landlords	and	caretakers	of	the	apartment	buildings,	must	undoubtedly	have
known	that	scarcely	any	of	those	interned	in	Drancy	would	ever	come	back.	For
the	most	part	the	valuables,	the	bank	deposits,	the	shares	and	the	houses	and
business	premises	ruthlessly	seized	at	the	time,	said	Lemoine,	remain	in	the
hands	of	the	city	and	the	state	to	this	day.	In	the	years	from	1942	onwards
everything	our	civilization	has	produced,	whether	for	the	embellishment	of	life
or	merely	for	everyday	
use,	from	Louis	XVI	chests	of	drawers,	Meissen
porcelain,	Persian	rugs	and	whole	libraries,	down	to	the	last	saltcellar	and	pepper
mill,	was	stacked	there	in	the	Austerlitz-Tolbiac	storage	depot.	A	man	who	had
worked	in	it	told	me	not	long	ago,	said	Lemoine,	that	there	were	even	special
cardboard	cartons	set	aside	to	hold	the	rosin	removed,	for	the	sake	of	greater
cleanliness,	from	confiscated	violin	cases.	Over	five	hundred	art	historians,
antique	dealers,	restorers,	joiners,	clockmakers,	furriers,	and	couturiers	brought
in	from	Drancy	and	guarded	by	a	contingent	of	Indochinese	soldiers	were
employed	day	after	day,	in	fourteen-hour	shifts,	to	put	the	goods	coming	into	the
depot	in	proper	order	and	sort	them	by	value	and	kind—silver	cutlery	with	silver
cutlery,	cooking	pans	with	cooking	pans,	toys	with	toys,	and	so	forth.	More	than
seven	hundred	train	loads	left	from	here	for	the	ruined	cities	of	the	Reich.	Not
infrequently,	said	Lemoine,	Party	grandees	on	visits	from	Germany	and	high-
ranking	SS	and	Wehrmacht	officers	stationed	in	Paris	would	walk	around	the
halls	of	the	depot,	known	to	the	prisoners	as	Les	Galéries	d’Austerlitz,	with	their
wives	or	other	ladies,	choosing	drawing	room	furniture	for	a	Grunewald	villa,	or
a	Sèvres	dinner	service,	a	fur	coat	or	a	Pleyel	piano.	The	most	valuable	items,	of
course,	were	not	sent	off	wholesale	to	the	bombed	cities,	and	no	one	will	now
admit	to	knowing	where	they	went,	for	the	fact	is	that	the	whole	affair	is	buried
in	the	most	literal	sense	beneath	the	foundations	of	our	pharaonic	President’s
Grande	Bibliothèque,	said	Lemoine.	The	last	of	the	light	faded	away	down	on
the	empty	promenades.	The	treetops	of	the	pine	grove,	which	from	this	high
vantage	point	had	resembled	moss-covered	ground,	now	formed	
a	regular	black
rectangle.	For	a	while,	said	Austerlitz,	we	stood	together	in	silence	on	the	library
belvedere,	looking	out	over	the	city	where	it	lay	now	sparkling	in	the	light	of	its
lamps.
When	I	met	Austerlitz	again	for	morning	coffee	on	the	boulevard	Auguste
Blanqui,	shortly	before	I	left	Paris,	he	told	me	that	the	previous	day	he	had
heard,	from	one	of	the	staff	at	the	records	center	in	the	rue	Geoffroy-l’Asnier,
that	Maximilian	Aychenwald	had	been	interned	during	the	latter	part	of	1942	in
the	camp	at	Gurs,	a	place	in	the	Pyrenean	foothills	which	he,	Austerlitz,	must
now	seek	out.	Curiously	enough,	said	Austerlitz,	a	few	hours	after	our	last
meeting,	when	he	had	come	back	from	the	Bibliothèque	
Nationale	and	changed
trains	at	the	gare	d’Austerlitz,	he	had	felt	a	premonition	that	he	was	coming
closer	to	his	father.
	
	
As	I	might	know,	he	said,	part	of	the	railway	network	had	been	paralyzed	by	a
strike	last	Wednesday,	and	in	the	unusual	silence	which,	as	a	consequence,	had
descended	on	the	gare	d’Austerlitz,	an	idea	came	to	him	of	his	father’s	leaving
Paris	from	this	station,	close	as	it	was	to	his	flat	in	the	rue	Barrault,	soon	after
the	Germans	entered	the	city.	I	imagined,	said	Austerlitz,	that	I	saw	him	leaning
out	of	the	window	of	his	compartment	as	the	train	left,	and	I	saw	the	white
clouds	of	smoke	rising	from	the	locomotive	as	it	began	to	move	ponderously
away.	After	that	I	wandered	round	the	deserted	station	half	dazed,	through	the
labyrinthine	underpasses,	
over	footbridges,	up	flights	of	steps	on	one	side	and
down	on	the	other.
That	station,	said	Austerlitz,	has	always	seemed	to	me	the	most	mysterious	of	all
the	railway	terminals	of	Paris.	I	spent	many	hours	in	it	during	my	student	days,
and	even	wrote	a	kind	of	memorandum	on	its	layout	and	history.	At	the	time	I
was	particularly	fascinated	by	the	way	the	Métro	trains	coming	from	the	Bastille,
having	crossed	the	Seine,	roll	over	the	iron	viaduct	into	the	station’s	upper	story,
quite	as	if	the	façade	were	swallowing	them	up.	And	I	also	remember	that	I	felt
an	uneasiness	induced	by	the	hall	behind	this	façade,	filled	with	a	feeble	light
and	almost	entirely	empty,	where,	on	a	platform	roughly	assembled	out	of	beams
and	boards,	there	stood	a	scaffolding	reminiscent	of	a	gallows	with	all	kinds	of
rusty	iron	hooks,	which	I	was	told	later	was	used	as	a	bicycle	store.	When	I	first
set	foot	on	this	platform	years	ago,	on	a	Sunday	afternoon	in	the	middle	of	the
vacation	period,	however,	there	was	not	a	bicycle	to	be	seen,	and	perhaps	for
that	reason,	or	perhaps	because	of	the	plucked	pigeon	feathers	lying	all	over	the
floorboards,	an	impression	forced	itself	upon	me	of	being	on	the	scene	of	some
unexpiated	crime.	What	is	more,	said	Austerlitz,	that	sinister	wooden	structure
still	exists.	Even	the	gray	pigeon	feathers	have	not	yet	blown	away.	And	there
are	dark	patches,	of	leaked	axle	grease,	perhaps,	or	carbolineum,	or	something
altogether	different,	one	can’t	tell.	Moreover,	I	was	disturbed	by	the	fact	that,	as
I	stood	on	the	scaffolding	that	Sunday	afternoon	looking	up	through	the	dim
light	at	the	ornate	ironwork	of	the	north	façade,	two	tiny	figures	which	I	had
noticed	only	after	some	time	were	moving	about	on	ropes,	carrying	out	repair
work,	like	black	spiders	in	their	web.—I	don’t	know,	said	Austerlitz,	what	all
this	means,	and	so	I	am	going	to	continue	
looking	for	my	father,	and	for	Marie
de	Verneuil	as	well.
	
	
It	was	nearly	twelve	o’clock	when	we	took	leave	of	each	other	outside	the
Glacière	Métro	station.	Years	ago,	Austerlitz	said	as	we	parted,	there	were	great
swamps	here	where	people	skated	in	winter,	just	as	they	did	outside	Bishopsgate
in	London,	and	then	he	gave	me	the	key	to	his	house	in	Alderney	Street.	I	could
stay	there	whenever	I	liked,	he	said,	and	study	the	black	and	white	photographs
which,	one	day,	would	be	all	that	was	left	of	his	life.	And	I	should	not	omit,	he
added,	to	ring	the	bell	at	the	gateway	in	the	brick	wall	adjoining	his	house,	for
behind	that	wall,	although	he	had	never	been	able	to	see	it	from	any	of	his
windows,	there	was	a	plot	where	lime	trees	and	lilacs	grew	and	in	which
members	of	the	Ashkenazi	community	had	been	buried	ever	since	the	eighteenth
century,	including	Rabbi	David	Tevele	Schiff	and	Rabbi	Samuel	Falk,	the	Baal
Shem	of	London.	He	had	discovered	the	cemetery,	from	which,	as	he	now
suspected,	the	moths	used	to	fly	into	his	house,	said	Austerlitz,	only	a	few	days
before	he	left	
London,	when	the	gate	in	the	wall	stood	open	for	the	first	time	in
all	the	years	he	had	lived	in	Alderney	Street.	Inside,	a	very	small,	almost	dwarf-
like	woman	of	perhaps	seventy	years	old—the	cemetery	caretaker,	as	it	turned
out—was	walking	along	the	paths	between	the	graves	in	her	slippers.
	
Beside	her,	almost	as	tall	as	she	was,	walked	a	Belgian	sheepdog	now	gray	with
age	who	answered	to	the	name	of	Billie	and	was	very	timid.	In	the	bright	spring
light	shining	through	the	newly	opened	leaves	of	the	lime	trees	you	might	have
thought,	Austerlitz	told	me,	that	you	had	entered	a	fairy	tale	which,	like	life
itself,	had	grown	older	with	the	passing	of	time.	I	for	my	part	could	not	get	the
story	of	the	cemetery	in	Alderney	Street	with	which	Austerlitz	had	taken	his
leave	of	me	out	of	my	head,	and	that	may	have	been	why	I	stopped	in	Antwerp
on	my	way	back	from	Paris,	to	see	the	Nocturama	again	and	go	out	to
Breendonk	once	more.	I	spent	a	disturbed	night	in	a	hotel	on	the	Astridsplein,	in
an	ugly	room	with	brown	wallpaper	looking	out	on	fire	walls,	ventilation
chimneys,	and	flat	roofs	separated	from	each	other	by	barbed	wire	at	the	back	of
the	
building.
	
	
I	think	there	was	some	kind	of	popular	festival	going	on	in	the	city	at	the	time;	in
any	case,	the	wailing	of	ambulance	and	police	sirens	went	on	until	early	in	the
morning.	When	at	last	I	woke	from	a	bad	dream	I	saw	the	tiny	silver	arrows	of
airplanes	passing	at	intervals	of	ten	or	twelve	minutes	through	the	bright	blue
space	above	the	neighboring	houses,	which	still	lay	in	twilight.	On	leaving	the
Flamingo	Hotel—such	was	its	name,	if	I	remember	correctly—at	about	eight
o’clock,	I	saw	a	pale-faced	woman	of	about	forty	with	her	eyes	turned	away
lying	on	a	high	trolley	down	by	the	reception	desk,	where	there	was	no	one	in
evidence.	Two	ambulance	men	were	talking	out	on	the	pavement.	I	crossed	the
Astridsplein	to	the	station,	bought	myself	a	coffee,	and	took	the	next	suburban
train	to	Mechelen,	then	walking	the	ten	remaining	kilometers	to	Willebroek
through	the	suburbs	and	the	now	built-up	outskirts	of	the	town.	I	retained	hardly
anything	of	what	I	saw	on	my	way.	All	I	remember	is	a	peculiarly	narrow	house,
in	fact	no	more	than	one	room	wide,	built	of	puce-colored	brick	and	standing	in
an	equally	narrow	strip	of	garden	surrounded	by	a	tall	thuya	hedge.	A	canal	ran
beside	this	house,	and	a	long	barge	laden	with	cabbages	as	big	and	round	as
cannonballs	
was	gliding	along	it	just	as	I	passed,	apparently	without	any
boatman	to	steer	it	and	leaving	not	a	trace	on	the	black	surface	of	the	water.	It
had	turned	unusually	hot,	just	as	it	was	thirty	years	ago,	by	the	time	I	reached
Willebroek.	The	fortifications	lay	unchanged	on	the	blue-green	island,	but	the
number	of	visitors	had	increased.	There	were	several	coaches	in	the	car	park,
while	inside	the	porter’s	lodge	a	troop	of	schoolchildren	in	brightly	colored
clothes	was	crowding	around	the	cash	desk	and	the	small	kiosk.	Some	of	them
had	already	gone	ahead	of	the	rest	over	the	bridge	to	the	dark	gate	through
which,	yet	again,	I	could	not	bring	myself	to	pass	even	after	long	hesitation.	I
spent	some	time	in	one	of	the	hut-like	wooden	buildings	where	the	SS	had	set	up
a	printing	shop	for	the	manufacture	of	various	official	forms	and	greeting	cards.
The	roof	and	the	walls	creaked	in	the	heat,	and	the	thought	passed	through	my
mind	that	the	hair	on	my	head	might	catch	fire,	as	St.	Julian’s	did	on	his	way
through	the	desert.	Later	I	sat	beside	the	moat	surrounding	the	fortress.	In	the
distance,	beyond	the	penal	colony,	the	fence	and	the	watchtowers,	I	saw	the
high-rise	blocks	of	Mechelen	encroaching	further	and	further	on	the	fields	and
the	countryside.	A	gray	goose	was	swimming	on	the	dark	water,	going	a	little
way	in	one	direction	and	then	a	little	way	back	in	the	other.	After	a	while	it
scrambled	up	on	the	bank	and	settled	on	the	grass	not	far	from	me.	I	took	the
book	Austerlitz	had	given	me	on	our	first	meeting	in	Paris	out	of	my	rucksack.	It
was	by	Dan	Jacobson	(a	colleague	of	his,	although	unknown	to	him	all	these
years,	Austerlitz	had	said),	and	it	described	the	author’s	search	for	his
grandfather	Rabbi	Yisrael	Yehoshua	Melamed,	known	as	Heshel.	All	that	had
come	down	from	Heshel	to	his	grandson	was	a	pocket	calendar,	his	Russian
identity	papers,	a	worn	spectacle	case	containing	not	only	his	glasses	but	a	faded
and	already	disintegrating	piece	of	silk,	and	a	studio	photograph	of	Heshel	in	a
black	coat	with	a	black	velour	top	hat	on	his	head.	His	one	eye,	or	so	at	least	it
looks	on	the	cover	of	the	book,	is	shaded;	in	the	other	it	is	just	possible	to	make
out	a	white	fleck,	the	light	of	life	extinguished	when	Heshel	died	of	a	heart
attack	at	the	age	of	fifty-three	soon	after	the	First	World	War.	It	was	this
premature	death	which	made	Menuchah,	the	rabbi’s	wife,	decide	in	1920	to
emigrate	with	her	nine	children	from	Lithuania	to	South	Africa,	and	that	was
also	the	reason	why	Jacobson	himself	spent	most	of	his	childhood	in	the	town	of
Kimberley,	near	the	diamond	mines	of	the	same	name.	Most	of	the	mines,	so	I
read	as	I	sat	there	opposite	the	fortifications	of	Breendonk,	were	already	disused
at	the	time,	including	the	two	largest,	the	Kimberley	and	De	Beers	mines,	and
since	they	were	not	fenced	off	anyone	who	liked	could	venture	to	the	edge	of
those	vast	pits	and	look	down	to	a	depth	of	several	thousand	feet.	Jacobson
writes	that	it	was	truly	terrifying	to	see	such	emptiness	open	up	a	foot	away	from
firm	ground,	to	realize	that	there	was	no	transition,	only	this	dividing	line,	with
ordinary	life	on	one	side	and	its	unimaginable	opposite	on	the	other.	The	chasm
into	which	no	ray	of	light	could	penetrate	was	Jacobson’s	image	of	the	vanished
past	of	his	family	and	his	people	which,	as	he	knows,	can	never	be	brought	up
from	those	depths	again.	On	his	travels	in	Lithuania,	Jacobson	finds	scarcely	any
trace	of	his	forebears,	only	signs	everywhere	of	the	annihilation	from	which
Heshel’s	weak	heart	had	preserved	his	immediate	family	when	it	stopped
beating.	Of	the	town	of	Kaunas,	where	Heshel	had	his	photograph	taken	all	those
years	ago,	Jacobson	tells	us	that	the	Russians	built	
a	ring	of	twelve	fortresses
around	it	in	the	late	nineteenth	century,	which	then	in	1914,	despite	the	elevated
positions	on	which	they	had	been	constructed,	and	for	all	the	great	number	of
their	cannon,	the	thickness	of	their	walls,	and	their	labyrinthine	corridors,	proved
entirely	useless.	Some	of	the	forts,	writes	Jacobson,	fell	into	disrepair	later;
others	served	the	Lithuanians	and	then	the	Russians	once	more	as	prisons.	In
1941	they	fell	into	German	hands,	including	the	notorious	Fort	IX	where
Wehrmacht	command	posts	were	set	up	and	where	more	than	thirty	thousand
people	were	killed	over	the	next	three	years.	Their	remains,	says	Jacobson,	lie
under	a	field	of	oats	a	hundred	meters	outside	the	walls.	Transports	from	the
west	kept	coming	to	Kaunas	until	May	1944,	when	the	war	had	long	since	been
lost,	as	the	last	messages	from	those	locked	in	the	dungeons	of	the	fortress	bear
witness.	One	of	them,	writes	Jacobson,	scratched	the	words	
Nous	sommes	neuf
cents	Français
	on	the	cold	limestone	wall	of	the	bunker.	Others	left	only	a	date
and	place	of	origin	with	their	names:	Lob,	Marcel,	de	St.	Nazaire;	Wechsler,
Abram,	de	Limoges;	Max	Stern,	Paris,	18.5.44.	Sitting	by	the	moat	of	the
fortress	of	Breendonk,	I	read	to	the	end	of	the	fifteenth	chapter	of	
Heshel’s
Kingdom
,	and	then	set	out	on	my	way	back	to	Mechelen,	reaching	the	town	as
evening	began	to	fall.
*
	On	looking	through	these	notes	I	remember	that	in	February	1971,	during	a
short	visit	to	Switzerland,	one	of	the	places	I	visited	was	Lucerne.	After	seeing
the	Glacier	Museum	I	spent	some	time	standing	on	the	bridge	over	the	lake	on
my	way	back	to	the	station,	because	the	view	of	its	dome	and	the	snow-white
heights	of	the	Pilatus	massif	rising	in	the	clear	winter	sky	behind	it	had	reminded
me	of	my	conversation	with	Austerlitz	in	Antwerp	four	and	a	half	years	earlier.
A	few	hours	later,	on	the	night	of	4	February,	long	after	I	was	fast	asleep	in	my
hotel	room	in	Zurich,	a	fire	broke	out	in	Lucerne	Station,	spread	very	rapidly	and
entirely	destroyed	the	domed	building.	I	could	not	get	the	pictures	I	saw	next	day
in	the	newspapers	and	on	television	out	of	my	head	for	several	weeks,	and	they
gave	me	an	uneasy,	anxious	feeling	which	crystallized	into	the	idea	that	I	had
been	to	blame,	or	at	least	one	of	those	to	blame,	for	the	Lucerne	fire.	In	my
dreams,	even	years	later,	I	sometimes	saw	the	flames	leaping	from	the	dome	and
lighting	up	the	entire	panorama	of	the	snow-covered	Alps.
ABOUT	THE	AUTHOR
	
W.	G.	S
EBALD
	was	born	in	Wertach	im	Allgäu,	Germany,	in	1944.	He
studied	German	language	and	literature	in	Freiburg,	Switzerland,	and
Manchester.	He	taught	at	the	University	of	East	Anglia	in	Norwich,
England,	for	thirty	years,	becoming	professor	of	European	literature	in
1987,	and	from	1989	to	1994	was	the	first	director	of	the	British	Centre	for
Literary	Translation.	His	books	have	won	a	number	of	international	awards,
including	the	National	Book	Critics	Circle	Award,	the	
Los	Angeles	Times
Book	Award,	the	Berlin	Literature	Prize,	and	the	Literatur	Nord	Prize.	He
died	in	December	2001.
2011	Modern	Library	Trade	Paperback	Edition
Copyright	©	2001	W.	G.	Sebald
Translation	copyright	©	2001	Anthea	Bell
Introduction	copyright	©	2011	by	James	Wood
All	rights	reserved.
	
Published	in	the	United	States	by	Modern	Library,
an	imprint	of	The	Random	House	Publishing	Group,
a	division	of	Random	House,	Inc.,	New	York.
	
M
ODERN
	L
IBRARY
	and	the	T
ORCHBEARER
	Design
are	registered	trademarks	of	Random	House,	Inc.
	
Originally	published	in	German	by	Carl	Hanser	Verlag
in	2001.	This	English	language	translation	was	first
published	in	the	United	States	by	Random	House,
an	imprint	of	The	Random	House	Publishing	Group,
a	division	of	Random	House,	Inc.,
and	in	the	United	Kingdom	by	Hamish	Hamilton,
an	imprint	of	Penguin	Group	UK,	in	2001.
Published	by	arrangement	with	Hamish	Hamilton,
an	imprint	of	Penguin	Group	UK.
	
The	bottom	photograph	on	
this	page
	appears	courtesy	of	the
Wittgenstein	Archive,	Cambridge,	England.
	
L
IBRARY	OF
	C
ONGRESS
	C
ATALOGING-IN
-P
UBLICATION
	D
ATA
Sebald,	Winfried	Georg,	1944–2001
	
[Austerlitz.	English]
Austerlitz/W.	G.	Sebald;	translated	by	Anthea	Bell.
p.					cm.
eISBN:	978-0-679-64541-2
1.	Holocaust,	Jewish	(1939–1945)—Fiction.	I.	Title.
PT2681.E18	A9513	2001
833′.914—dc21					2001019785
	
www.modernlibrary.com
	
Photographic	work	by	Michael	Brandon	Jones
	
v3.1
	
