Copyrighted Material
ALICE MUNRO
Alice Munro was born in 1931 and is the author 
of thirteen collections of stories, most recently 
Dear Life , and a novel, Lives of Girls and Women . 
She has received many awards and prizes, 
including three of Canada’s Governor General’s 
Literary Awards and two Giller Prizes, the Rea 
Award for the Short Story, the Lannan Literary 
Award, the WHSmith Book Award in the UK, the 
National Book Critics Circle Award in the US, 
was shortlisted for the Booker Prize for Who Do 
You Think You Are?  (previously published as The 
Beggar Maid ), and has been awarded the Man 
Booker International Prize 2009 for her overall 
contribution to fiction on the world stage, and in 
2013 she won the Nobel Prize in Literature. 
Her stories have appeared in the  New Yorker , 
Atlantic Monthly,  Paris Review  and other pub­
lications, and her collections have been translated 
into thirteen languages. She lives in Port Hope, 
Ontario, near lake Ontario in Canada.
Copyrighted Material
ALSO BY ALICE MUNRO
Selected Stories: 1995–2009
Dear Life
Too Much Happiness
The View from Castle Rock
Runaway
The Love of a Good Woman
Selected Stories: 1968–1994
Open Secrets
Friend of My Youth
The Progress of Love
The Moons of Jupiter
Who Do You Think You Are? (Previously  
published as The Beggar Maid )
Something I’ve Been Meaning to Tell You
Lives of Girls and Women
Dance of the Happy Shades
Copyrighted Material
ALICE MUNRO
Hateship,  
Friendship, 
Courtship,  
Loveship,  
Marriage
Copyrighted Material
22
Vintage is part of the Penguin Random House group of companies 
whose addresses can be found at global.penguinrando mhouse.com
Copyright © Alice Munro 2001
Some of the stories in this collection were originally published as 
follows: ‘Floating Bridge’, ‘Family Furnishings’, ‘Nettles’, ‘Post and 
Beam’ and ‘The Bear Came Over the Mountain’ in The New Yorker ; 
‘Queenie’ in the London Review of Books  and  subsequently in book 
form by Profile Books Ltd., London
Grateful acknowledgment is made to Viking Penguin, an imprint of 
Penguin Putnam Books for Young Readers, a division of Penguin 
Putnam Inc., for permission to reprint excerpts from Madeline  by 
Ludwig Bemelmans, copyright © 1939 by Ludwig Bemelmans,  
copyright renewed 1967 by Madeleine Bemelmans and Barbara 
Bemelmans Marciano
Alice Munro has asserted her right to be identified as the  
author of this Work in accordance with the Copyright,  
Designs and Patents Act 1988
First published in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf
First published in Great Britain by Chatto & Windus in 2001
First published in Vintage in 2002
This edition reissued by Vintage in 2021
penguin.co.uk/vintage
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the  
British Library
ISBN 9780099422747
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Clays Ltd, Elcograf S.p.A.
The authorised representative in the EEA is Penguin Random House 
Ireland, Morrison Chambers, 32 Nassau Street, Dublin D02 YH68
Penguin Random House is committed to a sustainable future for our 
business, our readers and our planet. This book is made from Forest 
Stewardship Council® certi fied paper.
Copyrighted Material
With gratitude
to
Sarah Skinner
Copyrighted Material
Copyrighted Material
Contents
Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage 
Floating Bridge 
Family Furnishings 
Comfort 
Nettles 
Post and Beam 
What Is Remembered 
Queenie 
The Bear Came Over the Mountain 
—1—
Copyrighted Material
Copyrighted Material
Hateship, Friendship, Courtship,
Loveship, Marriage
Years ago, before the trains stopped running on so many of the
branch lines, a woman with a high, freckled forehead and a frizz of
reddish hair came into the railway station and inquired about ship-
ping furniture.
The station agent often tried a little teasing with women, espe-
cially the plain ones who seemed to appreciate it.
“Furniture?” he said, as if nobody had ever had such an idea be-
fore. “Well. Now. What kind of furniture are we talking about?”
A dining-room table and six chairs. A full bedroom suite, a sofa,
a coffee table, end tables, a ﬂoor lamp. Also a china cabinet and a
buffet.
“Whoa there. You mean a houseful.”
“It shouldn’t count as that much,” she said. “There’s no kitchen
things and only enough for one bedroom.”
Her teeth were crowded to the front of her mouth as if they
were ready for an argument.
“You’ll be needing the truck,” he said.
“No. I want to send it on the train. It’s going out west, to
Saskatchewan.”
She spoke to him in a loud voice as if he was deaf or stupid, and
——
Copyrighted Material
there was something wrong with the way she pronounced her
words. An accent. He thought of Dutch—the Dutch were moving
in around here—but she didn’t have the heft of the Dutch women
or the nice pink skin or the fair hair. She might have been under
forty, but what did it matter? No beauty queen, ever.
He turned all business.
“First you’ll need the truck to get it to here from wherever you
got it. And we better see if it’s a place in Saskatchewan where the
train goes through. Otherways you’d have to arrange to get it
picked up, say, in Regina.”
“It’s Gdynia,” she said. “The train goes through.”
He took down a greasy-covered directory that was hanging
from a nail and asked how she would spell that. She helped herself
to the pencil that was also on a string and wrote on a piece of paper
from her purse: GDYNIA .
“What kind of nationality w ould that be?”
She said she didn’t know.
He took back the pencil to follow from line to line.
“A lot of places out there it’s all Czechs or Hungarians or
Ukrainians,” he said. It came to him as he said this that she might
be one of those. But so what, he was only stating a fact.
“Here it is, all right, it’s on the line.”
“Yes,” she said. “I want to ship it Friday—can you do that?”
“We can ship it, but I can’t promise what day it’ll get there,” he
said. “It all depends on the priorities. Somebody going to be on the
lookout for it when it comes in?”
“Yes.”
“It’s a mixed train Friday, two-eighteen p.m. Truck picks it up
Friday morning. You live here in town?”
She nodded, writing down the address. Exhibition Road.
It was only recently that the houses in town had been numbered,
and he couldn’t picture the place, though he knew where Ex-
hibition Road was. If she’d said the name McCauley at that timeHateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
he might have taken more of an interest, and things might have
turned out differently. There were new houses out there, built
since the war, though they were called “wartime houses.” He sup-
posed it must be one of those.
“Pay when you ship,” he told her.
“Also, I want a ticket for myself on the same train. Friday after-
noon.”
“Going same place?”
“Yes.”
“You can travel on the same train to Toronto, but then you have
to wait for the Transcontinental, goes out ten-thirty at night. You
want sleeper or coach? Sleeper you get a berth, coach you sit up in
the day car.”
She said she would sit up.
“Wait in Sudbury for the Montreal train, but you won’t get off
there, they’ll just shunt you around and hitch on the Montreal cars.
Then on to Port Arthur and then to Kenora. You don’t get off till
Regina, and there you have to get off and catch the branch-line
train.”
She nodded as if he should just get on and give her the ticket.
Slowing down, he said, “But I won’t promise your furniture’ll
arrive when you do, I wouldn’t think it would get in till a day or
two after. It’s all the priorities. Somebody coming to meet you?”
“Yes.”
“Good. Because it won’t likely be much of a station. Towns out
there, they’re not like here. They’re mostly pretty rudimentary
affairs.”
She paid for the passenger ticket now, from a roll of bills in a
cloth bag in her purse. Like an old lady. She counted her change,
too. But not the way an old lady would count it—she held it in her
hand and ﬂicked her eyes over it, but you could tell she didn’t miss
a penny. Then she turned away rudely, without a good-bye.
“See you Friday,” he called out.——
Copyrighted Material
She wore a long, drab coat on this warm September day, also a
pair of clunky laced-up shoes, and ankle socks.
He was getting a coffee out of his thermos when she came back
and rapped on the wicket.
“The furniture I’m sending,” she said. “It’s all good furniture,
it’s like new. I wouldn’t want it to get scratched or banged up or in
any way damaged. I don’t want it to smell like livestock, either.”
“Oh, well,” he said. “The railway’s pretty used to shipping
things. And they don’t use the same cars for shipping furniture
they use for shipping pigs.”
“I’m concerned that it gets there in just as good a shape as it
leaves here.”
“Well, you know, when you buy your furniture, it’s in the store,
right? But did you ever think how it got there? It wasn’t made in
the store, was it? No. It was made in some factory someplace, and
it got shipped to the store, and that was done quite possibly by
train. So that being the case, doesn’t it stand to reason the railway
knows how to look after it?”
She continued to look at him without a smile or any admission
of her female foolishness.
“I hope so,” she said. “I hope they do.”
The station agent would have said, without thinking about it, that
he knew everybody in town. Which meant that he knew about half
of them. And most of those he knew were the core people, the
ones who really were “in town” in the sense that they had not
arrived yesterday and had no plans to move on. He did not know
the woman who was going to Saskatchewan because she did not go
to his church or teach his children in school or work in any store or
restaurant or ofﬁce that he went into. Nor was she married to any
of the men he knew in the Elks or the Oddfellows or the Lions
Club or the Legion. A look at her left hand while she was getting
the money out had told him—and he was not surprised—that sheHateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
was not married to anybody. With those shoes, and ankle socks
instead of stockings, and no hat or gloves in the afternoon, she
might have been a farm woman. But she didn’t have the hesitation
they generally had, the embarrassment. She didn’t have country
manners—in fact, she had no manners at all. She had treated him
as if he was an information machine. Besides, she had written a
town address—Exhibition Road. The person she really reminded
him of was a plainclothes nun he had seen on television, talking
about the missionary work she did somewhere in the jungle—
probably they had got out of their nuns’ clothes there because it
made it easier for them to clamber around. This nun had smiled
once in a while to show that her religion was supposed to make
people happy, but most of the time she looked out at her audience
as if she believed that other people were mainly in the world for
her to boss around.
One more thing Johanna meant to do she had been putting off
doing. She had to go into the dress shop called Milady’s and buy
herself an outﬁt. She had never been inside that shop—when she
had to buy anything, like socks, she went to Callaghans Mens
Ladies and Childrens Wear. She had lots of clothes inherited from
Mrs. Willets, things like this coat that would never wear out. And
Sabitha—the girl she looked after, in Mr. McCauley’s house—was
showered with costly hand-me-downs from her cousins.
In Milady’s window there were two mannequins wearing suits
with quite short skirts and boxy jackets. One suit was a rusty-gold
color and the other a soft deep green. Big gaudy paper maple
leaves were scattered round the mannequins’ feet and pasted here
and there on the window. At the time of year when most people’s
concern was to rake up leaves and burn them, here they were the
chosen thing. A sign written in ﬂowing black script was stuck
diagonally across the glass. It said: Simple Elegance, the Mode for
Fall.——
Copyrighted Material
She opened the door and went inside.
Right ahead of her, a full-length mirror showed her in Mrs.
Willets’s high-quality but shapeless long coat, with a few inches of
lumpy bare legs above the ankle socks.
They did that on purpose, of course. They set the mirror there
so you could get a proper notion of your deﬁciencies, right away,
and then—they hoped—you would jump to the conclusion that
you had to buy something to alter the picture. Such a transparent
trick that it would have made her walk out, if she had not come in
determined, knowing what she had to get.
Along one wall was a rack of evening dresses, all ﬁt for belles of
the ball with their net and taffeta, their dreamy colors. And beyond
them, in a glass case so no profane ﬁngers could get at them, half a
dozen wedding gowns, pure white froth or vanilla satin or ivory
lace, embroidered in silver beads or seed pearls. Tiny bodices,
scalloped necklines, lavish skirts. Even when she was younger she
could never have contemplated such extravagance, not just in the
matter of money but in expectations, in the preposterous hope of
transformation, and bliss.
It was two or three minutes before anybody came. Maybe they
had a peephole and were eyeing her, thinking she wasn’t their kind
of customer and hoping she would go away.
She would not. She moved beyond the mirror’s reﬂection—
stepping from the linoleum by the door to a plushy rug—and at
long last the curtain at the back of the store opened and out
stepped Milady herself, dressed in a black suit with glittery but-
tons. High heels, thin ankles, girdle so tight her nylons rasped,
gold hair skinned back from her made-up face.
“I thought I could try on the suit in the window,” Johanna said
in a rehearsed voice. “The green one.”
“Oh, that’s a lovely suit,” the woman said. “The one in the
window happens to be a size ten. Now you look to be—maybe a
fourteen?”Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
She rasped ahead of Johanna back to the part of the store where
the ordinary clothes, the suits and daytime dresses, were hung.
“You’re in luck. Fourteen coming up.”
The ﬁrst thing Johanna did was look at the price tag. Easily
twice what she’d expected, and she was not going to pretend
otherwise.
“It’s expensive enough.”
“It’s very ﬁne wool.” The woman monkeyed around till she
found the label, then read off a description of the material that
Johanna wasn’t really listening to because she had caught at the
hem to examine the workmanship.
“It feels as light as silk, but it wears like iron. You can see it’s
lined throughout, lovely silk-and-rayon lining. You won’t ﬁnd it
bagging in the seat and going out of shape the way the cheap suits
do. Look at the velvet cuffs and collar and the little velvet buttons
on the sleeve.”
“I see them.”
“That’s the kind of detail you pay for, you just do not get it oth-
erwise. I love the velvet touch. It’s only on the green one, you
know—the apricot one doesn’t have it, even though they’re
exactly the same price.”
Indeed it was the velvet collar and cuffs that gave the suit, in
Johanna’s eyes, its subtle look of luxury and made her long to buy
it. But she was not going to say so.
“I might as well go ahead and try it on.”
This was what she’d come prepared for, after all. Clean under-
wear and fresh talcum powder under her arms.
The woman had enough sense to leave her alone in the bright
cubicle. Johanna avoided the glass like poison till she’d got the
skirt straight and the jacket done up.
At ﬁrst she just looked at the suit. It was all right. The ﬁt was all
right—the skirt shorter than what she was used to, but then what
she was used to was not the style. There was no problem with the——
Copyrighted Material
suit. The problem was with what stuck out of it. Her neck and her
face and her hair and her big hands and thick legs.
“How are you getting on? Mind if I take a peek?”
Peek all you want to, Johanna thought, it’s a case of a sow’s ear,
as you’ll soon see.
The woman tried looking from one side, then the other.
“Of course, you’ll need your nylons on and your heels. How
does it feel? Comfortable?”
“The suit feels ﬁne,” Johanna said. “There’s nothing the matter
with the suit.”
The woman’s face changed in the mirror. She stopped smiling.
She looked disappointed and tired, but kinder.
“Sometimes that’s just the way it is. You never really know until
you try something on. The thing is,” she said, with a new, more
moderate conviction growing in her voice, “the thing is you have a
ﬁne ﬁgure, but it’s a strong ﬁgure. You have large bones and
what’s the matter with that? Dinky little velvet-covered buttons
are not for you. Don’t bother with it anymore. Just take it off.”
Then when Johanna had got down to her underwear there was a
tap and a hand through the curtain.
“Just slip this on, for the heck of it.”
A brown wool dress, lined, with a full skirt gracefully gathered,
three-quarter sleeves and a plain round neckline. About as plain as
you could get, except for a narrow gold belt. Not as expensive as
the suit, but still the price seemed like a lot, when you considered
all there was to it.
At least the skirt was a more decent length and the fabric made a
noble swirl around her legs. She steeled herself and looked in the
glass.
This time she didn’t look as if she’d been stuck into the gar-
ment for a joke.
The woman came and stood beside her, and laughed, but with
relief.Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
“It’s the color of your eyes. You don’t need to wear velvet.
You’ve got velvet eyes.”
That was the kind of soft-soaping Johanna would have felt
bound to scoff at, except that at the moment it seemed to be true.
Her eyes were not large, and if asked to describe their color she
would have said, “I guess they’re a kind of a brown.” But now
they looked to be a really deep brown, soft and shining.
It wasn’t that she had suddenly started thinking she was pretty
or anything. Just that her eyes were a nice color, if they had been a
piece of cloth.
“Now, I bet you don’t wear dress shoes very often,” the woman
said. “But if you had nylons on and just a minimum kind of
pump— And I bet you don’t wear jewelry, and you’re quite right,
you don’t need to, with that belt.”
To cut off the sales spiel Johanna said, “Well, I better take it off
so you can wrap it up.” She was sorry to lose the soft weight of the
skirt and the discreet ribbon of gold around her waist. She had
never in her life had this silly feeling of being enhanced by what
she had put on herself.
“I just hope it’s for a special occasion,” the woman called out as
Johanna was hastening into her now dingy-looking regular
clothes.
“It’ll likely be what I get married in,” said Johanna.
She was surprised at that coming out of her mouth. It wasn’t a
major error—the woman didn’t know who she was and would
probably not be talking to anybody who did know. Still, she had
meant to keep absolutely quiet. She must have felt she owed this
person something—that they’d been through the disaster of the
green suit and the discovery of the brown dress together and that
was a bond. Which was nonsense. The woman was in the business
of selling clothes, and she’d just succeeded in doing that.
“Oh!” the woman cried out. “Oh, that’s wonderful.”
Well, it might be, Johanna thought, and then again it might——
Copyrighted Material
not. She might be marrying anybody. Some miserable farmer
who wanted a workhorse around the place, or some wheezy old
half-cripple looking for a nurse. This woman had no idea what
kind of man she had lined up, and it wasn’t any of her business
anyway.
“I can tell it’s a love match,” the woman said, just as if she had
read these disgruntled thoughts. “That’s why your eyes were shin-
ing in the mirror. I’ve wrapped it all in tissue paper, all you have to
do is take it out and hang it up and the material will fall out beauti-
fully. Just give it a light press if you want, but you probably won’t
even need to do that.”
Then there was the business of handing over the money. They
both pretended not to look, but both did.
“It’s worth it,” the woman said. “You only get married the
once. Well, that’s not always strictly true—”
“In my case it’ll be true,” Johanna said. Her face was hotly
ﬂushed because marriage had not, in fact, been mentioned. Not
even in the last letter. She had revealed to this woman what she was
counting on, and that had perhaps been an unlucky thing to do.
“Where did you meet him?” said the woman, still in that tone of
wistful gaiety. “What was your ﬁrst date?”
“Through family,” Johanna said truthfully. She wasn’t meaning
to say any more but heard herself go on. “The Western Fair. In
London.”
“The Western Fair,” the woman said. “In London.” She could
have been saying “the Castle Ball.”
“We had his daughter and her friend with us,” said Johanna,
thinking that in a way it would have been more accurate to say that
he and Sabitha and Edith had her, Johanna, with them.
“Well, I can say my day has not been wasted. I’ve provided the
dress for somebody to be a happy bride in. That’s enough to jus-
tify my existence.” The woman tied a narrow pink ribbon around
the dress box, making a big, unnecessary bow, then gave it a
wicked snip with the scissors.Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
“I’m here all day,” she said. “And sometimes I just wonder what
I think I’m doing. I ask myself, What do you think you’re doing
here? I put up a new display in the window and I do this and that to
entice the people in, but there are days—there are days—when I
do not see one soul come in that door. I know—people think these
clothes are too expensive—but they’re good. They’re good
clothes. If you want the quality you have to pay the price.”
“They must come in when they want something like those,”
said Johanna, looking towards the evening dresses. “Where else
could they go?”
“That’s just it. They don’t. They go to the city—that’s where
they go. They’ll drive ﬁfty miles, a hundred miles, never mind the
gas, and tell themselves that way they get something better than
I’ve got here. And they haven’t. Not better quality, not better
selection. Nothing. Just that they’d be ashamed to say they bought
their wedding outﬁts in town. Or they’ll come in and try some-
thing on and say they have to think about it. I’ll be back, they say.
And I think, Oh, yes, I know what that means. It means they’ll try
to ﬁnd the same thing cheaper in London or Kitchener, and even if
it isn’t cheaper, they’ll buy it there once they’ve driven all that way
and got sick of looking.”
“I don’t know,” she said. “Maybe if I was a local person it
would make a difference. It’s very clique-y here, I ﬁnd. You’re not
local, are you?”
Johanna said, “No.”
“Don’t you ﬁnd it clique-y?”
Cleeky.
“Hard for an outsider to break in, is what I mean.”
“I’m used to being on my own,” Johanna said.
“But you found somebody. You won’t be on your own anymore
and isn’t that lovely? Some days I think how grand it would be, to
be married and stay at home. Of course, I used to be married, and
I worked anyway. Ah, well. Maybe the man in the moon will walk
in here and fall in love with me and then I’ll be all set!”——
Copyrighted Material
Johanna had to hurry—that woman’s need for conversation had
delayed her. She was hurrying to be back at the house, her pur-
chase stowed away, before Sabitha got home from school.
Then she remembered that Sabitha wasn’t there, having been
carried off on the weekend by her mother’s cousin, her Aunt
Roxanne, to live like a proper rich girl in Toronto and go to a rich
girl’s school. But she continued to walk fast—so fast some smart
aleck holding up the wall of the drugstore called out to her,
“Where’s the ﬁre?” and she slowed down a bit, not to attract atten-
tion.
The dress box was awkward—how could she have known the
store would have its own pink cardboard boxes, with Milady’s
written across them in purple handwriting? A dead giveaway.
She felt a fool for mentioning a wedding, when he hadn’t men-
tioned it and she ought to remember that. So much else had been
said—or written—such fondness and yearning expressed, that the
actual marrying seemed just to have been overlooked. The way
you might speak about getting up in the morning and not about
having breakfast, though y ou certainly intended to have it.
Nevertheless she should have kept her mouth shut.
She saw Mr. McCauley walking in the opposite direction up the
other side of the street. That was all right—even if he had met her
head-on he would never have noticed the box she carried. He
would have raised a ﬁnger to his hat and passed her by, presumably
noticing that she was his housekeeper but possibly not. He had
other things on his mind, and for all anybody knew might be look-
ing at some town other than the one they saw. Every working
day—and sometimes, forgetfully, on holidays or Sundays—he got
dressed in one of his three-piece suits and his light overcoat or his
heavy overcoat, and his gray fedora and his well-polished shoes,
and walked from Exhibition Road uptown to the ofﬁce he stillHateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
maintained over what had been the harness and luggage store. It
was spoken of as an Insurance Ofﬁce, though it was quite a long
time since he had actively sold insurance. Sometimes people
climbed the stairs to see him, maybe to ask some question about
their policies or more likely about lot boundaries, the history of
some piece of real estate in town or farm out in the country. His
ofﬁce was full of maps old and new, and he liked nothing better
than to lay them out and get into a discussion that expanded far
beyond the question asked. Three or four times a day he emerged
and walked the street, as now. During the war he had put the
McLaughlin-Buick up on blocks in the barn, and walked every-
where to set an example. He still seemed to be setting an example,
ﬁfteen years later. Hands clasped behind his back, he was like a
kind landlord inspecting his property or a preacher happy to
observe his ﬂock. Of course, half the people that he met had no
idea who he was.
The town had changed, even in the time Johanna had been here.
Trade was moving out to the highway, where there was a new dis-
count store and a Canadian Tire and a motel with a lounge and
topless dancers. Some downtown shops had tried to spruce them-
selves up with pink or mauve or olive paint, but already that paint
was curling on the old brick and some of the interiors were empty.
Milady’s was almost certain to follow suit.
If Johanna was the woman in there, what would she have done?
She’d never have gotten in so many elaborate evening dresses, for
a start. What instead? If you made the switch to cheaper clothes
you’d only be putting yourself in competition with Callaghans and
the discount place, and there probably wasn’t trade enough to go
around. So what about going into fancy baby clothes, children’s
clothes, tr ying to pull in the grandmothers and aunts who had the
money and would spend it for that kind of thing? Forget about the
mothers, who would go to Callaghans, having less money and
more sense.——
Copyrighted Material
But if it was her in charge—Johanna—she would never be able
to pull in anybody. She could see what needed to be done, and how,
and she could round up and supervise people to do it, but she could
never charm or entice. Take it or leave it, would be her attitude.
No doubt they would leave it.
It was the rare person who took to her, and she’d been aware of
that for a long time. Sabitha certainly hadn’t shed any tears when
she said good-bye—though you could say Johanna was the nearest
thing Sabitha had to a mother, since her own mother had died. Mr.
McCauley would be upset when she left because she’d given good
service and it would be hard to replace her, but that would be all he
thought about. Both he and his granddaughter were spoiled and
self-centered. As for the neighbors, they would no doubt rejoice.
Johanna had had problems on both sides of the property. On one
side it was the neighbors’ dog digging in her garden, burying and
retrieving his supply of bones, which he could better have done at
home. And on the other it was the black cherry tree, which was on
the McCauleys’ property but bore most of its cherries on the
branches hanging over into the next yard. In both cases she had
raised a fuss, and won. The dog was tied up and the other neigh-
bors left the cherries alone. If she got up on the stepladder she
could reach well over into their yard, but they no longer chased the
birds out of the branches and it made a difference to the crop.
Mr. McCauley would have let them pick. He would have let the
dog dig. He would let himself be taken advantage of. Part of the
reason was that these were new people and lived in new houses and
so he preferred not to pay attention to them. At one time there had
been just three or four large houses on Exhibition Road. Across
from them were the fairgrounds, where the fall fair was held (ofﬁ-
cially called the Agricultural Exhibition, hence the name), and in
between were orchard trees, small meadows. A dozen years ago or
so that land had been sold off in regular lot sizes and houses had
been put up—small houses in alternating styles, one kind with anHateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
upstairs and the other kind without. Some were already getting to
look pretty shabby.
There were only a couple of houses whose occupants Mr.
McCauley knew and was friendly with—the schoolteacher, Miss
Hood, and her mother, and the Shultzes, who ran the Shoe Repair
shop. The Shultzes’ daughter, Edith, was or had been Sabitha’s
great friend. It was natural, with their being in the same grade at
school—at least last year, once Sabitha had been held back—and
living near each other. Mr. McCauley hadn’t minded—maybe he
had some idea that Sabitha would be removed before long to live a
different sort of life in Toronto. Johanna would not have chosen
Edith, though the girl was never rude, never troublesome when
she came to the house. And she was not stupid. That might have
been the problem—she was smart and Sabitha was not so smart.
She had made Sabitha sly.
That was all over now. Now that the cousin, Roxanne—Mrs.
Huber—had shown up, the Schultz girl was all part of Sabitha’s
childish past.
I am going to arrange to get all your furniture out to you on the train
as soon as they can take it and prepaid as soon as they tell me what it
will cost. I have been thinking you will need it now. I guess it will not
be that much of a surprise that I thought you would not mind it if I
went along to be of help to you as I hope I can be.
This was the letter she had taken to the Post Ofﬁce, before she
went to make arrangements at the railway station. It was the ﬁrst
letter she had ever sent to him directly. The others had been
slipped in with the letters she made Sabitha write. And his to her
had come in the same way, tidily folded and with her name,
Johanna, typed on the back of the page so there would be no mis-
taking. That kept the people in the Post Ofﬁce from catching on,
and it never hurt to save a stamp. Of course, Sabitha could have——
Copyrighted Material
reported to her grandfather, or even read what was written to
Johanna, but Sabitha was no more interested in communicating
with the old man than she was in letters—the writing or the receiv-
ing of them.
The furniture was stored back in the barn, which was just a
town barn, not a real barn with animals and a granary. When
Johanna got her ﬁrst look at everything a year or so ago, she found
it grimy with dust and splattered with pigeon droppings. The
pieces had been piled in carelessly without anything to cover them.
She had hauled what she could carry out into the yard, leaving
space in the barn to g et at the big pieces she couldn’t carry—the
sofa and buffet and china cabinet and dining table. The bedstead
she could take apart. She went at the wood with soft dustrags, then
lemon oil, and when she was ﬁnished it shone like candy. Maple
candy—it was bird’s-eye maple wood. It looked glamorous to her,
like satin bedspreads and blond hair. Glamorous and modern, a
total contrast to all the dark wood and irksome carving of the
furniture she cared for in the house. She thought of it as hisfur-
niture then, and still did when she got it out this Wednesday. She
had put old quilts over the bottom layer to protect everything
there from what was piled on top, and sheets over what was on top
to protect that from the birds, and as a result there was only a
light dust. But she wiped everything and lemon-oiled it before she
put it back, protected in the same way, to wait for the truck on
Friday.
Dear Mr. McCauley,
I am leaving on the train this afternoon (Friday). I realize this is
without giving my notice to you, but I will wave my last pay,
which would be three weeks owing this coming Monday. There
is a beef stew on the stove in the double boiler that just needs
warming up. Enough there for three meals or maybe could be
stretched to a fourth. As soon as it is hot and you have got all youHateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
want, put the lid on and put it away in the fridge. Remember, put
the lid on at once not to take chances with it getting spoiled.
Regards to you and to Sabitha and will probably be in touch
when I am settled. Johanna Parry.
P.S. I have shipped his furniture to Mr. Boudreau as he may
need it. Remember to make sure when you reheat there is enough
water in bottom part of the double boiler.
Mr. McCauley had no trouble ﬁnding out that the ticket Johanna
had bought was to Gdynia, Saskatchewan. He phoned the station
agent and asked. He could not think how to describe Johanna—
was she old or young-looking, thin or moderately heavy, what was
the color of her coat?—but that was not necessary when he men-
tioned the furniture.
When this call came through there were a couple of people in
the station waiting for the evening train. The agent tried to keep
his voice down at ﬁrst, but he became excited when he heard about
the stolen furniture (what Mr. McCauley actually said was “and I
believe she took some furniture with her”). He swore that if he
had known who she was and what she was up to he would never
have let her set foot on the train. This assertion was heard and
repeated and believed, nobody asking how he could have stopped
a grown woman who had paid for her ticket, unless he had some
proof right away that she was a thief. Most people who repeated
his words believed that he could and would have stopped her—
they believed in the authority of station agents and of upright-
walking ﬁne old men in three-piece suits like Mr. McCauley.
The beef stew was excellent, as Johanna’s cooking always was,
but Mr. McCauley found he could not swallow it. He disregarded
the instruction about the lid and left the pot sitting open on the
stove and did not even turn off the burner until the water in the
bottom pot boiled away and he was alerted by a smell of smoking
metal.——
Copyrighted Material
This was the smell of treachery.
He told himself to be thankful at least that Sabitha was taken
care of and he did not have that to worry about. His niece—his
wife’s cousin, actually, Roxanne—had written to tell him that
from what she had seen of Sabitha on her summer visit to Lake
Simcoe the girl was going to take some handling.
“Frankly I don’t think you and that woman you’ve hired are going
to be up to it when the boys come swarming around.”
She did not go so far as to ask him whether he wanted another
Marcelle on his hands, but that was what she meant. She said she
would get Sabitha into a good school where she could be taught
manners at least.
He turned on the television for a distraction, but it was no use.
It was the furniture that galled him. It was Ken Boudreau.
The fact was that three days before—on the very day that
Johanna had bought her ticket, as the station agent had now told
him—Mr. McCauley had received a letter from Ken Boudreau
asking him to (a) advance some money against the furniture be-
longing to him (Ken Boudreau) and his dead wife, Marcelle, which
was stored in Mr. McCauley’s barn, or (b) if he could not see his
way to doing that, to sell the furniture for as much as he could get
and send the money as quickly as he could to Saskatchewan. There
was no mention of the loans that had already been made by father-
in-law to son-in-law, all against the value of this furniture and
amounting to more than it could ever be sold for. Could Ken
Boudreau have forgotten all about that? Or did he simply hope—
and this was more probable—that his father-in-law would have
forgotten?
He was now, it seemed, the owner of a hotel. But his letter was
full of diatribes against the fellow who had formerly owned it and
who had misled him as to various particulars.
“If I can just get over this hurdle,” he said, “then I am con-
vinced I can still make a go of it.” But what was the hurdle? A need
for immediate money, but he did not say whether it was owing toHateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
the former owner, or to the bank, or to a private mortgage holder,
or what. It was the same old story—a desperate, wheedling tone
mixed in with some arrogance, some sense of its being what was
owed him, because of the wounds inﬂicted on him, the shame suf-
fered, on account of Marcelle.
With many misgivings but remembering that Ken Boudreau
was after all his son-in-law and had fought in the war and been
through God-knows-what trouble in his marriage, Mr. McCauley
had sat down and written a letter saying that he did not have any
idea how to go about getting the best price for the furniture and it
would be very difﬁcult for him to ﬁnd out and that he was enclos-
ing a check, which he would count as an outright personal loan. He
wished his son-in-law to acknowledge it as such and to remember
the number of similar loans made in the past—already, he be-
lieved, exceeding any value of the furniture. He was enclosing a
list of dates and amounts. Apart from ﬁfty dollars paid nearly two
years ago (with a promise of regular payments to follow), he had
received nothing. His son-in-law must surely understand that as a
result of these unpaid and interest-free loans Mr. McCauley’s
income had declined, since he would otherwise have invested the
money.
He had thought of adding, “I am not such a fool as you seem to
think,” but decided not to, since that would reveal his irritation and
perhaps his weakness.
And now look. The man had jumped the gun and enlisted
Johanna in his scheme—he would always be able to get around
women—and got hold of the furniture as well as the check.
She had paid for the shipping herself, the station agent had said.
The ﬂashy-looking modern maple stuff had been overvalued in
the deals already made and they would not get much for it, espe-
cially when you counted what the railway had charged. If they had
been cleverer they would simply have taken something from the
house, one of the old cabinets or parlor settees too uncomfortable
to sit on, made and bought in the last century. That, of course,——
Copyrighted Material
would have been plain stealing. But what they had done was not
far off.
He went to bed with his mind made up to prosecute.
He woke in the house alone, with no smell of coffee or breakfast
coming from the kitchen—instead, there was a whiff of the
burned pot still in the air. An autumn chill had settled in all the
high-ceilinged, forlorn rooms. It had been warm last evening and
on preceding evenings—the furnace had not been turned on yet,
and when Mr. McCauley did turn it on the warm air was accompa-
nied by a blast of cellar damp, of mold and earth and decay. He
washed and dressed slowly, with forgetful pauses, and spread some
peanut butter on a piece of bread for his breakfast. He belonged to
a generation in which there were men who were said not to be able
even to boil water, and he was one of them. He looked out the
front windows and saw the trees on the other side of the racetrack
swallowed up in the morning fog, which seemed to be advancing,
not retreating as it should at this hour, across the track itself. He
seemed to see in the fog the looming buildings of the old Ex-
hibition Grounds—homely, spacious buildings, like enormous
barns. They had stood for years and years unused—all through
the war—and he forgot what happened to them in the end. Were
they torn down, or did they fall down? He abhorred the races that
took place now, the crowds and the loudspeaker and the illegal
drinking and the ruinous uproar of the summer Sundays. When he
thought of that he thought of his poor girl Marcelle, sitting on the
verandah steps and calling out to grown schoolmates who had got
out of their parked cars and were hurrying to see the races. The
fuss she made, the joy she expressed at being back in town, the
hugging and holding people up, talking a mile a minute, rattling on
about childhood days and how she’d missed everybody. She had
said that the only thing not perfect about life was missing her hus-
band, Ken, left out west because of his work.
She went out there in her silk pajamas, with straggly, un-
combed, dyed-blond hair. Her arms and legs were thin, but herHateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
face was somewhat bloated, and what she claimed was her tan
seemed a sickly brown color not from the sun. Maybe jaundice.
The child had stayed inside and watched television—Sunday
cartoons that she was surely too old for.
He couldn’t tell what was wrong, or be sure that anything was.
Marcelle went away to London to have some female thing done
and died in the hospital. When he phoned her husband to tell him,
Ken Boudreau said, “What did she take?”
If Marcelle’s mother had been alive still, would things have
been any different? The fact was that her mother, when she was
alive, had been as bewildered as he was. She had sat in the kitchen
crying while their teenage daughter, locked into her room, had
climbed out the window and slid down the verandah roof to be
welcomed by carloads of boys.
The house was full of a feeling of callous desertion, of deceit.
He and his wife had surely been kind parents, driven to the wall by
Marcelle. When she had eloped with an airman, they had hoped
that she would be all right, at last. They had been generous to the
two of them as to the most proper young couple. But it all fell
apart. To Johanna Parry he had likewise been generous, and look
how she too had gone against him.
He walked to town and went into the hotel for his breakfast.
The waitress said, “You’re bright and early this morning.”
And while she was still pouring out his coffee he began to tell
her about how his housekeeper had walked out on him without any
warning or provocation, not only left her job with no notice but
taken a load of furniture that had belonged to his daughter, that
now was supposed to belong to his son-in-law but didn’t really,
having been bought with his daughter’s wedding money. He told
her how his daughter had married an airman, a good-looking,
plausible fellow who wasn’t to be trusted around the corner.
“Excuse me,” the waitress said. “I’d love to chat, but I got
people waiting on their breakfast. Excuse me—”
He climbed the stairs to his ofﬁce, and there, spread out on his——
Copyrighted Material
desk, were the old maps he had been studying yesterday in an
effort to locate exactly the very ﬁrst burying ground in the county
(abandoned, he believed, in ). He turned on the light and sat
down, but he found he could not concentrate. After the waitress’s
reproof—or what he took for a reproof—he hadn’t been able to
eat his breakfast or enjoy his coffee. He decided to go out for a
walk to calm himself down.
But instead of walking along in his usual way, greeting people
and passing a few words with them, he found himself bursting into
speech. The minute anybody asked him how he was this morning
he began in a most uncharacteristic, even shameful way to blurt
out his woes, and like the waitress, these people had business to
attend to and they nodded and shufﬂed and made excuses to get
away. The morning didn’t seem to be warming up in the way
foggy fall mornings usually did; his jacket wasn’t warm enough,
so he sought the comfort of the shops.
People who had known him the longest were the most dis-
mayed. He had never been anything but reticent—the well-
mannered gentleman, his mind on other times, his courtesy a deft
apology for privilege (which was a bit of a joke, because the privi-
lege was mostly in his recollections and not apparent to others).
He should have been the last person to air wrongs or ask for sym-
pathy—he hadn’t when his wife died, or even when his daughter
died—yet here he was, pulling out some letter, asking if it wasn’t a
shame the way this fellow had taken him for money over and over
again, and even now when he’d taken pity on him once more the
fellow had connived with his housekeeper to steal the furniture.
Some thought it was his own furniture he was talking about—they
believ ed the old man had been left without a bed or a chair in his
house. They advised him to go to the police.
“That’s no good, that’s no good,” he said. “How can you get
blood from a stone?”
He went into the Shoe Repair shop and greeted Herman Shultz.Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
“Do you remember those boots you resoled for me, the ones I
got in England? You resoled them four or ﬁve years ago.”
The shop was like a cave, with shaded bulbs hanging down over
various workplaces. It was abominably ventilated, but its manly
smells—of glue and leather and shoe-blacking and fresh-cut felt
soles and rotted old ones—were comfortable to Mr. McCauley.
Here his neighbor Herman Shultz, a sallow, expert, spectacled
workman, bent-shouldered, was occupied in all seasons—driving
in iron nails and clinch nails and, with a wicked hooked knife, cut-
ting the desired shapes out of leather. The felt was cut by some-
thing like a miniature circular saw. The buffers made a scufﬁng
noise and the sandpaper wheel made a rasp and the emery stone on
a tool’s edge sang high like a mechanical insect and the sewing
machine punched the leather in an earnest industrial rhythm. All
the sounds and smells and precise activities of the place had been
familiar to Mr. McCauley for years but never identiﬁed or reﬂected
upon before. Now Herman, in his blackened leather apron with a
boot on one hand, straightened up, smiled, nodded, and Mr.
McCauley saw the man’s whole life in this cave. He wished to
express sympathy or admiration or something more that he didn’t
understand.
“Yes, I do,” Herman said. “They were nice boots.”
“Fine boots. You know I got them on my wedding trip. I got
them in England. I can’t remember now where, but it wasn’t in
London.”
“I remember you telling me.”
“You did a ﬁne job on them. They’re still doing well. Fine job,
Herman. You do a good job here. You do honest work.”
“That’s good.” Herman took a quick look at the boot on his
hand. Mr. McCauley knew that the man wanted to get back to his
work, but he couldn’t let him.
“I’ve just had an eye-opener. A shock.”
“Have you?”——
Copyrighted Material
The old man pulled out the letter and began to read bits of it
aloud, with interjections of dismal laughter.
“Bronchitis. He says he’s sick with bronchitis. He doesn’t know
where to turn. I don’t know who to turn to. Well he always knows
who to turn to. When he’s run through everything else, turn to
me. A few hundred just till I get on my feet. Begging and pleading
with me and all the time he’s conniving with my housekeeper. Did
you know that? She stole a load of furniture and went off out west
with it. They were hand in glove. This is a man I’ve saved the skin
of, time and time again. And never a penny back. No, no, I have to
be honest and say ﬁfty dollars. Fifty out of hundreds and hun-
dreds. Thousands. He was in the Air Force in the war, you know.
Those shortish fellows, they were often in the Air Force. Strutting
around thinking they were war heroes. Well, I guess I shouldn’t
say that, but I think the war spoiled some of those fellows, they
never could adjust to life afterwards. But that’s not enough of an
excuse. Is it? I can’t excuse him forever because of the war.”
“No you can’t.”
“I knew he wasn’t to be trusted the ﬁrst time I met him. That’s
the extraordinary thing. I knew it and I let him rook me all the same.
There are people like that. You take pity on them just for being the
crooks they are. I got him his insurance job out there, I had some
connections. Of course he mucked it up. A bad egg. Some just are.”
“You’re right about that.”
Mrs. Shultz was not in the store that day. Usually she was the
one at the counter, taking in the shoes and sho wing them to her
husband and reporting back what he said, making out the slips, and
taking the payment when the restored shoes were handed back.
Mr. McCauley remembered that she had had some kind of opera-
tion during the summer.
“Your wife isn’t in today? Is she well?”
“She thought she’d better take it easy today. I’ve got my
girl in.”Hateship, Friendship, Courtship, Loveship, Marriage
Copyrighted Material
