
T h e  H a r e  w i t h  A m b e r  E y e s
T h e  H a r e  w i t h  A m b e r  E y e s
A F AMIL Y’S CENTUR Y OF AR T AND LOSS
E d m u n d  d e  W a a l
Farrar , Straus and Gir oux
 New Y ork
For Ben, Matthew and Anna, and for my father
 
‘Even w hen one is no longer attached to things, it’ s still something to have
been attached to them; because it was always for reasons which other
people d idn’ t gra sp…W ell, now that I’m a little too weary to live with other
people, these old feelings, so pe rsonal and individual, that I had in the past,
seem to me – it’ s the mania of all collectors – very precious. I open my
heart to myself like a sort of vit rine, and examine one by one all those love
af fairs of which the world can know nothing. And of this c ollection to
which I’m now much more att ached than to my others, I say to myself,
rather as Mazarin said of his b ooks, but in fact without the least distress,
that it will be very tiresome to have to leave it all.’
Charles Swann
Marcel Proust, Cities of the Plain

C O N T E N T S
Family T r ee
Prologue
Part One  Paris 1871–1899
1. Le W est End
2. Un lit de parade
3. ‘A mahout to guide her ’
4. ‘So light, so soft to the touch’
5. A box of children’ s sweets
6. A fox with inlaid eyes, in wood
7. The yellow armchair
8. Monsieur Elstir ’ s asparagus
9. Even Ephrussi fell for it
10. My small profits
1 1. A ‘very brilliant five o’clock’
Part T wo  V ienna 1899–1938
12. Die potemkinsche Stadt
13. Zionstrasse
14. History as it happens
15. ‘A lar ge square box such as children draw’
16. ‘Liberty Hall’
17. The sweet young thing
18. Once upon a time
19. T ypes of the Old City
20. Heil W ien! Heil Berlin!
21. Literally zero
22. Y ou must change your life
23. Eldorado 5–0050
Part Thr ee  V ienna, Kövecses, T unbridge W ells, V ienna 1938–1947
24. ‘An ideal spot for mass marches’
25. ‘A never -to-be-repeated opportunity’
26. ‘Good for a single journey’
27. The tears of things
28. Anna’ s pocket
29. ‘All quite openly , publicly and legally’
Part Four  T okyo 1947–2001
30. T akenoko
31. Kodachrome
32. Where did you get them?
33. The real Japan
34. On polish
Coda  T okyo, Odessa, London 2001–2009
35. Jiro
36. An astrolabe, a menzula, a globe
37. Y ellow/Gold/Red
Acknowledgements


T h e  H a r e  w i t h  A m b e r  E y e s
PROLOGUE
In 1991 I was given a two-year scholarship by a Japanese foundation. The
idea was to give seven young English people with diverse professional
interests – engineering, journali sm, industry , ceramics – a grounding in the
Japanese language at an English university , followed by a yea r in T okyo.
Our flue ncy wo uld help build a new era of contacts with Japan. W e were
the first intake on the programme and expectations were high.
Mornings during our second year were spent at a language school in
Shibuya, up the hill from the  welter of fast-food outlets an d discount
electrical stores. T okyo was recovering from the crash after the bubble
economy of the 1980s. Comm uters stood at the pedestrian c rossing, the
busiest in the world, to catch sight of the screens showing the N ikkei Stock
Index cl imbing higher and higher . T o avoid the worst of the ru sh hour on
the u nder ground , I’d leave an hour early and meet another , older scholar –
an archaeologist  – and we’d have cinnamon buns and cof fee on the way in
to cl asses. I had  homework, proper homework, for the first time since I was
a school boy: 15 0 kanji, Japanese characters, to learn each week; a column
of a tabloid new spaper to parse; dozens of conversational phras es to repeat
every day . I’d ne ver dreaded anything so much. The other , younger scholars
would jo ke in Japanese with the teachers about television they had seen or
political scandals. The school  was behind green metal gates, and I
remember kicking them one morning and thinking what it was to be twenty-
eight and kicking a school gate.
Afternoons were  my own. T wo  afternoons a week I was in a ceramics
studio, shared with everyone from retired businessmen making tea-bowls to
students making  avant-garde statements in rough red clay and mesh. Y ou
paid your subs and grabbed a bench or wheel and were left to get on with it.
It wasn’ t noisy , but there was a c heerful hum of chat. I started making work
in p orcelain for the first time, gently pushing the sides of m y jars and
teapots after I’d taken them of f the wheel.
I had been making pots since I w as a child and had badgered my father
to take me to an evening class. My first pot was a thrown bowl that I glazed
in opale scent w hite with a spla sh of cobalt blue. Most of my schoolboy
afternoons were spent in a pottery workshop, and I left school early at
seventeen to become apprenticed to an austere man, a devotee of the
English potter Bernard Leach. He taught me about respect for the material
and about fitness for purpose: I threw hundreds of soup-bowls  and honey-
pots in grey sto neware clay and swept the floor . I would help make the
glazes, careful recalibrations o f oriental colours. He had nev er been to
Japan, but had shelves of books on Japanese pots: we would discuss the
merits of particular tea-bowls over our mugs of milky mid-morning cof fee.
Be careful, he would say , of the unwarranted gesture: less is more. W e
would work in silence or to classical music.
I s pent a long s ummer in the m iddle of my teenage apprenticeship in
Japan vi siting equally severe masters in pottery villages across the country:
Mashiko, Bizen , T amba. Each s ound of a paper screen closing  or of water
across stones in the garden of a tea-house was an epiphany , just as each
neon Dunkin’ Donuts store gave me a moue of disqui et. I have
documentary evidence of the depth of my devotion in an article I wrote for
a magaz ine when I returned: ‘Japan and the Potter ’ s Ethic: Cultivating a
reverence for your materials and the marks of age’.
After finishing my apprenticeship, and then studying English literature
at unive rsity , I spent seven years working by myself in silent, ordered
studios on the b orders of W ales and then in a grim inner city . I was very
focused, and so were my pots.  And now here I was in Japan  again, in a
messy s tudio next to a man chatting away about baseball , making a
porcelain jar with pushed-in, gestural sides. I was enjoyi ng myself:
something was going right.
T wo afternoons  a week I was in the archive room of the  Nihon
Mingeikan, the Japanese Folk Crafts Museum, working on a book about
Leach. T he museum is a reconstructed farmhouse in a suburb, which houses
the collection of Japanese and Korean folk crafts of Y anagi Sōetsu. Y anagi,
a philos opher , a rt historian and poet, had evolved a theory of why some
objects – pots, baskets, cloth made by unknown craftsmen – were so
beautiful. In his view , they expr essed unconscious beauty becau se they had
been ma de in such numbers that the craftsman had been liberated from his
ego. He and Leach had been ins eparable friends as young men in the early
part of the twe ntieth century in T okyo, writing animated lett ers to each
other ab out their passionate reading of Blake and Whitman and Ruskin.
They ha d even started an artists’ colony in a hamlet a conveni ent distance
outside T okyo, where Leach made his pots with the help of local boys and
Y anagi discoursed on Rodin and beauty to his bohemian friends.
Through a door the stone floors would give way to of fice linole um, and
down of f a back corridor was Y anagi’ s archive: a small room, twelve feet
by eight , with shelves to the ceiling full of his books and s tacked with
Manila boxes containing his notebooks and correspondence. T here was a
desk and a single bulb. I like ar chives. This one was very , very  quiet and it
was extremely gloomy . Here I  read and noted and planned a revisionist
history of Leach. It was to be a c overt book on japonisme , the way in which
the W est has pas sionately and creatively misunderstood Japan fo r more than
a hundred years. I wanted to kn ow what it was about Japan that produced
such intensity and zeal in artists, and such crossness in academics as they
pointed out one misinterpretati on after another . I hoped that writing this
book would help me out of my own deep, congested infatuation with the
country .
And one afternoon a week I spent with my great-uncle Iggie.
I’d walk  up the hill from the subway station, past the glowing beer -
dispensing machines, past Sengaku-ji temple where the forty-seven samurai
are burie d, past the strange baro que meeting hall for a Shinto sect, past the
sushi bar run by the bluf f Mr X, turning right at the high wa ll of Prince
T akamatsu’ s garden with the pines. I’d let myself in and take t he lift up to
the sixth floor . Iggie would be reading in his armchair by t he window .
Mostly Elmore Leonard or John le Carré. Or memoirs in French. It is odd,
he said, how some languages are warmer than others. I would bend down
and he’d give me a kiss.
His desk  held an empty blotter ,  a sheaf of his headed paper , and pens
ready , th ough he  no longer wro te. The view from the window behind him
was of cranes. T okyo Bay was disappearing behind forty-storey
condominiums.
W e’d have lunch together , prepa red by his housekeeper Mrs Na kano or
left by his frien d Jiro, who lived in the interconnecting apartment. An
omelette and salad, and toasted bread from one of the excellent French
bakeries in the d epartment stores in the Ginza. A glass of cold white wine,
Sancerre or Pouilly-Fumé. A peach. Some cheese and then very good
cof fee. Black cof fee.
Iggie was eighty-four and slightly stooped. He was always impeccably
dressed; handso me in his herringbone jackets with a handkerchief in the
pocket, his pale shirts and a cravat. He had a small white moustache.
After our lunch he’d open the sliding doors of the long vitrine t hat took
up most of one wall of the sittin g-room and would get out the netsuke one
by one. The hare with amber ey es. The young boy with the samurai sword
and helm et. A tiger , all shoulder  and feet, turning round to snarl. He would
pass me one and we’d look at it  together , and then I’d put it ca refully back
amongst the dozens of animals and figures on the glass shelves.
Iggie with the netsuke collection in T okyo, 1960
I’d fill the little cups of water k ept in the case to make sure the ivories
didn’ t split in the dry air .
Did I tell you, he would say , how much we loved these as children?
How they were given to my mother and father by a cousin in Paris? And did
I tell you the story of Anna’ s pocket?
Conversations could take strange turns. One moment he would be
describing how their cook in V ienna would make their father
Kaiserschmarrn  for his birthday breakfast, lay ers of pancakes and icing
sugar ba thed in a syrupy liqueu r; how it would be brought in with a great
flourish by the b utler Josef into the dining-room and cut with a  long knife,
and how Papa would always say  that the Emperor couldn’ t hope for a better
start to his own birthday . And the next moment he would be talking about
Lilli’ s second marriage. Who was Lilli?
Thank God, I’d think, that even if I didn’ t know about Lilli  I knew
enough to know where some of the stories were set: Bad Ischl , Kövecses,
V ienna. I’d think, as the constru ction lights on the cranes came  on at dusk,
stretching deepe r and deeper into T okyo Bay , that I was becoming a sort of
amanuensis and  that I should probably record what he said about V ienna
before the First W orld W ar , sit at his elbow with a notebook. I n ever did. It
seemed formal and inappropriate. It also seemed greedy: that’ s a good rich
story , I’ ll have that. Anyway , I liked the way that repetition w ears things
smooth, and there was something of the river stone to Iggie’ s stories.
Over the year of afternoons I’d hear about their father ’ s pride in the
cleverness of his older sister Elisabeth, and of Mama’ s dis like of her
elaborate langu age. Do talk sensibly! He often mentioned, with some
anxiety , a game with his sister Gisela, where they had to take  something
small from the drawing-room , get it down the stairs and across the
courtyard, dodge the grooms, go down the cellar steps and hide it in the
arched vaults under the house. And dare each other to get it back, and how
he lost something in the dark. It seemed an unfinished, fraying memory .
Lots of stories about Kövecses, their country house in Czechoslovakia.
His mot her Emm y waking him before dawn to go out with a gamekeeper
with a gun for t he first time by  himself to shoot hares in the stubble, and
how he couldn’ t  pull the trigger when he saw their ears trembl e slightly in
the cool air .
Gisela and Iggie coming across gypsies with a dancing bear on a chain,
camping on the edge of the estat e by the river , and running all th e way back
terrified. How the Orient Express stopped at the halt and how their
grandmother , in her white dress,  was helped down by the stationmaster , and
how they ran to  greet her and take the parcel of cakes wrapp ed in green
paper that she’d bought for them at Demel in V ienna.
And Em my pul ling him to the  window at breakfast to show  him an
autumnal tree outside the dining -room window covered in goldfinches. And
how when he k nocked on the window and they flew , the tree was still
blazing golden.
I washed up afte r lunch while I ggie had his nap, and I would try to do
my kanj i homework, filling one chequered paper after another with my
jerky ef f orts. I’d stay until Jiro came back from work with the Japanese and
English evening newspapers and the croissants for tomorrow’ s breakfast.
Jiro wou ld put on Schubert or jazz and we would have a drink a nd then I’d
leave them be.
I was renting a very pleasant sin gle room in Mejiro, looking ou t over a
small garden filled with azaleas. I had an electric ring and a kettle and was
doing m y best, but my life in the evenings was very noodle-focused and
rather lonely . T wice a month Jiro  and Iggie would take me out to  dinner or a
concert. They would give me drinks at the Imperial Hotel and then
wonderful sushi or steak tartare or , in homage to banking antecedents, boeuf
à la financièr e . I refused the foie gras that was Iggie’ s staple.
That summer there was a rec eption for the scholars in the  British
Embassy . I had t o make a speech  in Japanese about what I had learnt during
my year and ho w culture was th e bridge between our two island nations. I
had rehe arsed it until I could bear it no longer . Iggie and Jiro came and I
could see them encouraging me across their glasses of champagne.
Afterwards Jiro squeezed my shoulder and I got a kiss from Iggie and,
smiling, complicit, they remarked, “Jōzu desu ne?”  – Good , isn’ t it? –
telling me that my Japanese was expert, skilled, unparalleled.
They ha d sorted  it well, these two. There was a Japanese room in Jiro’ s
apartment with tatami mats and  the little shrine bearing photog raphs of his
mother and Iggie’ s mother , Em my , where prayers were said and the bell
rung. An d throu gh the door in Iggie’ s apartment on his desk there was a
photograph of them together in a boat on the Inland Sea, a mountain of
pines behind them, dappled sunshine on the water . It is January 1960. Jiro,
so good-looking  with his hair slicked back, has an arm over Iggie’ s
shoulder . And another picture, from the 1980s, on a cruise ship somewhere
of f Hawaii, in evening dress, arm in arm.
Living the longest is hard, says Iggie, under his breath.
Growing old in Japan is wonderful, he says more loudly . I ha ve lived
here for more than half my life.
Do you miss an ything about V ienna? (Why not come straight out and
ask him : So what do you miss, when you are old and not living in the
country you were born in?)
No. I didn’ t go back until 1973. It was stifling. Smothering. Everyone
knew yo ur name . Y ou’d buy a novel in the Kärntner Strasse and they’d ask
you if your mo ther ’ s cold was better yet. Y ou couldn’ t move. All that
gilding and marble in the house. It was so dark. Have you seen our old
house on the Ringstrasse?
Do you  know , he says sudden ly , that Japanese plum dumplings are
better than V iennese plum dumplings?
Actually , he resumes, after a pause, Papa always said that he’d put me
up for his club when I was old enough. It met on Thursdays somewhere
near the  Opera, with all his friends, his Jewish friends. He ca me back so
cheerful on Thursdays. The W iener Club. I always wanted to go there with
him, but he never took me. I left for Paris and then New Y ork, you see, and
then there was the war .
I miss that. I missed that.
 
Iggie died in 19 94 soon after I returned to England. Jiro rang m e: there had
been on ly three days in hospital. It was a relief. I came back to T okyo for
his fune ral. Ther e were two dozen of us, their old friends, Jiro’ s family , Mrs
Nakano and her daughter , clouded in tears.
There is  the cremation, and we gather together and the ashes are
brought out, and in turns a pair of us pick up long black chopsticks and put
the fragments of unburnt bone into an urn.
W e go to the te mple where Iggie and Jiro have their interme nt plot.
They ha d planne d this tomb twenty years before. The cemetery is on a hill
behind t he temp le, each plot m arked with small stone walls. T here is the
grey gravestone with both their names already inscribed on it, and a place
for flowers. Buckets of water and brushes and long wooden signs with
painted inscripti ons on them. Y ou clap three times and greet your family
and apol ogise fo r the delay since you were last there, and clean up, remove
old chrysanthemums and put new ones in water .
At the temple the urn is placed  on a small dais and a photog raph of
Iggie – the photograph of him on the cruise ship in his dinner  jacket – is
placed in front of it. The abbot chants a sutra and we of fer incense, and
Iggie is given his new Buddhist name, his kaimyo , to help  him in his next
life.
Then we speak of him. I try to  say , in Japanese, how much my great-
uncle m eans to me and cannot because I am in tears and beca use, despite
my expe nsive two-year scholars hip, my Japanese isn’ t good enough when I
need it. So instead, in this roo m in this Buddhist temple, in  this T okyo
suburb, I say the Kaddish for Ignace von Ephrussi, who is so far from
V ienna, for his father and his mother , and for his brother and sis ters in their
diaspora.
After the  funeral Jiro asks me to help sort out Iggie’ s clothes. I open the
cupboards in his dressing-room and see the shirts ordered by c olour . As I
pack the  ties away , I notice that  they map his holidays with Jiro in London
and Paris, Honolulu and New Y ork.
When this job is  done, over a glass of wine, Jiro takes out his br ush and
ink and writes a document and seals it. It says, he tells me, that once he has
gone I should look after the netsuke.
So I’m next.
 
There ar e 264 netsuke in this co llection. It is a very big collection of very
small objects.
I pic k one up and turn it round in my fingers, weigh it in the palm  of my
hand. If it is wood, chestnut or elm, it is even lighter than the ivory . Y ou see
the p atina more easily on these  wooden ones: there is a faint s hine on the
spine of  the brindled wolf and on the tumbling acrobats locked in their
embrace. The ivory ones come i n shades of cream, every colour , in fact, but
white. A few ha ve inlaid eyes of amber or horn. Some of the older ones are
slightly worn away: the haunch of the faun resting on leaves has lost its
markings. There  is a slight split, an almost imperceptible fault  line on the
cicada. Who dropped it? Where and when?
Most of them are signed – that moment of ownership when it was
finished and let go. There is a wooden netsuke of a seated ma n holding a
gourd between his feet. He’ s be nding over it, both hands on a knife that is
half into  the gourd. It is hard w ork, his arms and shoulder and  neck show
the ef fo rt: every  muscle concentrates on the blade. There is another of a
cooper working on a half-finished barrel with an adze. He sits leaning into
it, fr amed by it,  brows puckered with concentration. It is an iv ory carving
about what it is like to carve into  wood. Both are about finishing something
on th e s ubject of the half-finishe d. Look, they say , I got there fi rst and he’ s
hardly started.
When you tumble them in your hands there is a pleasure in finding
where these signatures have been placed – on the sole of a sandal, the end
of a branch, the thorax of a hornet – as well as the play between the strokes.
I thi nk of the moves when you sign your name in Japan with ink, the sweep
of the brush into the ink, the first plosive moment of contact, the return to
the ink stone, a nd wonder at h ow you could develop such a  distinctive
signature using the fine metal tools of the netsuke-maker .
Some of  these netsuke carry no name. Some have bits of paper glued to
them, bearing tiny numbers carefully written in red pen.
There are a great number of rats. Perhaps because they give the maker
the chance to wrap those sinuo us tails round each other , over the pails of
water , t he dead fish, the beggars’ robes, and then fold those paws
underneath the carvings. There are also quite a lot of rat-catchers, I realise.
Some o f the netsuke are studies in running movement, so that your
fingers m ove alo ng a surface of  uncoiling rope, or spilt water . Others have
small co ngested movements that knot your touch: a girl in a wo oden bath, a
vortex of clam shells. Some do both, surprising you: an intricately ruf fled
dragon leans against a simple rock. Y ou work your fingers round the
smoothness and stoniness of the ivory to meet this sudden density of
dragon.
They ar e always asymmetric, I think with pleasure. As with my
favourite Japanese tea-bowls, you cannot understand the whole from a part.
When I am back in London I put one of these netsuke in my pocket for
a day and carry it round. Carr y is not quite the right word f or having a
netsuke in a pocket. It sounds too purposeful. A netsuke is so light and so
small th at it migrates and almost disappears amongst your keys and change.
Y ou simply for get that it is there. This was a netsuke of a very ripe medlar
fruit, made out o f chestnut wood in the late eighteenth century in Edo, the
old T okyo. In autumn in Japan you sometimes see medlars; a branch
hanging over a wall of a templ e or from a private garden into a street of
vending machines is impossibl y pleasing. My medlar is just about to go
from rip eness to  deliquescence. The three leaves at the top feel as if they
would fall if you rubbed them between your fingers. The fruit is slightly
unbalanced: it is riper on one si de than the other . Underneath, y ou can feel
the two holes – one lar ger than the other – where the silk cord would run, so
that the netsuke could act as a toggle on a small bag. I try and imagine who
owned the medlar . It was mad e long before the opening up of Japan to
foreign t rade in the 1850s, and thus created for the Japanese ta ste: it might
have be en carv ed for a merchant or a scholar . It is a quiet one,
undemonstrative, but it makes me smile. Making something to h old out of a
very hard material that feels so soft is a slow and rather good tactile pun.
I keep my medla r in my jacket pocket and go to a meeting at a m useum
about a piece of research I am supposed to be doing, and then t o my studio
and then  to the London Library . I intermittently roll this thing through my
fingers.
I r ealise  how much I care about how this hard-and-soft, losable object
has survived. I need to find a way of unravelling its story . Owning this
netsuke – inheriting them all – m eans I have been handed a responsibility to
them and to the people who have owned them. I am unclear and
discomfited about where the parameters of this responsibility might lie.
I kn ow t he bones of this journey from Iggie. I know that these netsuke
were bought in Paris in the 18 70s by a cousin of my great-grandfather
called C harles E phrussi. I know that he gave them as a weddin g-present to
my grea t-grandfather V iktor von Ephrussi in V ienna at the turn of the
century . I know the story of Ann a, my great-grandmother ’ s maid , very well.
And I know that  they came with Iggie to T okyo, of course, and were part of
his life with Jiro.
Paris, V ienna, T okyo, London.
The med lar ’ s st ory starts where it is made. Edo, the old T okyo  before
the Black Ships of the Americ an Commodore Perry opened Japan up to
trade wi th the rest of the world  in 1859. But its first resting-place was in
Charles’ s study in Paris. It was in a room looking over the rue de Monceau
in the Hôtel Ephrussi.
I start well. I’m pleased because I have one direct, spoken link to
Charles. As a c hild of five, my  grandmother Elisabeth met Charles at the
Chalet Ephrussi in Meggen, on the edge of Lake Lucerne. The ‘chalet’ was
six store ys of rusticated stone surmounted by small baronial turrets, a house
of stupe ndous u gliness. It had been built in the early 1880s b y Charles’ s
oldest brother Jules and wife Fanny , as a place to escape the ‘horrid
oppression of Paris’. It was huge, grand enough to house all the ‘clan
Ephrussi’ from Paris and V ienna, and assorted cousins from Berlin.
The cha let had endless small p aths that crunched underfoot, with neat
box edging in t he English manner , small flowerbeds filled with bedding
plants, a nd a fierce gardener to tell the children of f for playing ; gravel did
not stray in this  severe Swiss g arden. The garden went down to the lake,
where th ere was a small jetty and boathouse, and more opportunities for
reprimand. Jule s, Charles and their middle brother Ignace were Russian
citizens and the Russian imperia l flag flew from the boathouse roof. There
were endless slow summers at the chalet. My grandmother was the
expected heir of the fabulously wealthy and childless Jules and  Fanny . She
remembered a lar ge painting in the dining-room of willows b y a stream.
She also remembered that there were only manservants in the  house, and
that eve n the cook was a man, which was wildly more exciting than her
own fam ily’ s ho usehold in V ienna with only old Josef the butler , the porter
who wo uld wink  at her as he op ened the gates to the Ring and the grooms
amidst all the m aids and cooks. Apparently manservants were l ess likely to
break the porcelain. And, she r emembered, there was porcela in on every
surface in this childless chalet.
Charles was middle-aged, but seemed old by comparison with his
infinitely more glamorous br others. Elisabeth remembered only his
beautiful beard and that he h ad an extremely delicate watch that he
produced from a waistcoat pocket. And that, in the manner of elderly
relatives, he had given her a golden coin.
But she also rem embered with great clarity , and more animation, that
Charles had bent down and ruf fled her sister ’ s hair . Her sister Gisela –
younger and far , far prettier – al ways got this kind of attention. Charles had
called her his little gypsy , his bohémienne .
And that is my oral link to Charles. It is history and yet, when I write it
down, it doesn’ t feel like much.
And wh at there is to go on – the  number of manservants and the  slightly
stock story of the gift of a coin – seems held in a sort of melancholic
penumbra, though I quite like the detail of the Russian flag. I know that my
family were Jewish, of course, and I know they were staggeringly rich, but I
really don’ t want to get into the sepia saga business, writing up some
elegiac Mitteleuropa narrative of loss. And I certainly don’ t w ant to turn
Iggie int o an old great-uncle in h is study , a figure like Bruce Chatwin’ s Utz,
handing over the family story , telling me: Go, be careful.
It could write itself, I think, this kind of story . A few stitched-together
wistful anecdotes, more about the Orient Express, of course, a bit of
wandering round Prague or somewhere equally photogenic, some clippings
from Google on ballrooms in the Belle Époque. It would come out as
nostalgic. And thin .
And I’m  not entitled to nostalgia about all that lost wealth and glamour
from a century ago. And I am n ot interested in thin . I want to know what
the relationship has been between this wooden object that I  am rolling
between my fingers – hard and t ricky and Japanese – and where it has been.
I wa nt to be able to reach to the handle of the door and turn it and feel it
open. I want to walk into each room where this object has lived, to feel the
volume of the space, to know what pictures were on the walls, h ow the light
fell f rom the win dows. And I wa nt to know whose hands it has been in, and
what they felt about it and thought about it – if they thought about it. I want
to know what it has witnessed.
Melancholy , I think, is a sort of default vagueness, a get-out clause, a
smothering lack of focus. And this netsuke is a small, tough explosion of
exactitude. It deserves this kind of exactitude in return.
All this matters  because my jo b is to make things. How objects get
handled, used and handed on is not just a mildly interesting question for me.
It is my  question . I have made many , ma ny thousands of pots. I am very bad
at names , I mumble and fudge, but I am good on pots. I can re member the
weight and the balance of a pot, and how its surface works with its volume.
I can  read how an edge creates tension or loses it. I can feel if it has been
made at speed or with diligence. If it has warmth.
I can  see  how it works with the objects that sit nearby . How it displaces
a small part of the world around it.
I can also remember if something invited touch with the whole hand or
just the fingers, or was an object that asked you to stay away . It is not that
handling someth ing is better  t han not handlin g it. Some things in the world
are mea nt to be looked at from a distance and not fumbled a round with.
And, as a potter , I find it a bit strange when people who have my pots talk
of th em as if they are alive: I am not sure if I can cope with the afterlife of
what I have ma de. But some o bjects do seem to retain the pulse of their
making.
This pul se intrig ues me. There i s a breath of hesitancy before touching
or not touching, a strange moment. If I choose to pick up this small white
cup with  its single chip near the handle, will it figure in my lif e? A simple
object, t his cup that is more ivory than white, too small for morning cof fee,
not q uite balanced, could becom e part of my life of handled things. It could
fall away into the territory of personal story-telling; the sensuous, sinuous
intertwining of things with me mories. A favoured, favourite thing. Or I
could put it away . Or I could pass it on.
How ob jects are  handed on is all about story-telling. I am giving you
this beca use I love you. Or because it was given to me. Because I bought it
somewhere spec ial. Because you will care for it. Because it will  complicate
your life. Because it will make someone else envious. There is no easy story
in legacy . What is remembered and what is for gotten? There can be a chain
of for getting, the rubbing away of previous ownership as much as the slow
accretion of stories. What is being passed on to me with all these small
Japanese objects?
I rea lise that I’v e been living w ith this netsuke business for too long. I
can eithe r anecd otalise it for the rest of my life – my odd inheritance from a
beloved elderly relative – or go  and find out what it means. On e evening I
find myself at a  dinner telling some academics what I know of the story ,
and feel slightly sickened by how poised it sounds. I hear myself
entertaining them , and the story  echoes back in their reactions.  It isn’ t just
getting smoothe r , it is getting thinner . I must sort it out now or it will
disappear .
Being busy is no excuse. I ha ve just finished an exhibition of my
porcelain in a m useum and can postpone a commission for a collector , if I
play my cards r ight. I have neg otiated with my wife and cleared my diary .
Three or  four months should see  me right. That gives me enough time to go
back to see Jiro in T okyo and to visit Paris and V ienna.
As my grandmother and my great-uncle Iggie have died, I must also ask
for my father ’ s help to get starte d. He is eighty and kindness itself and will
look out family things for me, he says, for background information. He
seems d elighted that one of his four sons is interested. There isn ’ t much, he
warns m e. He comes down to my studio with a small cache of p hotographs,
forty-odd. He also brings two th in blue files of letters to which h e has added
yellow Post-it notes, mostly legible, a family tree annotated by my
grandmother sometime in the 1970s, the membership book for the W iener
Club in 1935 an d, in a supermarket carrier bag, a pile of Th omas Mann
novels w ith insc riptions. W e lay them out on the long table in my of fice up
the stairs, above the room where I fire my pots in the kilns. Y ou are now the
keeper of the family archive, he tells me, and I look at the piles and am not
sure how funny I should find this.
I ask , somewhat desperately , if there is any more material. He looks
again th at eveni ng in his small  flat in the courtyard of retired cler gymen
where he lives. He telephones m e to say that he has found another volume
of Thom as Mann. This journey is going to be more complicated than I had
thought.
Still, I can’ t start with a complaint. I know very little of substan ce about
Charles, the first collector of the netsuke, but I have found where he lived in
Paris. I put a netsuke in my pocket and set out.

P a r t  O n e
P ARIS 1871–1899

1. LE WEST END
One sunny April day I set out to find Charles. Rue de Moncea u is a long
Parisian street bisected by the gr and boulevard Malesherbes that char ges of f
towards the boulevard Pereire. It is a hill of golden stone houses , a series of
hotels p laying discreetly on neoclassical themes, each a minor Florentine
palace with heavily rusticated ground floors and an array of heads, caryatids
and cartouches. Number 81 rue de Monceau, the Hôtel Ephruss i, where my
netsuke start their journey , is nea r the top of the hill. I pass the h eadquarters
of C hristian Lacroix and then, next door , there it is. It is now , rather
crushingly , an of fice for medical insurance.
It is utterly bea utiful. As a boy I used to draw buildings li ke this,
spending afterno ons carefully inking in shadows so that you could see the
rise and fall of the depth of the  windows and pillars. There is something
musical in this kind of elevation. Y ou take classical elements and try to
bring the m into rhythmic life: four Corinthian pilasters rising up  to pace the
façade, four massive stone urns on the parapet, five storeys high, eight
windows wide. The street level is made up of great blocks of st one worked
to lo ok as if they have been weathered. I walk past a couple of times and,
on t he third, not ice that there is  the double back-to-back E of the Ephrussi
family i ncorporated into the metal grilles over the street windows, the
tendrils of the letters reaching in to the spaces of the oval. It is barely there. I
try to work out this rectitude and what it says about their confidence. I duck
through the passageway to a courtyard, then through another arch to a stable
block of red bric k with servants’ quarters above; a pleasing diminuendo of
materials and textures.
A deliv ery man carries boxes of Speedy-Go Pizza into the medical
insurers. The door into the entrance hall is open. I walk into the hall, its
staircase curling up like a coil of smoke through the whole house, black cast
iron and gold fil igree stretching up to a lantern at the top. There is a marble
urn in a deep niche, chequerboard marble tiles. Executives are coming
down th e stairs, heels hard on m arble, and I retreat in embarras sment. How
can I start to explain this idiotic quest? I stand in the street an d watch the
house and take some photograp hs, apologetic Parisians ducking past me.
House-watching is an art. Y ou have to develop a way of se eing how a
building sits in i ts landscape or s treetscape. Y ou have to discover how much
room it takes up  in the world, how much of the world it displaces. Number
81, f or i nstance, is a house that cannily disappears into its neighbours: there
are other houses that are grander , some are plainer , but few are more
discreet.
I l ook up at the  second-floor windows where Charles had his suite of
rooms, s ome of which looked across the street to the more robus tly classical
house op posite, some across the courtyard into a busy roofscape  of urns and
gables a nd chim neypots. He had an antechamber , two salons – one of which
he turned into his study – a dining-room, two bedrooms and a ‘ petite ’. I try
to work it out; he and his older brother Ignace must have had neighbouring
apartments on this floor , their el der brother Jules and their wido wed mother
Mina b elow , with the higher ceilings and grander windows and the
balconies on which, on this April morning, there are now some rather leggy
red gera niums in plastic pots. The courtyard of the house was glazed,
according to the city records, though all that glass is long gone. And there
were five horses and three carriages in these stables which are now a perfect
bijou ho use. I wonder if that number of horses was appropriate for a lar ge
and social family wanting to make the right kind of impression.
It is  a huge house, but the three  brothers must have met every  day on
those bla ck-and-gold winding st airs, or heard each other as the noise of the
carriage being readied in the co urtyard echoed from the glazed canopy . Or
encountered frie nds going past their door on the way up to an apartment
above. T hey must have developed a way of not seeing each ot her , and not
hearing each other , too: to live so close to your family takes some doing, I
think, re flecting on my own bro thers. They must have got on well. Perhaps
they had no choice in the matter . Paris was work, after all.
The Hôt el Ephr ussi was a fam ily house, but it was also the Parisian
headquarters of a family in its ascendancy . It had its counterpart in V ienna,
the v ast Palais E phrussi on the Ringstrasse. Both the Parisian an d V iennese
buildings share a sense of dram a, of a public face to the world . They were
both bui lt in 1871 in new and fashionable areas: the rue de M onceau and
the Ringstrasse were so of-the -minute that they were unfinished, untidy ,
loud and  dusty building sites. They were still spaces that were inventing
themselves, com petitive with the older parts of town with the ir narrower
streets, and spikily arriviste.
If this particular  house in this particular streetscape seems a little stagey ,
it is because it is a staging of intent. These houses in Paris and V ienna were
part of a family plan: the Ephrussi family was ‘doing a Rothschild’. Just as
the R othschilds had sent their sons and daughters out from Frankfurt at the
start of the nine teenth century to colonise European capital c ities, so the
Abraham of my family , Charles Joachim Ephrussi, had masterminded this
expansion from Odessa in the 18 50s. A true patriarch, he had two sons from
his first marriage, Ignace and Lé on. And then when he remarried at fifty he
had cont inued producing childre n: two more sons, Michel and Maurice, and
two dau ghters, Thérèse and Marie. All of these six children were to be
deployed as financiers or married into suitable Jewish dynasties.
Odessa w as a city within the Pale of Settlement, the area on the western
borders of imperial Russia in which Jews were allowed to live. It was
famous for its rabbinical schoo ls and synagogues, rich in lit erature and
music, a  magnet  for the impove rished Jewish shtetls of Galicia. It was also
a city that doubled its population of Jews and Greeks and Russians every
decade, a polyglot city full of speculation and traders, the docks full of
intrigues and spies, a city on the make. Charles Joachim E phrussi had
transformed a small grain-trading business into a huge en terprise by
cornering the market in buying wheat. He bought the grai n from the
middlemen who  transported it o n carts along the heavily rutted roads from
the r ich black soil of the Ukrainian wheat fields, the greatest wh eat fields in
the wor ld, into the port of Odessa. Here the grain was stored in his
warehouses before being exported across the Black Sea, up the Danube,
across the Mediterranean.
By 1860 the family had become the greatest grain-exporters in the
world. I n Paris, James de Roths child was known as the le R oi de s Juifs , the
King of the Jews. The Ephrussi were les Rois de Blé , the Kings of Grain.
They we re Jews with their own  coat of arms: an ear of corn and a heraldic
boat with three masts and full s ails. Their motto, Quod honestum , unfurled
below the ship: W e ar e above r epr oach. Y ou can trust us.
The mas terplan was to build on this network of contacts and finance
huge ca pital pro jects: bridges across the Danube, railways across Russia
and acro ss France, docks and c anals. Ephrussi et Cie would change from
being a very successful commodity trading house into an international
finance house. It would become a bank. And each helpful deal s truck with a
government, each venture with an impoverished archduke, each client
drawn in to serio us obligation with the family would be a step to wards even
greater respectab ility , a step further from those wagons of wheat creaking in
from the Ukraine.
In 1 857 the two elder sons and their families were sent out from Odessa
to V ienn a, the capital city of the sprawling Hapsbur g Empire. They bought
a huge house in the city centre, and for ten years this was home to a shifting
population of grandparents, chil dren and grandchildren as the family moved
backwards and forwards between the two cities. One of the sons, my great-
great-grandfather Ignace, was ta sked with handling Ephrussi business in the
Austro-Hungarian Empire from this V ienna base. Paris came next: Léon,
the older son, was tasked with establishing the family and business here.
I’m stan ding outside Léon’ s outpost on a honey-coloured hill in  the 8th
arrondissement. Actually I am leaning against the house opposite and
thinking of that fiercely hot s ummer of 1871 when they a rrived from
V ienna t o this newly built, golde n mansion. It was a city still in trauma. The
siege by the Prussian army had  only ended a few months before with the
defeat of France and the declar ation of the German Empire in  the Hall of
Mirrors in V ersailles. The new Third Republic was shaky , assailed by
communards on the street and by factionalism in government.
The Hôtel Ephrussi in the rue de Monceau
Their house may have been fini shed, but all the neighbouring b uildings
were still under construction. T he plasterers had only just left,  the gilders
were lyi ng unco mfortably on the shallow stairs burnishing the finials on the
handrail. Furnit ure, pictures, crates of crockery are shifted slowly up to
their apartments . There is noise inside and noise outside, and all the
windows are open onto the street. Léon is unwell with a hear t complaint.
And the family h ave a terrible st art to their life in this beautiful s treet. Betty ,
the y oungest of Léon and Mina’ s four children, married to a yo ung Jewish
banker of unimpeachable suitab ility , dies within weeks of givin g birth to a
daughter , Fanny . They have to b uild a family tomb in the Jewish section of
the c emetery in Montmartre in their newly adopted city . It is G othic, lar ge
enough for the whole clan, a w ay of making it clear that they are staying
here, wh atever is going to happe n. I finally find it. The gates are gone and it
has caught drifts of autumn’ s chestnut leaves.
This hil l was the perfect setting for the Ephrussi family . Just as the
Ringstrasse in V ienna, where the other half of the family lives, was
acerbically kno wn as ‘Zionstrasse’, so Jewish money was a key
denominator of life here in the rue de Monceau. The area was d eveloped in
the 1860 s by Isaac and Emile Pereire, two Sephardic brothe rs who had
made their fortunes as financiers, railroad-builders and property magnates,
creating colossal developments of hotels and department stores. They
acquired the plaine Monceau, a lar ge nondescript area that was originally
beyond the city limits, and set to work developing hous es for the
bur geoning financial and comm ercial elite, an appropriate landscape for the
newly arrived Jewish families from Russia and the Levant. These streets
became a virtual colony , a c omplex of intermarriage, obligation and
religious sympathy .
The Pereires relandscaped the existing eighteenth-century park in order
to im prove the v iews of the new  houses around it. New cast-iron gates with
gilded e mblems of the Pereires’ activities now led into it. There was an
attempt to call t he area around the parc Monceau Le W est End. If you are
asked where the boulevard Malesherbes leads, a contemporary journalist
wrote, ‘answer boldly: to Le W est End…One could give it a French name,
but that would be vulgar; an English name was far more fashionable.’ This
was the park in which, according to a waspish journalist, you c ould watch
‘the great dames of the noble F aubour g…the female “illustrations” of “La
Haute Finance” and “La Haute C olonie Israélite” promenade’. T he park had
sinuous paths and flowerbeds in the new English style with displays of
colourful annuals that had to be  constantly renewed, far removed from the
grey , clipped formalities of the T uileries.
As I walk down the hill from the  Hôtel Ephrussi at what I consider to be
a good flaneurial pace, slower than usual, weaving from one side of the
road to the othe r to check on details of the mouldings of wi ndows, I’m
conscious that many of the houses I pass have these stories of reinvention
embedded in them. Almost everyone who built them started somewhere
else.
T en hou ses down from the Eph russi household, at number 61, is the
house o f Abrah am de Camondo, with his brother Nissim at 63 and their
sister Rebecca over the street at number 60. The Camondos, Jewish
financiers like the Ephrussi, had come to Paris from Constantino ple by way
of V enice. The banker Henri Cernuschi, a plutocratic supporter of the Paris
Commune, had come to Paris f rom Italy and lived in chilly magnificence
with his Japanese treasures on the edge of the park. At numb er 55 is the
Hôtel C attaui, h ome to a family  of Jewish bankers from Egypt.  At number
43 is the palace of Adolphe de  Rothschild, acquired from Eugène Pereire
and rebuilt with a glass-roofed  exhibition room for his Ren aissance art
collection.
But nothing compares to the mansion built by the chocolate magnate
Émile-Justin Menier . It was a b uilding so splendidly excessive, so eclectic
in its garnished  decorations, glimpsed above its high walls, that Zola’ s
description of it as ‘an opulent bastard of every style’ still seems about
right. In  his dark novel of 187 2, La curée , Saccard – a rapacious Jewish
property magnat e – lives here on the rue de Monceau. Y ou feel this street as
the fami ly move in: it is a street of Jews, a street full of people o n display in
their lavish golden houses. Monceau  is slang in Paris for nouveau riche,
newly arrived.
This is the world in which my netsuke first settled. On this street down
the h ill I  feel this play between discretion and opulence, a sort of breathing-
in and breathing-out of invisibility and visibility .
Charles Ephrussi was twenty-one when he came to live here. Paris was
being pl anted w ith trees, and w ide pavements were taking the place of the
cramped interstices of the old city . There had been fifteen years of constant
demolition and rebuilding unde r the direction of Baron Haussmann, the
civic pla nner . He  had razed med ieval streets and created new pa rks and new
boulevards. V istas were opened up with extraordinary velocity .
If you want to taste this mom ent, taste the dust sweeping al ong the
newly paved avenues and acro ss the bridges, look at two paintings of
Gustave Caillebotte. Caillebotte, a few months older than Charles, lived
around t he corne r from the Ephr ussi family in another grand ho tel. Y ou see
in his Le p ont de l’Eur ope  a young  man, well dressed in h is grey overcoat
and black top h at, maybe the artist, walking over the bridge along the
generous pavement. He is two s teps ahead of a young woman in a dress of
sedate frills carrying a parasol. The sun is out. There is the glare of newly
dressed stone. A dog passes by . A workman leans over the bridge. It is like
the star t of the world: a litany of perfect movements an d shadows.
Everyone, including the dog, knows what they are doing.
Gustave Caillebotte,  Le pont de l’Europe, 1876
The streets of Paris have a calmness to them: clean stone façades,
rhythmic detailing of balconies , newly planted lime trees appear in his
painting Jeune homme à sa fenêtr e , s hown  in the second Impres sionist
exhibition in 1876. Here Cailleb otte’ s brother stands at the open window of
their family apartment looking  out onto the intersection of the rue de
Monceau’ s neig hbouring streets. He stands with his hands in his pockets,
well dre ssed and  self-assured, with his life before him and a plu sh armchair
behind him.
Everything is possible.
This cou ld be the young Charles . He was born in Odessa and spends the
first ten years of  his life in a yellow-stuccoed palais  on the edge of a dusty
square fringed with chestnut tre es. If he climbs to the attics of the house he
can see all the way across the m asts of the ships in the port to the sea. His
grandfather occupies a whole floor and all the space. The bank i s next door .
He cann ot move along the promenade without someone stopping his
grandfather or father or uncles to ask them for information, a favour , a
kopek, s omething. He learns, without knowing it, that to mov e in public
means a  series of encounters and avoidances; how to give money to beggars
and pedlars, how to greet acquaintances without stopping.
Then Ch arles m oves to V ienna, living there for the next decade with his
parents, his siblings, his uncle Ignace and glacial aunt Émilie, and his three
cousins – Stefan (haughty), Ann a (acerbic) and the little boy V iktor . A tutor
comes e ach morning. They learn their languages: Latin, Greek, German and
English. They are always to speak French at home, and are allowed to use
Russian amongst themselves, but must not be caught speaking the Y iddish
that they  picked  up in the courtyards in Odessa. All these cousin s can start a
sentence in one language and finish it in another . They need these
languages, as the family travels  to Odessa, to St Petersbur g, to Berlin and
Frankfurt and Paris. They also need these languages as they are
denominators of class. W ith languages, you can move from one social
situation to another . W ith languages, you are at home anywher e .
They vis it Breug hel’ s Hunters in the Snow  with its patchwork of dogs
busy on the ridg e. They open th e cabinets of drawings in the Albertina, the
watercolours by Dürer of the t rembling hare, the outstretched  wing of a
lapidary bird. They learn to ride  in the Prater . The boys are tau ght to fence
and all the cousins take dance lessons. All the cousins dance well. Charles,
at eighteen, has a family nickname, le Polonais , the Pole, the waltzing boy .
It is in V ienna that the oldest boys, Jules, Ignace and Stefan, are taken to
the of fices of f the Ringstrasse on the Schottenbastei. It is a  forbidding
building. This is where the Ephrussi conduct business. The boy s are told to
sit quietly as shipments of grain are discussed and percentages on stock are
queried. There are new possib ilities in oil in Baku and gold near Lake
Baikal. Clerks scurry . This is w here they are blooded in the sheer scale of
what will be theirs, taught the catechism of profit from the endless columns
in the ledgers.
This is when C harles sits with his youngest cousin V iktor and draws
Laocoön and the snakes, the statue he loved in Odessa, making the coils
extra spe cially t ight around muscly shoulders to impress the bo y . It takes a
long time to draw each of those snakes well. He sketches what he has seen
in th e Albertina. He sketches the servants. And he talks to his parents’
friends about their pictures. It is always pleasing to have your paintings
discussed by such a knowledgeable young man.
And the n at last there is the long-planned move to Paris. Charles is
good-looking, sl ightly built with a neatly trimmed dark beard, which has a
haze of red in particular lights. He has an Ephrussi nose, lar ge and beaked,
and the high for ehead of all the  cousins. His eyes are dark grey and alive,
and he is charm ing. Y ou see how well dressed he is, with his cravat
beautifully folded, and then you hear him talk: he is as good a talker as a
dancer .
Charles is free to do what he wants.
I want to think t his is because he was the youngest son and the t hird son
and, as in all good children’ s stories, it is always the third son who gets to
leave ho me and go adventuring – pure projection, as I am a third son. But I
suspect that the family know this boy is not cut out for the life of the
Bourse. His uncles Michel and Maurice have moved to Paris: perhaps there
were enough sons for the of fice s of Ephrussi et Cie at 45 rue de l’Arcade
not to miss this pleasant bookish one, with his habit of withdrawing when
money comes up and that aptitude for losing himself in conversation.
Charles has his new apartment in the family house, gilded and clean,
and emp ty . He has somewhere to come back to, a new house on a newly
paved Parisian hill. He has lang uages, he has money and he has time. So
now he sets of f  wandering. Like a well-brought-up young man, Charles
goes south. He goes to Italy .
2. UN LIT DE P ARADE
In the prehistory  of my netsuke collection this is the first age of Charles’ s
collections. Perh aps as a boy he had picked up conkers from the  trees in the
promenade in Odessa, or collect ed coins in V ienna, but this is w here I know
he starts. What he starts with and brings back to his apartment at 81 rue de
Monceau shows avidity . A vidity or greed or liberated excitement: he
certainly buys a lot.
He has a year away from his family , a gap year , a conventional
W anderjahr , a  Grand T our  through the c anon of Renaissance art. This
journey turns Charles into a collector . Or perhaps, I think, it al lows him to
collect, to turn looking into having and having into knowing.
Charles buys drawings and m edallions, Renaissance enamels and
sixteenth-century tapestries made after Raphael cartoons. He buys a marble
child in the man ner of Donatello. He buys a beautiful faience sculpture of a
young faun by Luca della Ro bbia, an ambiguous, vulnerable creature
turning round to look back at us, glazed in deep Madonna blue and yolky
yellows. Back in his second-floor apartment Charles frames it in a niche in
his bedroom hung with sixteenth-century Italian broderies, thickly
embroidered textiles. It becomes a sort of satyric altarpiece, with the faun
taking the place of a martyred saint.
There is  an illustration of this altarpiece in a vast maroon three -volume
elephant folio in the library at the V ictoria and Albert Museum . I order it
up, and there is much jocularity  when it is brought into the Reading Room
on a hospital tro lley . This musée graphique  c ontain s engravings of all the
major c ollections of Renaissan ce art in Europe, principally those of Sir
Richard W allace (of the W allace Collection in London), assorted
Rothschilds – and the twenty-three-year -old Charles. These folios are vanity
publishing on a colossal scale , produced by collectors to im press other
collectors. Three pages after his sumptuous niche for the faun – a deep
bur gundy with raised golden t hreads, panels of saints, coats of arms –
another part of his collection is revealed.
It makes  me laugh out loud: a huge Renaissance bed, a lit de parade
also hung with b roderies. A high canopy with putti embowered  in intricate
patterns, grotesque heads, hera ldic emblems, flowers and fruit. T wo rich
curtains are held back with hea vily tasselled ropes, each with an E on a
golden b ackground. On the bedhead itself is another E. It is a sort of ducal
bed – almost a p rinceling’ s bed. It belongs to fantasy . It is a bed from which
to ru le a  city state, give audiences, to write sonnets in, certain ly to make
love in. What kind of young man would buy a bed like this?
I w rite down this long list of h is new possessions and try to imagine
being tw enty-three, with these crates of treasures heaved up the winding
stairs to  the second floor and o pened with all the shavings a nd splinters
flying; arrangin g them in my own suite of rooms, trying out their
disposition in relation to the mo rning sun that floods in from the street. As
visitors come into the salon, should they see a wall of dra wings or a
tapestry? Should  they glimpse my lit de parade ? I imagine showing the
enamels to my parents and my brothers, showing of f to my family . And I
have a sudden, embarrassed return to being sixteen and hauling my bed into
the corri dor in order to sleep on the floor , and tacking up a car pet over my
mattress to make a canopy . And  weekends spent rehanging my pictures and
rearranging my books, trying out how it felt to change my own space. It
feels eminently possible.
It is, of course, a stage-set. All  these things that Charles colle cted are
objects that need a connoisseur ’ s eye, all are things tha t speak of
knowledge, history , lineage, of collecting itself. Unpick this list of treasures
– tapestries woven after  Raphael cartoons, sculpture after  Donatello – and
you can  feel that Charles has be gun to internalise how art unfo lds through
history . Back in Paris he don ates a rare fifteenth-century medallion of
Hippolytus torn apart by wild horses to the Louvre. I think I can begin to
hear the  young art historian talking to visitors. Y ou sense the no tebook, not
just the money .
But I also begin to feel his plea sure in stuf f here: the surprising weight
of damask, the chill of the surface of enamels, the patina of b ronzes, the
heft of the raised thread on the embroideries.
This first collection is totally co nventional. Many of his parents’ friends
would have had similar objects within their houses, and would have brought
them together to make set-piece s of decorative sumptuousness , just as the
young Charles created his own bur gundy-and-gold mise en scène  in his
Parisian bedroo m. It is just a smaller version of what was happening
elsewhere in other Jewish hous eholds. He is showing, rather emphatically
for a  young man, how grown-up he is. And he is preparing himself for a life
in public.
If you wanted to see set-piece s at scale you could go to any  of the
Rothschild houses in Paris or , indeed, to James de Rothschild’ s  new palace
at Ferrières, just outside the city . Here the works of the Renaissance Italy of
merchants and bankers were celebrated: remember that great patronage
comes th rough t he astute use o f money and is not hereditary . Rather than
having a great h all, chivalric and Christian, Ferrières had a ce ntral indoor
piazza w ith four great doorways leading to dif ferent parts of  the house.
Under a  T iepolo  ceiling there w as a gallery of tapestries of the T riumphs,
sculptured figures in black-and-white marble, and pictures by V elázquez,
Rubens, Guido Reni and Remb randt. Above all, there was a lot of gold:
gold on the fur niture, on the picture frames, on the mouldings, in the
tapestries, and embedded – ev erywhere – were gilded symbols of the
Rothschilds. Le goût Rothschild  had become a s horthand for gilding. Jews
and their gold.
Charles’ s sensib ility stops short of Ferrières. As does his sp ace, of
course: he only has his two salo ns and his bedroom. But Char les not only
has a place in which he could arrange his new possessions and his books,
but also  has a s ense of himself as a young scholar -collector . He is in the
extraordinary po sition of being both ridiculously af fluent and very self-
directed.
And neither of these things warms me to him at all. In fact the bed
makes me feel a little queasy: I am not sure how much time I can face with
this young man and his good eye for art and interior decoration, netsuke or
no. Connoisseur , goes the alarm. And thinks he knows too much, too young.
And, of course, much, much too rich for his own good.
I realise that I must understand how Charles looked at things, and for
this I must read his writings. I  am in safe academic territory here: I will
make a complete bibliography , and I will work my way through it in
chronological o rder . I start by reading old volumes of the Gazette des
beaux-arts  from the time when Charles comes to live in Paris, noting down
his f irst, rather d ry published comments on Mannerist painters, bronzes and
Holbein. I feel focused, if dut iful. He has a favourite V enetian painter ,
Jacopo d e’ Barb ari, who was k een on St Sebastian, the comba t of T ritons
and writhing bound nudes. I’m not sure how significant th is taste for
eroticised subjects will prove. I remember Laocoön and feel a little anxious.
He start s poorly . There are no tes on exhibitions, books, essays, and
notes on  publications: the expected art-historical detritus on the mar gins of
other people’ s scholarship (‘notes towards an authentication of ’, ‘responses
to th e catalogue raisonné of ’) . These texts are a little like his Italian
collections and I feel I am making scant headway . But, as the we eks go by , I
find my self starting to relax into Charles’ s company: this first collector of
the n etsuke begins to write mor e fluidly . There are unexpected registers of
feeling. Three weeks of my precious spring go by , and then another
fortnight, a mad expense of days unspooling in the dimness in Periodicals.
Charles learns to spend time with a picture. He has been and  looked,
you feel, and then gone back and looked again. There are essays on
exhibitions where you feel this touch on the shoulder , that turn to look
again, move closer , move furth er away . Y ou feel his growing  confidence
and his passion, and then at last the beginning of a steeliness in his writings,
a di slike of set  opinions. Charles holds his feelings in balance with his
judgements, but writes so that y ou are aware of both. This is rar e in writing
on art, I think, as the weeks fall away from me in the library and my stack
of Gazettes  builds around me, a tower of new questions, each volume a
matrix of bookmarks and yellow Post-it notes and reserve slips.
My eyes hurt. The type is eight-point, less for the notes. At l east my
French is returning. I begin to think that I can work with this man. He is not
showing of f about how much he  knows, most of the time. He wa nts to make
us see more clearly what is in front of him. That seems honourable enough.
3. ‘A MAHOUT T O GUIDE HER’
It is not yet time for the netsuke to enter the story . Charles in his twenties is
always elsewhe re, in transit to somewhere, sending regards and his
apologies for missing family gat herings, from London, V enice, Munich. He
is starting to write a book on Dürer , the artist he fell for in the collections of
V ienna, and he n eeds to find eve ry drawing, every scribble in ev ery archive,
in order to do him justice.
His two older brothers are safely ensconced in their own worlds. Jules is
at the helm of Ephrussi et Cie in the rue de l’Arcade with his uncles. His
early tra ining in V ienna has pai d of f and he turns out to be very good with
money . And he has got married  in the synagogue in V ienna to Fanny , the
clever , wry young widow of a V iennese financier . She is very rich, and it is
all a ppropriately  dynastic. The gossip in the papers in Paris an d V ienna is
that he danced with her every night until she wearied, gave in and married
him.
Ignace has cut loose. He is pro ne to falling spectacularly , serially , in
love. As  an amateur de la fe mme , his particular skill is an ability to climb
buildings and into high window s for assignations – something I later find
recalled in memoirs of elderly society ladies. He is a mondain , a Parisian
man of the worl d, living between love-af fairs, evenings at the Jockey Club
– th e epicentre of bachelor society – and duelling. This is illegal, but
occupies the time of wealthy young men and army of ficers, who resort to
rapiers o ver issues of minute tr ansgressions of honour . Ignace turns up in
the duelling manuals of the day , one newspaper recording an accident where
his eye is almost taken out in a bout with his tutor . Ignace is ‘relatively tall
but a little und er the average height…Gifted with ener gy which is also
luckily backed up by steel m uscles…Mr Ephrussi is one amongst the
keenest…he is also one of the most friendly and frankest fencers I know .’
Here he is, posed nonchalantly with a rapier , like a Hilliard min iature of
an Eliza bethan courtier: ‘an untiring sportsman, you will find him in the
forest early in t he morning, riding a superb dapple-grey; he has already
taken hi s fencin g lesson…’ I th ink of Ignace checking the len gths of the
stirrups in the s tables in the rue  de Monceau. When he rides, his horse is
arrayed ‘in the Russian manner ’. I’m not quite sure what this entails, but it
sounds splendid.
It is in the salons that Charles fir st comes into view . He is noticed by the
acidic n ovelist, diarist and collector Edmond de Goncourt in his journal.
That people such as Charles were invited to salons at all disgusted the
novelist: the salons had become ‘infested with Jews and Jewesses’. He
comments on these new young men that he encounters: these Ephrussi were
‘ mal élevés ’, badly brought  up, and ‘insupportables’ , insuf ferable. Charles,
he intim ates, is ubiquitous, the  trait of someone who does not know his
place; he  is hungry for contact, does not know when to shade eagerness and
become invisible.
Goncourt is jealous of this charming boy with the slightest of ac cents to
his French. Charles has wal ked, seemingly without ef fort, into the
formidable, fashionable salons of the day , each of which was a minefield of
fiercely contested geographies of political, artistic, religious and aristocratic
taste. There were many , but the three principal salons we re those of
Madame Straus (the widow of Bizet), of the Countess Gref fulh e, and of a
rarefied painter of watercolours of flowers, Madame Madeleine Lemaire. A
salon co nsisted of a drawing-room full of regularly invited guests, meeting
at a set time in  the afternoon or evening. Poets, playwrights, painters,
‘clubmen’, mondains  would meet under the patronage of a hostess to
engage in conversation around issues of note, or purposeful g ossip, or to
listen to music or see a new so ciety portrait unveiled. Each salon had its
own dis tinct atmosphere and its own acolytes: those who of fended Mme
Lemaire were ‘bores’ or ‘deserters’.
Mme Lemaire’ s Thursday salon  is mentioned in an early essay of the
young M arcel P roust. He evokes the scent of lilacs filling her studio and
drifting into the rue de Monceau, crowded with the carriages of the beau
monde. Y ou could never get through the rue de Monceau on a Thursday .
Proust n otices C harles. There is a hubbub and he moves closer through the
throng of writers and socialites. Charles is there in a corner talking to a
portrait painter , their heads bowed and conversing so softly and intensely
that, though he hovers nearby , Proust cannot overhear even a scintilla of
their conversation.
Goncourt, splenetic, is particularly furious that young Charles has
become a confidant of his  Princes s Mathi lde, the niece of Bonaparte. She
lives nearby in a  vast mansion i n the rue de Courcelles. He records gossip
that she has been seen at Charle s’ s house in the rue de Monceau along with
the ‘ gratin ’, the upper crust, of the aristoc racy , that the Princess had found
in C harles ‘a mahout to guide her through her life’. It is an u nfor gettable
image o f the formidable, aged Princess in her black, an elephantine
presence rather like Queen V ictoria, and this young man in his twenties,
able to guide her with the merest of suggestions, of touch.
Charles is starting to find a life for himself in this complex and snobbish
city . He  is beginning to disco ver the places where his conversation is
welcomed, whe re his Jewishness is either acceptable or where it is
overlooked. As a young writer o n art, he goes to the of fices of  the Gazette
des beaux-arts  in  the rue Favart each day – taking in six or seven salons en
route, adds the o mniscient Goncourt. From family house to these editorial
of fices i s exactly twenty-five minutes’ brisk walk, or on my April morning
forty-five minut es of flaneurial stroll. I suppose Charles might go in a
carriage, I worry , but I can’ t time that.
The Gazette,  the ‘ Courrier eur opé en de l’art et de la curiosité ’, has a
canary-yellow cover and on its title page an aesthetic display of
Renaissance artefacts on top of a classical tomb surmounted by a furious-
looking Leonardo. For your seven francs you get reviews of the dif ferent
exhibitions jockeying for position in Paris, the Exposition des artistes
indépendants , the  of ficial Sa lons hung floor to ceiling with paintings, the
surveys at the T rocadéro and the Louvre. It is cuttingly described as ‘an
expensive art-m agazine which every great lady kept open but un read on her
table’ an d it certainly holds a rep utation as an essential part of society life, a
W orld of Interiors  as well as an Apollo . In the beautifu l oval library of  the
Camondo mansi on down the hill from the Hôtel Ephrussi are shelves and
shelves of its bound volumes.
Here at the of fices are other writers and artists, and the best art library in
Paris, full of per iodicals from all over Europe and catalogues of exhibitions.
It is  an exclusive arts club, a p lace to share news and gossip about which
painter is working on which commission, who is out of favour with the
collectors or with the jurists for the Salon. It is also busy . The Gazette  is
published monthly and so it is a real place of work. There  are all the
decisions to be taken on who will be writing on what, the ordering of
engravings and illustrations. Y ou can learn a lot by being here day by day ,
watching the ar guments.
When Charles, just back from his plundering of Italian art dealers, starts
to write for the Gazette , i t includes lavi sh engravings of the pictures of the
day , artefacts mentioned in the scholarly reviews and key pictures from the
Salon represented in careful reproduction. I pick out an issue  at random
from 18 78. It includes, amongst other things, articles on Spanish tapestry ,
Greek archaic sculpture, the a rchitecture of the Champ de Mars, and
Gustave Courbe t – all, of course, with illustrations interleaved with tissue
mounts. It is the  perfect journal for a young man to write for , a calling-card
into those places where society and art intersect.
I fin d the traces  of these intersections by hacking my way assi duously
through the social columns of Parisian newspapers of the 1870s . I start this
as a necessary clearing of the under growth, but it becomes strangely
compelling and a relief from my dogged attempt to chart every single one
of C harles’ s exhibition reviews . There are the same labyrinth ine lists of
encounters and guests, the minu tiae of who wore what, who is to be seen,
each run of names a calibration of snubs and fine judgements.
I ge t particularly hooked by the  listings of wedding-presents at society
marriages, tellin g myself that th is is all good research on cultures of gift-
giving, and waste an embarrassing amount of time trying to work out who
is being  over -ge nerous, who a c heapskate and who is just dull . My great-
great-grandmother gives a set of golden serving dishes shaped like cockle
shells at  a society wedding in 1 874. V ulgar , I think, with nothing to back
this up.
And am ongst all  these Parisian b alls and musical soirées, the salons and
receptions, I start to find me ntions of the three brothers. They stick
together: the MM. Ephrussi are seen in the box at a premiere at the Opéra,
at funerals, at the receptions of Prince X, Countess Y . The T sar has made a
visit to the city and they are there to greet him as promin ent Russian
citizens. They give parties jointly , are noted for the ‘grand series of dinners
they are  hosting together ’, have been spotted, along with other sportsmen ,
on the latest thing, the bicycle. One column of Le Gaulois  is  devoted to
déplacements  – who i s of f to Deauville and who to Chamonix – so I know
when th ey leave  Paris for their  holidays in Meggen at Jules and Fanny’ s
baronial Chalet Ephrussi. From their golden house on the hill t hey seem to
have become an accepted part of  Parisian society within a few years of their
arrival. Monceau , I remember , quick-going.
The elegant Charles has new int erests apart from rearranging his rooms
and perf ecting his sinuous art-historical sentences. He has a mistress. And
he h as s tarted to collect Japanese art. These two things, sex an d Japan, are
intertwined.
He owns  no netsuke yet, but he is getting much closer . I am willing him
on as he starts his collection, buying lacquer from a dealer in J apanese art
called P hilippe Sichel. Goncour t writes in his journal that he has been to
Sichel’ s, ‘the place where Jewish money comes’ he goes into a back room
in searc h of the latest objet , the newest album of erotic prints, a scroll
maybe. Here he comes acros s ‘la Cahen d’Anvers, crouched over a
Japanese lacquer box with her lover , the young Ephrussi’.
She is indicating  to him ‘the time and place that he can make lo ve with
her ’.
4. ‘SO LIGHT , SO SOFT T O THE T OUCH’
Charles’ s lover is Louise Cahen  d’Anvers. She is a couple of years older
than Charles and very pretty , with red-gold hair . ‘La Cahen d’Anvers’ is
married to a Jewish banker and they have four small children, a boy and
three girls. The fifth child arrives and Louise calls him Charles.
I on ly know a bout Parisian marriages from the novels of Nancy
Mitford, but this strikes me as extraordinarily sanguine. And rather
impressive – I want to be bour geois and ask how you find ti me for five
children, a husband and  a lover?  The two clans are very  close. In fact, as I
stand in the place d’Iéna outside Jules and Fanny’ s marital home, his initials
floridly entwine d with hers ab ove the grander doors, I find  that I am
looking straight across the road  to Louise’ s equally baroque ne w palace at
the corn er of the rue de Bassano. At this point I wonder if the clever ,
indefatigable Fanny arranged this af fair for her best friend.
There was certainly something very intimate about the whole
arrangement. They met constan tly at the round of receptions and balls and
the two families often holida yed together at the Chalet E phrussi in
Switzerland or at the Cahen d’ Anvers chateau at Champs-sur -Marne just
outside Paris. What was the etiq uette of meeting your friend on  the way up
the stairs to yo ur brother -in-la w’ s apartment? These lovers might have
needed the back rooms of deale rs just to get away from all this smothering,
knowing amiability . And the children.
Charles, this increasingly adept  and helpful young man of the salons,
arranged for his society friend  Léon Bonnat to do a pastel portrait of
Louise. She is p ictured in a pa le dress, looking down demurely , her hair
half-hiding her face.
In fact, Louise was far from d emure. Goncourt records her with his
novelist’ s eye, on Saturday 28th February 1876, in her salon:
 
The Jew s retain,  from their orien tal origin, a peculiar nonchalance. T oday , I
was cha rmed as I observed Mme Louise Cahen fishing in the bo ttom of her
vitrine of porcelain and lacquer ware, wanting to hand me some; she moved
like a lazy cat. A nd when they a re blond – these Jews – there is, at the heart
of th eir blondness, something g olden, like the painting of the MISTRESS OF
TITIAN . He r search completed, the Jew ess dropped onto a chaise longu e, her
head flung back to one side an d revealing at the head, a coil of hair that
resembled a nest of snakes. Pulling various amused, questioning
expressions, and, wrinkling her nose, she complained of the
unreasonableness of men and of novelists expecting women  not to be
human creatures and not to have, in love, the same disgust as men.
 
It is an u nfor gettable image of e roticised langour: the mistress of T itian
is in deed very golden and very  naked, one hand loosely cover ing herself.
Y ou sense Louise’ s power ov er the famous writer , her control of the
situation. She is, after all, ‘ ma muse alpha ’ for Paul Bour get, another
popular novelist  of the day . In t he portrait she commissioned of herself for
her o wn salon f rom Carolus-Duran, the  s oc iety painter of the moment, she
is barely  contain ed in her swirling gown, her lips slightly parted. There is a
lot o f drama in this muse. It makes me wonder why she wanted this
aesthetic young man as a lover .
It m ay have bee n his lack of histrionics, the deliberative pace o f an art
historian. Or it may have been due to her having two huge households, a
husband and a run of children, whilst Charles was unencumbere d, perfectly
free to entertain her when she needed distraction. It is certain th at the lovers
shared a  real interest in music, a rt and poetry – and in musicians, artists and
poets. L ouise’ s brother -in-law , Albert, was a composer , and Charles and
Louise went with him to the Opéra in Paris, and to the more radical
premieres in Brussels to hear M assenet. They were both passionate about
W agner , a kind of passion that is hard to dissemble, but good to share.
W agner ’ s operas, I imagine, also give the couple plenty of time to
themselves in one of those deep, plush boxes at the Opéra. They were
present at a small and select dinner party ( sans  the husband) followed by a
recital of poetry by Anatole France, hosted by Proust.
And they buy Japanese black-and-gold lacquer boxes together for their
parallel collections: they start their love-af fair with Japan.
It is with Louise, weary after an ar gument with her husband or with
Charles, indolently fishing in her vitrine of Japanese lacquer bibelots, then
falling back on to her chaise longue, that I know that I am getting closer to
the n etsuke. They are coming into focus, part of a complex, fra ctious Paris
life that really existed.
I w ant to find h ow these nonchalant Parisians, Charles and his lover ,
handled Japanes e things. What was it like to have something so alien in
your hands for t he first time, to pick up a box or a cup – or a netsuke – in a
material that you had never encountered before and shift it around, finding
its weight and balance, running a fingertip along the raised decoration of a
stork in flight through clouds? There must be a literature  on touch
somewhere, I think; someone must have recorded in a diary or a letter the
fugitive momen t of what they felt when they picked one up. Th ere must be
a trace of their hands somewhere.
Goncourt’ s asid e is a good place to start. Charles and Louise bought
their firs t pieces  of Japanese lac quer from the house of the Sichel brothers.
It was not a gallery where each collector was reverently shown objets  and
prints in  separat e booths, as at the up-market gallery of Siegfrie d Bing, the
Oriental Art Boutique, but an o ver -flowing morass of everything Japanese.
The quantities were overwhelming. Philippe Sichel sent forty-five crates
with 5,0 00 objects back from Y okohama after one buying trip in 1874
alone. T his crea ted a febrile atm osphere. What was here, and w here was it?
W ould other collectors find the treasure before you?
This ma ss of Japanese art insp ired reverie. Goncourt recorded a day
spent at the Sichels soon af ter a delivery had arrived f rom Japan,
surrounded by ‘ tout cet art capiteux et hallucinatoir e ’ – all this intoxicating,
mesmerising art. Since 1859 prints and ceramics had begun to seep into
France; by the early 1870s thi s had become a flood of things . A writer
looking back on the very earliest days of this infatuation with J apanese art
wrote in the Gazette  in 1878:
 
One kept oneself informed about new car goes. Old ivories, enamels, faience
and porcelain, bronzes, lacquer , wooden sculptures…embroidered satins,
playthings, simply arrived at a merchant’ s shop and immediately left for
artists’ studios or writers’ studies…They entered the hands of…Carolus
Duran, Manet, James T issot, Fantin-Latour , Degas, Monet, the writers
Edmond and Jules de Goncourt, Philippe Burty , Zola…the travellers
Cernuschi, Duret, Emile Guim et…The movement was estab lished, the
amateurs followed.
 
Even more extraordinary was the occasional sight of:
 
young men in our great faubour gs, on our boulevards, in the theatre, whose
appearance surprises us…They wear top hats or small rounded felt ones
resting on fine and lustrous black hair , long and straight back, the cloth
frock coat is correctly buttoned, clear grey trousers, fine shoes and with a
cravat of some dark colour floa ting on the elegant linen. If the jewel that
fixes thi s cravat  was not too visible, the trousers not splayed by the instep,
the t op boots not too glossy , the cane not too light, – these nuances betray
the man who su bmits to the tast e of his tailor instead of imposing his taste
on them, – we would take them to be Parisians. Y ou cross them on the
pavement, you look at them: their skin is lightly bronzed, the beard rare;
some of them have adopted the moustache…the mouth is lar ge, conformed
to op en squarely , in the fashion o f masks in Greek comedy; the cheek-bones
become round and the forehea d protuberant on the oval of the face; the
external angles of the small bridled eyes, but black and alive, with a
piercing gaze, lift towards the temples. They are the Japanese.
 
It is  a breath-catching descriptio n of being a stranger in a new  culture,
almost impercep tible except for your meticulous dress. The passer -by takes
a second look, a nd it is only the completeness of your disguise that gives
you away .
It also reveals th e strangeness of this encounter with Japan. Though the
Japanese were extremely rare in Paris in the 1870s – there were delegations
and diplomats and the odd prince – their art was ubiquitous. Everyone had
to g et their han ds on these japonaiseries : all  the painte rs Charles was
starting to meet in the salons, all  the writers Charles knew from the Gazette ,
his family , his family friends , his lover , all were living through this
convulsion. Fan ny Ephrussi records in her letters shopping trips  to Mitsui, a
fashionable sho p in the rue Martel that sold Far Eastern objects, to buy
Japanese wallpa per for the new smoking-room and guest bedrooms in the
house that she a nd Jules had jus t finished building in the place d’Iéna. How
could C harles, t he critic, the we ll-dressed amateur d’art  and collector , not
buy Japanese art?
In the Parisian artistic hothou se it mattered when you started your
collection. Earli er collectors, japonistes,  had the edge as they were men of
superior appreci ation and creators of taste. Goncourt, naturally , managed to
suggest that he and his brother had actually seen Japanese prints befor e  the
opening up of J apan. These early adopters of Japanese art, though fiercely
competitive with each other , shared their discernment. But,  as Geor ge
Augustus Sala wrote in Paris Herself Again  in 1878, the collegial
atmosphere of earlier collecting soon disappeared. ‘ Japonisme  has become
to some  very artistic amateurs, the Ephrussi, the Camondos, li ke a sort of
religion.’
Charles and Louise were ‘ néojaponistes ’, young and rich artistic
latecomers. For with Japanese  art there was an exhilarating lack of
connoisseurship, none of the enmeshed knowledge of art historians to
confound your immediate resp onses, your intuitions. Here was a new
Renaissance unfolding and the chance to have the ancient and serious art of
the E ast in your hands. Y ou could have it in quantity and you c ould have it
now . Or you could buy it now and make love later .
When you held a Japanese objet , it revea led itself. T ouch tells you what
you need  to know: it tells you about yourself. Edmond de Goncourt of fered
his view: ‘here, in respect to politeness, gentleness, unctuousness so to
speak, of perfect things in one’ s hands: an aphorism. T ouch – it is the mark
by which the am ateur recognise s himself. The man who handl es an object
with indif ferent fingers, with clumsy  fin gers, with fingers that do not
envelop lovingly is a man who is not passionate about art.’
For thes e early collectors and travellers to Japan, it was enough to pick
up a Japanese object to know whether it was ‘right’ or not. Indeed, the
American artist John La Far ge  on his trip in 1884 made a pact with his
friends ‘that we should bring no books, read no books, but come as
innocently as we could’. Having  a feel  for beauty was enough: touch was a
kind of sensory innocence.
Japanese art was a brave new world: it introduced new textur es, new
ways of  feeling things. Though there were all those albums of wood block
prints to buy , this was not art simply to hang on walls. This was an
epiphany of new materials: bro nzes of a depth of patina that seemed far
greater than those of the Renaissance; lacquers of an unequalle d depth and
darkness; foldin g screens of gol d leaf to bisect a room, throw l ight. Monet
painted La Japonaise  ( Camille Monet in Japanese Costume ); Camille
Monet’ s robe had ‘certain gold embroideries several centimetres thick’.
And the re were objects that were unlike anything seen in W estern art,
objects that could only be des cribed as ‘playthings’, small carvings of
animals and beggars called ‘netsuke’ that you could roll in your hands.
Charles’ s friend  and editor of  the Gazette , the collector Louis Gonse,
described a particular boxwoo d netsuke beautifully as ‘ plus gras, plus
simple, plus car esse ’ – very  rich, very simple, very tactile. It is dif ficult to
beat this cadence of response.
This was all stuf f to have in y our hands, stuf f to add texture to your
salon or  your boudoir . As I look  at the images of Japanese things, I see that
the Parisians are layering one m aterial on another: an ivory is wrapped in a
silk, a silk is hanging behind a lacquer table, a lacquer table is spread with
porcelain, fans fall across a floor .
Passionate touch, discovery in the hands, things enveloped lovingly ,
plus car esse . Japonisme  and touch were a seductive combination for
Charles and Louise, amongst many others.
Before the netsuke comes a collection of thirty-three black-and-gold
lacquer boxes. It was a collection to place with Charles’ s other collections
in his apartment at the Hôtel Ephrussi, something to sit near his bur gundy
Renaissance hangings and his pale Donatello sculpture in marble. Charles
and Louise put this collection together from Sichel’ s chaotic house of
treasures. It was a stellar group of seventeenth-century lacquers , as good as
any in Europe: to choose them they must have been regular visitors to
Sichel’ s. And very pleasingly for me as a potter , alongside these lacquers,
Charles also had a sixteenth-century stoneware covered jar from Bizen, the
Japanese pottery  village in whic h I studied when I was seventeen, excited to
finally get my passionate hands on those simple, tactile tea-bowls.
In Les lacques japonais au T r ocadér o , a long essay published in the
Gazette  in  1878, Charles describes the five or six vitrines full of lacque r on
exhibition at the T rocadéro in Paris. This is his fullest wr iting about
Japanese art. As elsewhere, he is in turn academic (he is exer cised about
dating), descriptive and ultimat ely lyrical about what he sees  in front of
him.
He mentions the term japonisme  ‘ coi ned by my friend Philippe Burty’.
For three whole weeks, before I find an even earlier mention, I think this is
the first ever use  of the term in p rint, and am filled with excitement that my
netsuke and japonisme  are linked so beautifully , a told-you-so moment of
visceral happiness in the Publications section of the library .
Japanese box of golden lacquer fr om the collection of Louise Cahen
d’Anvers
Charles gets very , very excited  in this essay . He has discovered that
Marie A ntoinette had a collection of Japanese lacquer , and uses this
knowledge to negotiate a lovely correspondence between the civilised
world of the eighteenth-centur y rococo and that of Japan. In his essay ,
women, intimac y and lacquer seem to be woven together . Japan ese lacquer ,
Charles explains, was rarely seen in Europe: ‘One simultaneously needed
wealth a nd the fortune of being a favourite or a queen to reach for the
envied possessi on of these almost unobtainable objects.’ Bu t this is a
moment – Paris in the Third R epublic – when two remote an d alienated
worlds have collided. These lacquers, of a legendary rarity and so
technically com plex that they a re almost unmakeable, the possessions of
Japanese prince s or W estern q ueens, are now her e  in a Parisian shop,
available to buy . For Charles, this lacquer has a quality of embed ded poetry:
not just rich and strange, but latent with stories of desire. His  passion for
Louise is palpable. The unobtai nability of this lacquer creates t he aura that
surrounds it. Y ou feel him reaching towards the golden Louise as he writes.
And the n Charles picks a box up: ‘T ake one of these lacquer b oxes in
your hand – so light, so soft to the touch, on which the artist has represented
apple tre es in blossom, sacred cranes flying across the water , and topping a
mountain range, undulating under a cloud-filled sky , some  people in
flowing robes, in poses that seem bizarre to us but always gracious and
elegant, under their lar ge parasols…’
Holding this box, he talks about its exoticism. Its accompl ishment
requires a suppleness of the ha nd that is ‘entirely feminine, a persevering
dexterity , a sacrifice of time’ that we in the W est could not achieve. When
you see and hold these lacquers – or netsuke or bronzes – you are
immediately con scious of this work: they embody all the travail, and yet
they are miraculously free.
The images in the lacquer in terlace with his growing love of the
paintings of the Impressionists: the images of flowering apple trees, cloud-
filled skies and women in flowing robes are straight out of Pissarro and
Monet. J apanese things – lacquers, netsuke, prints – conjure a picture of a
place w here sen sations are always new , where art pours out of daily life,
where everything exists in a dream of endless beautiful flow .
And em bedded in Charles’ s essay on lacquer are engravings of pieces
from Louise’ s collection and his own. His prose becomes a little much here,
a litt le b reathless, as he describes the interior of Louise’ s cabinet of golden
lacquer , over which morning gl ories trail. Their collections are formed by
‘the cap rice of an opulent amateur who can satisfy all his covet ousness’. In
talking of their collections of th ese strangely rich objects he qu ietly brings
himself and Louise together . They are both covetous and capric ious, led by
sudden d esire. W hat they collect are objects to discover in your hands, ‘so
light, so soft to the touch’.
It is a discreetly  sensual act of disclosure, showing their pieces together
in public . And assembling these lacquers also records their assignations: the
collection records their love-af fair , their own secret history of touch.
There is  a review in Le Gaulois  o f an exhibitio n in 1884 of Charles’ s
lacquers. ‘One could spend days in front of these vitrines,’ writes the
reviewer . I agree. I cannot trace which museums Charles and Louise’ s
lacquers have disappeared into, but I go back to Paris for a  day to the
Musée G uimet on the place d’ Iéna, which now holds Marie Antoinette’ s
collection, and stand in front of their vitrines full of the mazy re flections of
these softly gleaming things.
He brings these dense black-and-gold objets  t o his s alon in the rue de
Monceau, where  he has recently  laid down a golden Savonnerie  carpet. It is
finely woven from silk, made originally for a gallery in the Louvre in the
seventeenth century . Its image ry is an allegory of Air: the four winds
blowing their trumpets with fat cheeks, and everything is interlaced with
butterflies and undulating ribbons. The carpet has been cut down in size so
that it fits. I imagine walking across this floor . The whole room is golden.
5. A BOX OF CHILDREN’S SWEETS
T o buy a little o f Japan the best thing to do was to visit the plac e. This was
the ultim ate bit of one-upmanship of Charles’ s neighbour Henri Cernuschi,
or the industrialist Emile Guimet, the or ganiser of the T rocadéro exhibition.
If yo u could not  match that, the n you had to visit Parisian galleries for
Japanese bibelots. These shop s were known as places for encounters,
popular sites for rendezvous for beau-monde lovers – r endez-vous des
couples adultèr es , l ike Charles an d Louise. In the old days, you would find
these couples in the Jonque Chinoise, the shop in the rue de Rivoli, or its
companion shop, the Porte Chinoise, in the rue V ivienne, where the
galleriste Madame Desoye – who had sold Japanese art to the f irst wave of
collectors – sat ‘enthroned in her jewels…almost a historic fi gure in our
time like a fat Japanese idol’. Now Sichel’ s had taken over .
Sichel was a great salesman, but not a curious or observant
anthropologist. I n a pamphlet p ublished in 1883, Notes d’ un bibe loteur au
Japon , h e wrote, ‘The  country was en tirely new to me: if I speak frankly I
wasn’ t i nterested in day-to-day  life at all: all I wanted was  to get the
lacquers from the bazaar .’
And this is all he did. Soon af ter his arrival in 1874 in Japan, Sichel
discovered a group of lacquer w riting-boxes hidden under layers of dust in
a Nagas aki bazaar . He ‘paid on e dollar for each, and today many of these
objects are valued at over 1,000  francs’. These were the writing-boxes that
he sold – he fails to say – to his Parisian clients like Charles or Louise or
Gonse for a great deal more than 1,000 francs.
Sichel continues:
 
In those  days Japan was a treasure trove of art objects to be ha d at bar gain
prices. The streets of its cities w ere lined with shops of curios, textiles and
pawn go ods. Th rongs of tradespeople would gather at one’ s door at dawn:
vendors of fukusa  [scrolls] or bronze merchants carrying their goods in
carts. There were even passer s-by who would quite willingly sell the
netsuke  from their obi  [belts]. The barrage of of fers w as so incessant that
one was almost overwhelmed by a weariness and a distaste for buying.
Nevertheless, these merchants in exotic objects were amiable tradesmen.
They acted as your guide, bar ga ined on your behalf in return for just a box
of children’ s sweets, and concluded business deals by throwing grand
banquets in your honour which ended with enticing performances by female
dancers and singers.
 
Japan was that box of sweets. Collecting in Japan encouraged a  striking
greed. Sichel writes of the ur ge  to ‘évaliser le Japon’  – to plu nder or  rape
the country . The stories of d estitute daimyos selling their heirlooms,
samurai their swords, dancers th eir bodies – and passers-by their netsuke –
became a story of endless pos sibility . Anyone would sell you anything.
Japan ex isted as  a sort of parallel country of licensed gratificat ion, artistic,
commercial and sexual.
Japanese things  carried an air  of eroticised possibility , evoking not
simply t he share d encounter of lovers over a lacquer box or ivo ry bibelots.
Japanese fans, bibelots and r obes would only come alive in private
encounters. They were props for dressing up, role-playing, the sensuous
reimagining of the self. Of course they appealed to Charles with his ducal
bed, canopied with swags of br ocade, and his endless reconfiguring of his
rooms in the rue de Monceau.
In Ja mes T issot’ s La J aponaise au bain  a girl is naked but for a heavy
brocade kimono, loose on her shoulders, standing on the threshold of a
Japanese room. In Monet’ s prov ocative portrait of his wife Camille, she is
shown i n a golden wig, clothed in a swirling robe of embroid ered red on
which a  samura i unsheathes his sword. Behind her is a scattering of fans
across the wall and the floor , like a burst of Whistler ’ s fireworks. It is very
much a performance for the artist, one akin to that in Proust’ s Du côté de
chez Swann  of the demi-mondaine  Odette receiving Swann, dressed in her
kimono in her drawing-room of Japanese silk cushions and screens and
lanterns, filled with its heavy scent of chrysanthemums, an olfactory
japonisme .
Ownership seemed transposed. These objects seemed to induce
insatiability , to own you, mak e demands on you. Collectors themselves
speak of the intoxication of hunting and buying, a process that could send
you towards mania: ‘Of all the passions, of all without ex ception, the
passion for the b ibelot is perhaps the most terrible and invincible. The man
smitten by an an tique is a lost man. The bibelot is not only a pa ssion, it is a
mania,’ claimed the young writer Guy de Maupassant.
A ha unting self-description of t his comes in a strange book written by
Charles’ s scour ge, Edmond de Goncourt. In La maison d’un artiste
Goncourt descri bes each room of his own house in Paris in painstaking
detail – the boiseries , the pictures, the books, the objects – in an attempt to
evoke ea ch object and picture a nd their placement as an act of homage to
his dead brother , with whom he  had lived. In two volumes, each of more
than 300 pages, Goncourt constructs an autobiography and a travelogue, as
much as an exh austive inventor y of a house through objects. Japanese art
saturates the house. There are Japanese brocades and kakemonos , scrolls, in
the h all. Even th e garden is a carefully curated assortment of Chinese and
Japanese trees and shrubs.
In a  moment w orthy of Bor ges, his  collection even incorporates a
grouping of Chinese art put together by a seventeenth-century Japanese
‘ bibeloteur exotique ’. There is endless play in Goncourt’ s display between
pictures, screens, scrolls on open display and those objects held in vitrines.
I im agine Goncourt, dark-eyed, an unruly white silk scarf knotted under
his chin, pausing for ef fect at the door of his pearwood vitrine. He is
holding one of his netsuke, and he starts to tell a story of the obsessive
search for perfection that lies behind each object:
 
a w hole class of exceptionally fine artists – usually specia lists – are
responsible for…fabrication and dedicate themselves exclusively to the
reproduction of an object or a creature. Thus, we hear of an artist whose
family has for three generations sculpted rats in Japan, nothi ng but rats.
Alongside these professional artists, amid this manually gifted populace,
there would be amateur netsuke sculptors, who amuse themselves by
sculpting a little masterpiece for themselves. One day , Mr Philippe Sichel
approached a Japanese man sitting on his threshold, notching a netsuke that
was in its last sta ges of completion. Mr Sichel asked him if he w ould like to
sell it…when it was completed . The Japanese man started la ughing, and
ended u p telling  him that that would take approximately a furth er eighteen
months; then he showed him another netsuke that was attached to his belt,
and informed him that it had ta ken him several years of work to make it.
And as the conv ersation progressed between the two men, the am ateur artist
confessed to Mr Sichel that he d id ‘not work like that in such a long-drawn
out manner…that he needed to be in the process…that it was only on
certain d ays…on days when he had smoked a pipe or two, after  he felt gay
and refreshed’, essentially letting him know that for this work, he needed
hours of inspiration.
 
These bibelots of ivory or lac quer or mother -of-pearl all seemed to
express the fact that Japanese workers had the imagination o f makers of
‘ bijoux-joujoux lilliputiens ’, c harming Lilliputian trink ets. That the
Japanese are small, and make s mall things, was a commonplace in Paris.
This idea of the  miniature was often held as the reason that J apanese art
seemed to lack a mbition. They were brilliant at the laborious fa shioning of
rapid feeling, but fell down whe n it came to the grander feelings of tragedy
or awe. That is why they lacked a Parthenon, a Rembrandt.
What they could do was ever yday life. And emotion. It was these
emotions that entranced Kipling when he first saw netsuke in J apan on his
travels in 1889. He writes in one of his letters from Japan of:
 
a sh op full of the wrecks of o ld Japan…The Professor rave s about the
cabinets in old gold and ivory studded with jade, lazuli, agate, mother -o’-
pearl and cornelian, but to me more desirable than any wonder of five-
stoned d esign are the buttons and netsuke that lie on cotton wo ol, and can
be taken  out and played with. Unfortunately the merest scratch of Japanese
character is the only clue to the  artist’ s name, so I am unable to say who
conceived, and in creamy ivory executed, the old man horribly e mbarrassed
by a  cuttle-fish; the priest who made the soldier pick up a deer for him and
laughed to think that the brisket would be his and the burden his
companion’ s; or  the dry , lean snake coiled in derision on a ja wless skull
mottled with the memories of corruption; or the Rabelaisian badger who
stood on his hea d and made you blush though he was not half an inch long;
or th e little fat boy pounding his smaller brother; or the rabbit t hat had just
made a joke; or – but there were  scores of these notes, born of every mood
of mirth, scorn and experience that sways the heart of man; and by this hand
that has held ha lf a dozen of them in its palm I winked at the shade of the
dead car ver! He  had gone to his rest, but he had worked out in ivory three
or four impressions that I had been hunting after in cold print.
 
And the  Japanese could do ero tica. This was hunted with a particular
passion: Goncourt talked of his ‘debauches’ buying it at Sichel’ s. Shunga  –
prints of acrobatic sexual positions or bizarre encounters between
courtesans and fantastical creatures – were hunted out by Degas  and Manet.
Octopuses were especially favoured as their sinuosity of fered great
inventive possibilities. Goncourt records that he has just bought ‘an album
of Japanese obscenities…They amuse me, enchant my eyes…The violence
of th e lines, unexpected conjunctions, the arrangement of the accessories,
the capr ice in their positioning a nd the clothes, the…picturesque quality of
the genitals.’ Erotic netsuke were also highly popular wi th Parisian
collectors. Stock themes included countless octopuses embracing naked
girls, monkeys carrying very lar ge and phallic mushrooms, and burst
persimmons.
These erotic objets  complemented other W estern objects for male
pleasure: the bronzes, small classical nudes perfect for the hand, that
connoisseurs wo uld keep in the  study for learned discussion of  the quality
of th e modelling, or of patinati on. Or the collections of small enamelled
snuf f-boxes that, when opened, showed priapic fauns or startled nymphs,
little sta gings of concealment and revelation. These small things to handle
and to be moved around – slightly , playfully , discerningly – were kept in
vitrines.
The chance to pass round a small and shocking object was too good to
miss in the Paris of the 1870s. V itrines had become essential to the witty
and flirtatious intermittencies of salon life.
6. A FOX WITH INLAID EYES, IN WOOD
And so Charles buys the netsuke. He buys 264.
A fox with inlaid eyes, in wood
A curled snake on a lotus leaf, in ivory
A boxwood hare and the moon
A standing warrior
A sleeping servant
Children playing with masks, in ivory
Children playing with puppies
Children playing with a samurai helmet
Dozens of ivory rats
Monkeys and tigers and deer and eels and a galloping horse
Priests and actors and samura i and craftsmen and a bathing
woman in her wooden tub
A bundle of kindling tied with a rope
A medlar
A hornet on a hornet’ s nest, the nest attached to a broken branch
Three toads on a leaf
A monkey and its young
A couple making love
A reclining stag scratching his ear with a hind leg
A N oh dancer i n a heavy embroidered robe holding a mask in
front of his face
An octopus
A naked woman and an octopus
A naked woman
Three sweet chestnuts
A priest on a horse
A persimmon.
And over 200 more, a huge collection of very small things.
Charles bought them, not piec e by piece like his lacquers, but as a
complete and spectacular collection from Sichel.
Had they  just come in, each one  folded in its square of silk, the n placed
in wood -shavings, then crated from Y okohama on one of those four -month
shipments by way of the Cape ? Had Sichel recently put them out in a
cabinet t o tempt  his rich collectors, or did Charles unwrap them one by one,
finding my favourite tiger turn ing in surprise on a branch of bamboo,
carved in ivory at the end of th e eighteenth century in Osaka; or the rats
looking up as they are caught on the husk of a dried-out fish?
Did he fall in love with the startlingly pale hare with amber ey es, and
buy the rest for company?
Did he order them from Sichel?  W ere they put together over a year or
two from the newly impoverished, by some canny dealer in Kyoto, and sold
on? I look care fully . There are a very few that have been made for the
W estern market , knocked up in  a hurry ten years before. The plump boy ,
simpering with his mask, is definitely one of these. It is cr udely done,
vulgar . T he vast  majority are ne tsuke that were carved before th e coming of
Commodore Perry , some from a hundred years before. There are figures
and animals and erotica and creatures from myth: they cover most of the
subjects that you could expect in a comprehensive collection. Some are
signed by famous carvers. Som eone with knowledge has put this group
together .
Did he just happen to be there at Sichel’ s with Louise, amongst the
landslide of silks, the folders of prints, the screens and the porce lain, before
the othe r collectors could spot the trove? Did she turn to him or did he turn
to her?
Or was Louise elsewhere? And  was it intended as a surprise for her
when she next came up to his rooms?
How much did they cost this young man, this capricious, c harming
collector? His father Léon had just died of heart failure, aged only forty-
five, and  had been buried next t o Betty in the family grave in Montmartre.
But Ephrussi et Cie was doing very well indeed. Jules had recently bought
the land on the Lake Lucerne for his holiday chalet. His uncles w ere buying
chateaux and running racehorses at Longchamps in the Ephrussi colours of
blue-and-yellow polka dots. The netsuke must have been very expensive
indeed, but Charles could choos e to af ford this extravagance as  his fortune
went on growing year by year with that of his family .
There ar e things I cannot know . But I do know that Charles bought a
black vitrine to put them in, wo od polished like lacquer . It wa s taller than
him, jus t over six foot high. Y ou could see in through the glass  door at the
front and through the glass at th e sides. A mirror at the back let  the netsuke
slide aw ay into infinities of collecting. And they were all placed on green
velvet. There are many dif feren t subtle variations of colours in  netsuke, all
the c olours of th e ivory , the horn  and the boxwood: cream, wax,  nut-brown,
gold in this field of dense dark green.
They are in front of me now , Charles’ s collection within a collection.
Charles places the netsuke on the green velvet in their dark vitr ine with
the mirr ored bac k, in this, their first resting-place in the story . They are near
the l acquer boxes, near the great hangings he brought back from Italy , close
to the golden carpet.
I wonde r if he c ould resist going out onto the landing and turnin g left to
tell his brother Ignace about his new acquisition.
Netsuke cannot knock around your salon or your study unprotected.
They get lost o r dropped, dusty , chipped. They need a place to rest,
preferably in company with other bibelots. This is why vitrines come to
matter . A nd in this journey towards the netsuke, I became more and more
intrigued by vitrines, glass display cases.
I kept coming across them in Louise’ s salon. I had seen them preserved
in B elle Époque mansions, read  about them in Charles’ s exhibit ion reviews
in the Gazette  and  in descriptions in Rothschild inventories. And now that
Charles has one of his own, I realise they are part of the performance of
salon life, not just part of the furnishings. A collector friend of Charles is
described in the act of placing J apanese objects in a vitrine, ‘like a painter
applying a stroke to his canvas. The harmony is comple te and the
refinement exquisite…’
The vitr ines exist so that you can see objects, but not touch them: they
frame things, suspend them, tantalise through distance.
This is what I realise now I fail ed to understand about vitrines. I spent
the f irst twenty years of my life as a potter earnestly trying to  get objects
out of the glass cases in which my pots were often placed in galleries and
museums. They die, I’d say , behind glass, held in that airlock. V itrines were
a so rt of cof fin: things need to be out and to take their chances away from
the p rotection of formal display , to be liberated. ‘Out of the drawing-room
and into the kitc hen!’ I wrote in  a sort of manifesto. There was too much in
the way . There was tr op de verr e , too  much glass, as a great a rchitect
commented on seeing a rival Modernist’ s house of glass.
But the vitrine – as opposed to t he museum’ s case – is for opening. And
that opening glass door and the moment of looking, then choosing, and then
reaching in and then picking up is a moment of seduction, an encounter
between a hand and an object that is electric.
Charles’ s friend Cernuschi had  a great collection of Japanese art just
down the road n ext to the gates  to the parc Monceau, displayed on radical
white w alls. It made the Japanese objects ‘look unhappy’, as if t hey were in
the Louvre, a critic remarked. Displaying Japanese art as A rt made it
problematic, ov er -serious. But Charles’ s salon up the hill, a place for a
strange encounter between old Italian things and new Japanese things, is not
a museum.
Charles’ s vitrine is a threshold.
And the se netsu ke are perfect fo r the life of Charles’ s salon. The golden
Louise o pening up her vitrine o f Japanese things, fishing, handing things
out to be looked  at and handled , to be caressed, shows that Japanese things
are mad e for digressive convers ation, made for distraction. These netsuke
add som ething v ery particular to Charles’ s way of living, I think. They are
the first  things that have any c onnection to everyday life, even an exotic
everyday life. They are wonder ful and highly sensual, of cour se, but they
are n ot p rincely like his Medici bed or his Marie Antoinette lac quers. They
are for touching.
Above a ll, they make you laugh in many dif ferent ways. They a re witty
and riba ld and slyly comic. And  now that I have finally got the  netsuke up
the winding stairs and settled in Charles’ s salon in the hon ey-coloured
hotel, I find I am  relieved that t his man whom everyone liked s o much had
enough of a sense of humour to enjoy them. I don’ t have just to admire him.
I can like him too.
7. THE YELLOW ARMCHAIR
The netsuke – m y tiger , my hare , my persimmon – have settled in Charles’ s
study where he was finally finishing his book on Dürer . It is a room lit up in
a breathless letter to Charles from the young poet Jules Lafor gue:
 
Every line of your beautiful book recalled so many memories. Especially
the hour s spent working alone in your room where the note of a yellow
armchair bursts out! And the Im pressionists! T wo fans by Pissarro, solidly
constructed of painstaking sma ll strokes. The Sisleys, the Se ine and the
telegraph wires and the sky in springtime. The bar ge near Paris, with that
loafer in the lanes. And Monet’ s flowering apple trees scaling a hill. And
Renoir ’ s dishevelled little sava ge and Berthe Morisot’ s deep and fresh
under growth, a seated woman, her child, a black dog, a butterfly net. And
another Morisot , a maid with her char ge – blue, green, pink, wh ite, dappled
with the sun. An d the other Ren oirs, the Parisienne with red lips in a blue
jersey . And that carefree woma n with a muf f and the lacquer rose in her
buttonhole…And the bare-shouldered dancer by Mary Cassatt in yellow ,
green, b lond, ru st on the red fauteuil. And the nervous dancer s by Degas,
Duranty by Degas – and of course Manet’ s Polichinelle  with Banville’ s
poem!…Ah! Th e tender hours s pent there, losing myself in the catalogue of
Albert Dür er , d reami ng…in your bright room where bursts the note of the
yellow armchair , yellow , so yellow!
Albert Dür er et ses dessins  was Charles’ s first proper book, a book that
had taken him ‘vagabonding’ across Europe. Lafor gue, twenty-one years
old and new to Paris, had been r ecommended as a secretary to sift the lists,
emendations, notes of ten years of study into appendices, tables  and indices
for p ublication. For Lafor gue, C harles in his Chinese dressing-gown was an
intoxicating patron in an intoxicating setting.
I’m pretty excited too, because I had no idea that Lafor gue had worked
for him,  before coming across a  footnote in a book on Manet. L afor gue is a
wonderful poet of cities, park benches dripping wet, telegraph wires on
roads that no one passes.
Charles is no longer the rushing young man. He has beco me the
‘Benedictine-dandy of the rue de Monceau’, a black-coated scholar , but
flaneurial, whos e top hat is tilted at an angle; someone who carries his cane
under hi s arm with a sense of correctness and amour pr opr e . Someone who
has a valet to make sure that hi s hat is brushed. Someone, I am sure, who
never carried things in his jacket pockets and spoilt the fall of the cloth. W e
see him here at thirty , with his mistress and his new role as the recently
appointed editor of the Gazette , and  find that he has grown into  himself. He
is a mondain  art histo rian wi th a secretary . A nd a collector now not only of
netsuke, but of pictures.
And he is so ali ve in this room . These colours – the black of his coat,
and the black o f his top hat, and the slightly reddish tinge to his beard –
against t he strea m of fantastic p aintings, set alight by this fierc e clarity of
the n ote of the yellow armchair . A study , you think, of a man w ho not only
needs colour , but constructs his life around it. A man who wears the perfect
uniform of rabbinical black in t he rue de Monceau, and who has this other
life behind this study door .
What kind of study could possibly go on in a room like this?
Jules Lafor gue started work for Charles on 14th July 1881. He worked
all s ummer in this study , staying up half the night. He was, I not e with some
severity , very badly paid by this Jewish Maecenas. It is through his eyes
that we see Charles completing  his book: ‘stone by stone you slowly and
solidly build the pyramid which supports your beautifully bearded
monument’. In a throwaway bit of mar ginalia Lafor gue scribbles a picture
of the two of th em together . Lafor gue, tiny with bouf fant hair , walks in
front, arms and legs akimbo blo wing clouds of smoke, while th e debonair ,
upright, tall, monumental, Assyrian-profiled Charles walks behind him. He
has filled out splendidly .
Lafor gue adores  him, teases him . He is anxious to prove himself in this
his first job. ‘An d now , oh dand y-scholar of the Rue de Moncea u, what are
you up to? I alw ays see the sum maries of the Gazette  and Art . Wh at a re you
plotting betwee n Monet’ s Gr enouillèr e , Manet’ s Constantin Guys , and
the…strange archaeologies of Moreau – tell me.’
The ‘Benedictine-dandy of the rue de Monceau’: a self-portrait with
Charles, by Jules Lafor gue, 1881
Lafor gue wishes  to be remembered to ‘our ’ room, signs of f with ‘good
wishes to the M onet – you know which’. His summer with Charles was an
encounter with Impressionism, an encounter that would challenge him to
find a new kind of poetic language. He tries out a kind of prose-poem, calls
it ‘G uitare’, and dedicates it to  Charles. But surely these des criptions of
Charles’ s study are prose-poem s themselves: there are the mix tures of the
exact ma rkings of colour – ‘ la tâche colorée ’ – the yellow armchair , the red
lips and blue je rsey of Renoir ’ s girl. The letters, pell-mell with sensation,
high on ideas, are close to Lafo r gue’ s description of Impressionist style as
one in which spectator and spectacle are knitted together:
‘ irrémédiablement mouvants, insaisissables et insaissants ’.
Charles was very attached to Lafor gue. After the long summer in Paris
he arranged for the young poet to get a job in Berlin as reader of French to
the Emp ress – Charles had a casually impressive social reach – and wrote to
him, sent him money , advised h im, critiqued his reviews and then helped
Lafor gue to get published. Charles kept more than thirty letters from
Lafor gue from this time, publis hing them in the journal La r evue blanche
after the poet’ s early death from tuberculosis.
In these letters you feel  the room. I wanted to be here with the netsuke,
and have worried that I would never get beyond a connoisseurial inventory
of the grand fur nishings of Charles’ s apartment. I’ve worried h ow I could
construct a life entirely thro ugh objects. The room overflows, like
Lafor gue’ s writings, with unexpected conjunctions and disjunctions. I can
hear their digressive night-time conversations and am here at last.
Everything in this salon is heightened emotion. It is dif ficult not to feel
alive in a place saturated with im ages of freedom and lassitude, days out in
the coun tryside, young women, a gypsy girl, bathers in the Seine, a loafer in
a lan e w ith now here to go, a gor geous faun framed amongst the broderies
and all those curious, funny , tactile netsuke.
8. MONSIEUR ELSTIR’S ASP ARAGUS
I am  in the library again, hesitating. Dürer ’ s self-portrait – Chris t-like, long-
haired a nd beard ed – stares bac k at me as I open Charles’ s Albert Dür er et
ses dessins . T here is a cha llenge in this s tare. I have spent ages thinking
about how this careful, delicate  skein of thinking, and all these properly
edited ta bles an d lists, could h ave been written in a study with Monet’ s
breezy summer day ther e  on the wall.
When I read o f Charles’ s animation as he describes his sea rch for
Dürer ’ s lost drawings, I can hear the catch of his voice: ‘W e  traced the
drawings of our master wherever we suspected they might be hidden:
museums of capital cities and secondary towns abroad, of Paris and the
provinces, famous collections and little-known private ones, the cabinets  of
amateurs and of forbidding p eople, we rummaged and raked up, we
examined everything.’ Charles might be a flâneur , might take his time in the
salons, b e seen at the races and the Opéra, but his ‘vagabondi ng’ is done
with real intensity .
V agabonding  w as his word. I t sounds recreational rather than diligent or
professional. As  an extremely rich Jewish mondain , it would have been
contrary to social practice to be seen to work. He was an ‘ amateur d’art ’,
an art lover , and  his phrase is carefully self-deprecating. But it does get the
pleasure of the searching right, the way you lose your sense of  time when
you are research ing, are pulled on by whims as much as by intent. It makes
me think of the rummaging that I am doing through his  life as I track the
netsuke, the noting of other people’ s annotations in the mar gins.  I vagabond
in libraries, trace where he went and why . I follow the leads of whom he
knew , whom he wrote about, w hose pictures he bought. In Pa ris I go and
stand ou tside his old of fices in the rue Favart in the summer rai n like some
sad art-historical gumshoe and wait to see who comes out.
I find that as the months pass I have a strangely increased sensi tivity to
the quality of paper .
And I find that I  have fallen for  Charles. He is a passionate scholar . He
is well dressed and  good at art histo ry and  dog ged in resea rch. What a grea t
and unlikely trinity of attributes to have, I think, aspirationally .
Charles had a very particular reason to do his research work. He
believed that ‘all of Dürer ’ s drawings, even the lightest of sketches, merited
a sp ecial mention, that nothing that was attributed to the hand of our master
should be omitted…’ Charles kn ows that it is intimacy that matters. Picking
up a  drawing enables us to ‘catch the thought of the artist in all its
freshness, at the very moment of manifestation, with perhaps  even more
truth and  sincer ity than in the works that require arduous hour s of labour ,
with the defiant patience of the genius’.
This is a wonde rful manifesto for drawing. It celebrates the mo ment of
apprehension an d the fugitive m oment of response – a few traces of ink or a
few strokes of the pencil. It is also a beautifully coded c laim for a
conversation between a particul ar kind of the old and the very  new in art.
Charles intended this book to ‘make better known in France the greatest
German artist’, the first artist h e fell in love with during his childhood in
V ienna. But it a lso gave Charles an emotional as well as an  intellectual
platform from which to ar gue that dif ferent ages informed each other , that a
sketch by Dürer could talk to a sketch by Degas. He knew that it could
work.
Charles was becoming an advoc ate in print for the living artists he was
getting to know . He was a critic both in his own name and under
pseudonyms, ar guing the merits of particular paintings, fighting for the
cause of  Degas’ s Little Dancer , ‘ standing in he r working clothes, tired and
worn ou t…’ Now , as editor of the Gazette , he started to commission
reviews of the exhibitions of painters he admired. And, passionate and
partisan, he had also started buying pictures for the room with the yellow
armchair .
Charles’ s first pictures were by  Berthe Morisot. He loved he r work:
‘She grinds flower petals onto her palette, in order to spread them later on
her c anvas with airy , witty touch es, thrown down a little haphazardly . These
harmonise, blend, and finish by producing something vital, fine and
charming that you do not so much see as intuit…one step further and it will
be impossible to distinguish or understand anything at all!’
In th ree years he  put together a collection of forty Impressionist works –
and bou ght twenty more for his Bernstein cousins in Berlin.  He bought
paintings and pastels by Morisot, Cassatt, Degas, Manet, Monet, Sisley ,
Pissarro and Renoir: Charles created one of the great early collections of the
Impressionists. A ll the walls of his rooms must have been filled with these
pictures, they must have been hung above each other three deep. For get the
Degas pastel glowing solitary on a gallery wall at the Metropolitan, five feet
from another picture on either side, nothing above or below . In this room
this pastel ( T wo W omen at the Haber dashers , 1880) must have shaded the
Donatello, knoc ked against a score of other glowing pictures, rubbed up
against the vitrine of netsuke.
Charles was in the vanguard. H e needed audacity . The Impressionists
had thei r passio nate supporters,  but were still assailed in the p ress and by
the Academy as charlatans. His advocacy was significant; he had the
gravitas of a pro minent critic and editor . He also had straightforward utility
as a patron for painters who were struggling: it was ‘in the mansion of an
American or of a young Isra elite banker ’ that you would find these
paintings, wrote  Philippe Burty . And Charles acted as a mahout to other
wealthy friends,  persuading Madame Straus, giver of the fierce ly aesthetic
salon, to purchase one of Monet’ s Nymphéas .
But he was muc h more than this . He was a real interlocutor , a visitor to
their stu dios to see work in pro gress, to buy a picture from the easel, ‘an
older bro ther to young artists’, a s one critic wrote. He and Renoir talked at
length about which paintings might be best to send to the Salon, Whistler
asked him to check one of his pictures for damage. ‘It was d ue to him,’
wrote P roust in a later charac ter sketch of Charles as ‘ un amateur de
peintur e ’, ‘that many pa intings, which had been left at a half-way sta ge,
were actually completed.’
And he was a friend of the artists. ‘It is now Thursday ,’ writes Manet to
Charles, ‘and I still haven’ t heard from you. Y ou are evidently enthralled by
your host’ s wit…Come on, take up your very best pen and get on with it.’
Charles bought a picture of so me asparagus from Manet, one of his
extraordinary small still lifes, where a lemon or rose is lambent in the dark.
It was a bundle of twenty stalks bound in straw . Manet wanted  800 francs
for it, a substantial sum, and C harles, thrilled, sent 1,000. A week later
Charles received  a small canvas signed with a simple M in retu rn. It was a
single as paragus stalk laid across a table with an accompanying  note: ‘This
seems to have slipped from the bundle.’
Proust, who knew Charles’ s pai ntings well from visits to his apartment,
retells the story to his credit. In his novels there is an Impressio nist painter ,
Elstir , m odelled partly on Whistler and partly on Renoir . The Duke de
Guermantes fumes that ‘There was nothing else in the picture. A bundle of
asparagus exactly like what you’re eating now . But I must say I declined to
swallow Monsieur Elstir ’ s asparagus. He asked three hundred francs for a
bundle of asparagus. A Louis, th at’ s as much as they’re worth, even if they
are out of season. I thought it a bit stif f.’
Edouar d Manet,  Une botte d’asper ges , 1880
Many of  the pictures on the wa lls of Charles’ s working study were of
his friends. There was a pastel b y Degas of Edmond Duranty , c aptured in a
description by the young wri ter J. K. Huysmans: ‘Here i s Monsieur
Duranty , among  his prints an d his books, sitting at a desk. And his
neighbouring tapering fingers, h is sharp mocking eyes, his acute searching
expression, his wry smile of an English humorist…’ There was a canvas by
Constantin Guys, the ‘painter of modern life’, as well as a portrait of him by
Manet, looking very unkempt and bushy and slightly wild-eyed. From
Degas, Charles bought the double portrait of General Mellinet and the Chief
Rabbi A struc, in  which the hea ds of these two redoubtable me n – friends
from their shared experiences o f the war of 1870 – are seen in half-profile
together .
Then the re were Charles’ s pictures of his Paris life: a scene by Degas of
the start of the races at Longchamp, where Charles would go to see his
uncle Maurice Ephrussi’ s famo us racehorses. ‘Courses – Ephrussi – 1000
[francs],’ writes  Degas in his notebook. And images of the demi-monde, of
dancers and a scene at the milliner ’ s with the backs of the heads of two
young w omen o n a sofa (2,000 francs), and one of a solitary woman in a
café nursing a glass of absinthe.
Most of  Charles’ s pictures were of the country , of the fast -moving
clouds a nd wind in the trees that spoke to his feeling for the disappearing
moment. There were five landscapes by Sisley and three by Pissarro. From
Monet he purchased, for 400 francs, a view of Vétheuil with scudding white
clouds a cross a field with willows, and a picture of apple trees , Pommiers,
painted in the same village. H e also bought a scene of a w intry early
morning on the Seine, Les glaçons,  with the break-up of the ice, a painting
beautifully described by Proust in his early novel Jean Santeuil  as ‘a day of
thaw…the sun, the blue of the sk y , the broken ice, the mud, and the moving
water turning the river to a dazzling mirror ’.
Even the portrait of the ‘dishevelled little savage’ to whom Lafor gue
asked t o be remembered cap tures this feeling of impermanence, of
imminent change. La Bohémienne,  the red-headed gypsy girl with her
unkempt hair , is in country clo thes standing amongst grasses and trees in
fierce sunlight. She is clearly p art of her landscape, about to run of f and
keep running.
These w ere all paintings, Charles wrote, that could ‘present the living
being, in gesture and attitude , moving in the fugitive, ev er -changing
atmosphere and  light; to seize in passing the perpetual mobility of the
colour o f the air , deliberately ignoring individual shades in order to achieve
a l umino us unity whose separate elements melt together into an indivisible
whole and to arrive at a general harmony even by way of discords’.
He also bought a  spectacular painting by Monet of bathers, Les bains de
la Gr enouillèr e .
Back in  London, on my way to the library , I go into the National
Gallery to see this picture and reimagine it near the yellow fauteuil  and the
netsuke. It shows a popular place on the Seine in midsummer . Figures in
bathing costumes walk along a narrow wooden gangway out i nto the sun-
dappled water , while the non-bathers in their dresses walk towards the
shore, a single p atch of vermilion on the hem of a dress. Rowing boats –
Lafor gues’ s ‘glo riously imagined boats’ – jumble up into the fo reground, a
canopy of trees hangs over the scene. The water ripples away , becoming
enmeshed with the bobbing heads of the bathers, the ‘perpetual  mobility of
the colour of the air ’. It is only just warm enough to go in the water , you
think, almost too cold to come out. Y ou feel alive looking at it.
This conjunction  of Japanese objects and the shimmering new style of
painting seems right: though japonisme  might be a ‘sort of religion’ to the
Ephrussi, it was in Charles’ s circle of artist friends that this new art had the
most profound ef fect. Manet, Renoir and Degas were, like  him, avid
collectors of Japanese prints. The structure of Japanese pictures seemed to
rehearse the meaning of the world dif ferently . Inconsequential  gobbets of
reality – a pedla r scratching his head, a woman with a crying child, a dog
wandering of f to the left – e ach had as much significance as a great
mountain on the horizon. As in the netsuke, everyday life went on without
rehearsal. This almost violent conjunction of story-telling with graphic,
calligraphic clarity was catalytic.
The Impression ists learnt how to cut life up into glanc es and
interjections. Ra ther than formal views, you have a trapeze-wir e dissecting
a picture , the backs of the heads  at the milliner ’ s, the pillars of the Bourse.
Edmond Duranty , whose portra it in pastels by Degas hung in Charles’ s
study , saw this happening. ‘The person…is never in the ce ntre of the
canvas, in the c entre of the se tting. He is not always seen as a whole:
sometimes he appears cut-of f at mid-leg, half-length, or longitudinally .’
When you see the strange portrait by Degas of V iscount Lepic and His
Daughters: Place de la Concor de , now in the Hermitage in St Petersbur g –
three figures and a dog moving across a strange emptiness stretching
through the canvas – the influence of the flat perspective of Jap anese prints
seems palpable.
Like the repeated themes in the netsuke, Japanese prints also give the
possibility of the series – fo rty-seven views of a famous mountain
suggested a way of returning i n dif fering ways and reinterpreting formal
pictorial elements. Haystacks, the bend of the river , poplars, the clif f face of
Rouen Cathedral – all share this poetic return. Whistler , the master of
‘variations’ and ‘caprices’, explained that ‘On any given canvas the colours
must, so to sp eak, be embroidered on; that is, the same c olour must
reappear at intervals, like a single thread in an embroidery .’ Zola, an early
advocate, wrote of Manet’ s pain tings that ‘This art of simplifica tion is to be
likened to that of Japanese prints; they resemble it in their strange elegance
and mag nificent patches of colour .’ Simplification seemed to lie at the heart
of th is n ew aesthetic, but only if it was combined with ‘patchine ss’, with an
abstraction of colour or with its repetition.
Sometimes all it took was to pa int Parisian life in the rain. A fl otilla of
patchy grey umbrellas taking the  place of parasols turns Paris into a kind of
Edo.
When Charles writes – beautifully and with precision – about his
friends, he understands how rad ical they are, both in technique and subject
matter . I t reminds one of the best critiques of Impressionism . Their aim
was:
 
to make the figures indivisible from their background, as though they were
the prod uct of it, so that to appreciate the picture the eye must ta ke it in as a
whole, looking at it from the c orrect distance – such are the ideals of the
new school. It has not learnt its optical catechism, it disdains pictorial rules
and regu lations, it renders what it sees as it sees it, spontaneously , well or
badly , uncompromisingly , without comment, without verbiage. In its horror
of platit ude it seeks for fresh t hemes, it haunts the corridors of theatres,
cafés, ca barets, even low music-halls; the glare of cheap dance-halls does
not alar m its members; and th ey go boating on the Seine in the Paris
suburbs.
 
This was to be the setting of Renoir ’ s bravura Le déjeuner des
canotiers , the Luncheon of the Boating Party . I t shows a plea singly louche
afternoon at the Maison Fournaise, a restaurant by the Seine at one of the
newly popular places that Pa risian day-trippers could reach by train.
Pleasure boats and a skif f can be seen through the silvery-grey willows. A
red-and-white st riped awning protects the party from the glare of the sun. It
is af ter l unch in  Renoir ’ s new w orld of painters, patrons and ac tresses, and
everyone is a friend. Models smoke, drink and talk amongst the detritus of
the emp ty bottles and the meal left on the tables. There are no rules or
regulations here.
The actress Ellen Andrée, in a hat with a flower pinned to it, raises her
glass to her lips. Baron Raoul Barbier , a former mayor of colonial Saigon,
his brown bowler hat pushed back, talks to the young daughter of the
proprietor . Her brother , straw-h atted like a professional oarsman, stands in
the foreground surveying the lunch. Caillebotte, relaxed and fit in a white
singlet a nd boater , sits astride his chair looking at the young seamstress
Aline C harigot, Renoir ’ s lover and future wife. The artist Paul Lhote sits
with a proprietorial arm around the actress Jeanne Samary . It is a matrix of
smiling conversation and flirtation.
And Charles is there. He is the man at the very back, in the top hat and
black suit, turning slightly away , seen glancingly . Y ou can just see his red-
brown beard. He is talking with a pleasantly open-faced, poorly shaved
Lafor gue, dresse d as a proper poet in a working man’ s cap and what could
even be a corduroy jacket.
I do ubt that Ch arles really wore his Benedictine clothes, heavy and
dark, to  a boating party in the summer sunshine, a top hat instead of a
boater . T his is an in-joke abou t his Maecenas uniform between friends,
Renoir suggesti ng that patrons and critics are needed, somewhere in the
background, on the edge, even on the sunniest and most liberated of days.
Proust writes of this picture, noting a ‘gentleman…wearing a top hat at
a boating party where he was clearly out of place, which pro ved that for
Elstir he was not only a regular sitter , but a friend, perhaps a patron’.
Charles is clearly out of place, but he is a sitter , friend and patron and he
is there. Charles Ephrussi – or at least the back of Charles’ s head – enters
art history .
9. EVEN EPHRUSSI FELL FOR IT
It is July and I’m in my studio in south London. It is down a track between
a bettin g shop and a Caribbe an takeaway , sandwiched in amongst car
repairers. It’ s a noisy area, but it is a beautiful space, with my wheels and
kilns in a long a nd airy workshop and a room up some steep wh ite stairs for
my books. It is here that I disp lay some of my finished work , groups of
porcelain cylinders placed in lead-lined boxes at this moment; and it is here
that I stack my piles of notes on early Impressionism and continue to write
about the first collector of my netsuke.
It is  a calm space, books and po ts being good companions. And this is
where I bring clients who want to commission something fro m me. It is
very stra nge for me to be reading so much about Charles as a pa tron and his
friendship with Renoir and Dega s. It is not just the vertiginous d escent from
doing the commissioning to bei ng commissioned. Or , indeed, from having
paintings to writing about them.  It is that I have been working long enough
as a potter to know that bein g commissioned is an extremely delicate
business. Y ou are grateful, of course, but gratitude is dif ferent from feeling
indebted. It is an interesting question for any artist: how long m ust you go
on f eeling grateful once someon e has bought your work? It must have been
especially comp lex given the youth of this patron – thirty-one in 1881 – and
the a ge of some of the artists: Manet was forty-eight when he painted that
bundle o f aspara gus. And, I thin k when I look at an image of a P issarro that
Charles owned, of poplar trees i n a breeze, it must be especially delicate if
your arti stic cred o is of freedom  of expression, and spontaneity and lack of
compromise.
Renoir was in n eed of money , and so Charles persuaded an aunt to sit
for him;  then he began work on  Louise. It took a long summer of delicate
negotiation betw een the lovers and the painter; Fanny , writing from the
Chalet Ephrussi where Charles was staying, details the lengths to which he
went to make sure it all came of f successfully . It was quite a labour to bring
about th ese two paintings. The first is of Louise’ s elder daughter Irène, with
reddish-golden hair , like her mother ’ s, falling around her shoulders. The
second, impossi bly saccharine portrait is of the younger girls, Alice and
Elisabeth. The two girls also hav e their mother ’ s hair . They stan d in front of
a dark bur gund y curtain, held open to reveal the salon beyond, holding
hands, a s if for reassurance – a confection of pink and blue  ruf fles and
ribbons. Both pictures were exhibited at the Salon of 1881. I’m not sure
how mu ch Louise liked them. After all this work she was shock ingly late in
paying the modest char ge of  1,500 francs. I find myse lf similarly
embarrassed wh en I discover a cross note from Degas remind ing Charles
about a bill.
All this commis sioned work for Renoir made some of Charles’ s other
painter friends mistrustful. Degas was especially severe: ‘Monsieur Renoir ,
you have no inte grity . It is unacc eptable that you paint to order . I gather that
you now  work for financiers, that you do the rounds with Mons ieur Charles
Ephrussi, next you’ll be exhibiting at the Mirlitons with Monsieur
Bouguereau!’ This anxiety was compounded when Charles started buying
pictures by other artists; this patron seemed to be moving on, looking for
new sen sations. And it was at this point that Charles’ s Jewishnes s made him
suspect.
Charles had bought two paintings by Gustave Moreau. Goncourt
described his work as the ‘watercolours of a poet goldsmith, which seem to
have been washed with the gleams and patina of the treasures in the
Thousand and One Nights’.  T hey were rich, highly symbolic, Parnassian
paintings of Salome, Hercules, Sappho, Prometheus. Moreau’ s subjects are
barely c lothed, e xcept for a fall of gauze. The landscapes are classical, full
of ruined temples, the details ex actingly coded. It was all a very , very long
way from a meadow in the wind, the currents of a river amongst ice, or a
seamstress bent over her work.
Huysmans wou ld write his sca ndalous novel À r ebours  ( Against the
Grain ) abo ut what it felt like to live with a Moreau painting. Or , to be  more
exact, in the at mosphere created by a Moreau painting. His  hero, Des
Esseintes, was based closely on the decadent Comte Robert de
Montesquiou, a man dedicated to achieving a totally aestheticised existence,
finessing the details of his house so that every sensory experience would
immerse him totally . The apogee was a tortoise whose shell was encrusted
with gem stones so that its slow  passage across a room would enliven the
pattern of a Persian carpet. Th is impressed Oscar W ilde, who noted in
French in his Paris journal that ‘a friend of Ephrussi has an emerald-
encrusted tortoi se. I also nee d emeralds, living bibelots…’  This was
substantially better than opening the door of a vitrine.
In Des Esseinte s’ s attenuated existence there was one artist ‘who most
ravished him with unceasing transports of pleasure – Gustave Moreau. He
had purchased his two masterpi eces, and night after night he would stand
dreaming in front of one of thes e, a picture of Salome’: he is so involved in
these intensely char ged paintings that he becomes one with them.
And this is close to how Charles felt about his two great pictu res. He
wrote to Moreau that his work had ‘the tonalities of an ideal d ream’ – an
ideal dream being one where y ou are held in a state of weigh tless reverie
and lose the boundaries of your self.
And Renoir was absolutely furious. ‘Ah that Gustave Moreau, to think
he is taken seriously , a painter who has never even learnt how to paint a
foot…he knew a thing or two. It was clever of him to take in the Jews, to
have tho ught of painting with gold colours…Even Ephrussi fell for it, who I
really thought had some sense! I go and call on him one day , and I come
face to face with a Gustave Moreau!’
I imagin e Renoi r entering the m arble hall and coming up those winding
stairs past Ignace’ s apartment to Charles’ s rooms on the second floor , and
being let in and finding Moreau’ s Jason  in front of him: standing naked on
the slaug htered dragon, holding  up his broken spear and the golden fleece.
Medea carries the small flask that contains the magic potion and rests her
hand adoringly on his shoulder – ‘a dream, a flash of enchantment’,
Lafor gue’ s ‘strange archaeologies of Moreau’.
Or perhaps he came face to face with Galatée , dedicated ‘ à mon ami
Charles Ephrussi ’, a picture described by Huysmans as ‘a cavern
illuminated by precious stone s like a tabernacle, and containing that
inimitable and radiant jewel, the white body , its breast and lips tinted with
pink, Ga latée, a sleep…’ There is certainly a lot of gold here al ongside the
yellow a rmchair: Galatée is immured in a faux-Renaissance frame worthy
of a T itian.
It is ‘Jew Art’, Renoir writes, galled to find his patron, the editor of the
Gazette,  wit h th is goût Rothschild  st uf f on the walls, jewelled and mythic,
contaminatingly close to his own paintings. Charles’ s salon in the rue de
Monceau has become ‘a cavern …like a tabernacle’. It has become a room
that could anger Renoir , inspire  Huysmans and even impress t he sanguine
Oscar W ilde: ‘ Pour écrir e il me faut de satin j aune ,’ he  writes in his Paris
journal – ‘T o write I need yellow satin.’
I rea lise that I am trying to polic e Charles’ s taste. I am worried  by gold
and by Moreau. And even more so by the work of Paul Baudry , the
decorator of the ceilings of the P aris Opéra, adept at working in the baroque
cartouches of the new Belle Époque buildings of Paris. Baudry’ s work was
reviled b y the Impressionists as meretricious pap – an academic painter like
the hated W illiam-Adolphe Bouguereau. He was particularly  successful
with his nudes. He still is. There is a hugely popular poster of a Baudry with
a wa ve about to  break over a stretched-out girl, called Pearl and the W ave ,
that you  can find in the racks of  museum shops and on fridge magnets. And
Baudry was Charles’ s closest painter friend, their letters laced with
endearments. Charles was his biographer and was named as his executor .
Perhaps I should continue to hunt down every picture that was in
Charles’ s room with the netsuke . I start to list all the museums in which his
pictures now hang and to trace how they got there. I consider how long it
would ta ke to go from the Art I nstitute of Chicago to the Musée de la V ille
de Géra rdmer to put Manet’ s Races at Longchamp  alongside Degas’ s
double p ortrait o f the General and the Rabbi. I wonder if I should take my
white ne tsuke o f the hare with amber eyes in my pocket to reunite object
and image. For the span of a cup of cof fee I mull this over as a real
possibility , a way of keeping moving.
My time table ha s disappeared. My other life as a potter is on hold. A
museum needs a response. I am away , my assistants say when people ring,
and cannot be reached. Y es, a big project. He will return your call.
Instead I make the familiar tri p to Paris and stand beneath Baudry’ s
ceilings in the O péra and then rush over to the Musée d’Orsay to look at
Charles’ s single  asparagus stem by Manet and the pair of Mor eau pictures
they now  own, to see if it all coh eres, if it all sings, if I can see w hat his eye
saw . And, of cou rse, I cannot, for the simple reason that Charles buys what
he likes. He is not buying art for the sake of coherence, or to fil l gaps in his
collection. He is buying pictures from his friends, with all the complexities
that brings with it.
Charles has many friendships beyond the studios of painters. Saturday
evenings would be spent at the  Louvre with colleagues, each collector or
writer bringing a sketch or an object, or a problem of att ribution for
discussion: ‘anything could be brought to the table, save for pedantry! What
we would learn there, and never need to doubt! What tireless voyages we
made in  those beautiful chairs in the Louvre, across all the m useums of
Europe!’ remem bered the art historian Clément de Ris. Charles had
stimulating colleagues working at the Gazette . He had friends for
neighbours, the Camondo broth ers and Cernuschi, men to whom  you could
happily show an acquisition.
Charles was becoming a public figure. In 1885 he had become the
proprietor of the Gazette . H e helped rai se money for the purchase of a
Botticelli for the Louvre. He had his writing. There was his curatorial work:
he h elped to or g anise exhibition s of Old Master drawings in 1879, and two
of portraits in 1882 and 188 5. It was one thing to be a covetous,
vagabonding yo ung man and q uite another to have these res ponsibilities
and this scrutiny . He had just received the Légion d’honneur  for his
contribution to the arts.
Most parts of th is busy life were lived in the public view of colleagues,
neighbours, friends, his young secretaries, his lover and his family .
Proust, a  neophyte if not yet quite a friend, had become a regular visitor
to the apartment, drinking in Charles’ s empyrean conversation, the way he
arranged his new treasures, hi s span across society . Charles knows the
socially ravenou s Proust well enough to tell him that it is tim e to leave a
dinner a fter mid night, as the ho sts are desperate for bed. For some long-
buried slight, Ignace in the apartment next door pins him down as the
‘Proustaillon’ – a rather adept d escription of Proust’ s butterfly flitting from
one social occasion to another .
Proust h as also become a presence in the of fices of the Gazette  in the
rue Fava rt. He is diligent here: s ixty-four works of art that will appear later
in the twelve n ovels that make up À la r echer che du temps per du  were
illustrated in the Gazette , a huge proportion of the works’ visual texture.
Like Lafor gue before him, he ha s sent Charles his early writing s on art and
has rece ived a tough critique and  then a first commission. For Proust it is to
be a study of Ruskin. The preface to Proust’ s translation of Ruskin’ s Bible
of Amiens  has as its dedicatee ‘M. Charles Ephrussi, always so good to me’.
Charles and Louise are still lov ers, though I am not sure if Louise has
another lover , or several other lovers. Charles, who has a quality of
discretion, leave s no traces her e, and I feel frustrated that I cannot find
more. I note that Lafor gue was the first of a number of much younger men
who would work for him more a s acolytes than as secretaries, and I wonder
at th is s eries of intense relation ships in his heady cavern-like r ooms lit up
by yello w satin and those Moreaus. The gossip in Paris was t hat Charles
was entr e deux lits , bisexual.
That spring of 1 889 Ephrussi et Cie prospers, but family ma tters are
exceedingly com plicated. The robustly heterosexual Ignace, along with
other wistful bachelors, was devoted to the Countess Po tocka. This
intriguing countess, with looks that Proust described as ‘at once delicate,
majestic and malicious’, her black hair pulled apart in a centre parting, held
sway over a co terie of young men who would wear sapp hire badges
inscribed with the motto ‘ À la V ie, à la Mort ’. S he holds ‘Maccabee’
dinners at which they would pledge to perform outrageous acts in her
honour . As the Maccabees were Judaean martyrs, this must make her
Judith, I realise belatedly , the heroine who cut of f the head of Holofernes
when he was drunk. After one dinner a letter to de Maupassant records that
‘Ignace is a little more far -gone  than the others…and has the bright idea of
walking completely naked through the Paris streets…’ and has been packed
of f to the country to recover .
Charles, at forty , was poised between all these dif ferent worlds. His
private taste had become pub lic property . Everything about him was
aesthetic. He was known in Pa ris as an aesthete whose commissions and
pronouncements and cut of jacket were scrutinised. He was a devotee of the
Opéra.
Even his dog was called Carmen.
I fin d a letter to her , c/o Monsie ur C. Ephrussi, 81 rue de Monceau, in
the arch ives of the Louvre, from Puvis de Chavannes, the Symbolist painter
of pallid figures and washed-out landscapes.
10. MY SMALL PROFITS
It wasn’ t just Renoir who disliked the Jews. A string of financial scandals
throughout the 1880s were laid at the door of the new Jewish financiers,
and the Ephrussi family was a p articular tar get: ‘Jewish machina tions’ were
supposed to be behind the collapse in 1882 of the Union Générale, a
Catholic bank that had strong ties to the Church, with many small Catholic
depositors. The popular demagogue Edouard Drumont wrote in La France
juive :
 
The audacity with which these m en treat these enormous operations, which
for them are just simple game parties, is incredible. In one session, Michel
Ephrussi buys or sells oil or wh eat worth ten or fifteen million. No trouble;
seated for two hours near a column at the Stock Exc hange and
phlegmatically h olding his beard in his left hand, he distributes orders to
thirty courtiers who crowd around him with their pencils extended.
 
Courtiers come and whisper in Michel’ s ear the day’ s news. Money is
seen to be a bagatelle to these  Jewish money-men, implies Drumont, a
plaything. It has no connection to the savings carefully taken into the bank
on market day , or hidden in the cof fee pot on the mantelpiece.
It is a vivid image of covert po wer , of plotting. It has the intensity of
Degas’ s painting At the Bourse  of a whispered conversation between hook-
nosed, red-bear ded financiers amongst the pillars. The Bourse and its
players segue into the T emple and the money-changers.
‘Who sh all stop these men from living then, who shall soon make
France l ook like  a wasteland the n?…it is the speculator in forei gn wheat, it
is the Jew , the friend of the Count of Paris…the favourite of all the salons
of th e aristocratic quarter; it is E phrussi, the chief of the Jewish band who
speculate on wheat.’ Speculation, the making of money out of money , is
seen as a particular Jewish sin. Even Theodor Herzl, the apologist of
Zionism, always  eager to raise money for the cause from wealthy Jewry , is
rude in a letter about ‘the Ephrussi, spekulant ’.
Ephrussi et Cie did wield extraordinary power . The absence of the
brothers from the Bourse was noted with panic during one crisis. Their
threat to  flood the markets with grain in response to Russian p ogroms was
taken seriously in an excited report in a newspaper during another crisis.
‘[The Je ws]…have learned the  potency of this weapon when they made
Russia hold her hand in the las t Jewish persecution…by reduc ing Russian
securities twenty-four points in thirteen days. “T ouch another of our people
and not another  ruble you shal l have, to save your empire,” said Michel
Ephrussi, head of the great hous e at Odessa, the lar gest grain dealers in the
world.’ The Ephrussi were, in short, very rich, very visible and very
partisan.
Drumont, the editor of a daily anti-Semitic newspaper , acted as the
marshaller of opinion into print. He told the French how to spot a Jew – one
hand is lar ger than another – and how to counter the threat th at this race
posed to France. His La France juive  sold 100,000 copies in its first year of
publication in 1886. By 1914 it h ad gone into 200 editions. Drum ont ar gued
that Jews, because they were inh erently nomadic, felt they owed nothing to
the Stat e. Charles and his bro thers, Russian citizens from Odessa and
V ienna and God knows where, looked after themselves – whilst leaching
the life-blood of France by speculating with real French money .
The Eph russi family certainly thought they belonged in Paris. D rumont
certainly thought not: ‘Jews, vomited from all the ghettos of Europe, are
now installed as the masters in historic houses that evoke the most glorious
memories of ancient France…the Rothschilds everywhere: at Ferrières and
at Les V aux-de-Cernay…Ephrussi, at Fontainebleau, in the palace of
Francis I…’ Drumont’ s ridicule of the speed in which this family has
moved from being ‘penniless ad venturers’ to this ascent into s ociety , their
attempts at hunting, their recen tly commissioned coats of arms, became
vicious a nger w hen he thought o f his patrimony soiled by the Ephrussi and
their friends.
I fo rce myself to read this st uf f: Drumont’ s books, newspa per , the
endless pamphle ts in numerous editions, the English versions. S omeone has
annotated a book on the Jews of Paris in my London library . W ritten very
carefully and approvingly next to Ephrussi is the word venal  pencilled in
capitals.
There are quantities and quantities of this stuf f, swinging wildly
between hectoring generalities and splenetic detail. The Ephrussi family
comes u p again and again. It is as if a vitrine is opened and eac h of them is
taken out and he ld up for abuse.  I knew in a very general way about French
anti-Semitism, b ut it is this particularity that makes me feel nauseated. It is
a daily anatomising of their lives.
Charles is pilloried as someo ne ‘who operates …in the world of
literature and the arts’. He is abused as someone who has powe r in French
art, but treats a rt as commerce. Everything Charles does com es back to
gold, say the w riters in La France juive . Meltab le, trans portable, mutab le
gold to be carried, bought and sold by Jews who do not understand land or
country . Even his book on Dürer is scrutinised for Semitic tendencies. How
can Charles understand this g reat German artist, writes one angry art
historian, for he is only a ‘Landesmann aus dem Osten’, an oriental.
His brothers and uncles are exc oriated and his aunts, now marr ied into
the Fren ch aristocracy , are savagely parodied. All the Jewish finance houses
of F rance are anathematised by rote: ‘Les Rothschilds, Erlanger , Hirsch,
Ephrussi, Bamb er ger , Camondo , Stern, Cahen d’Anvers…Membres de la
finance internationale’. The complex intermarriage between the clans is
repeated endlessly to build up a picture of one terrible spider ’ s web of
intrigue, a web even more tightly bound when Maurice Ephrussi marries
Béatrice, the daughter of the head of the French Rothschilds, Alphonse de
Rothschild. These two families now count as one.
The anti -Semites need to pull th ese Jews back to where they came from,
to strip them of their sophisticated Parisian life. One anti-Semitic pamphlet,
Ces bons Juifs , describes an imagined conversation between Maurice
Ephrussi and a friend:
 
– Is it true that you soon have to leave for Russia?
– W ithin 2 or 3 days, said M. de K…
W ell! M aurice E phrussi replied , if you are going to Odessa, g o to the
stock exchange to tell my father some news of me.
M. de K promises, and after having finished his business work in
Odessa, goes to the stock exchange and asks for Ephrussi the father .
– Y ou know , he is told, if you want it to be done, it is the Jews you need.
Ephrussi the father arrives, an  awful-looking Hebrew with long and
dirty hair , wearing a pelisse which is completely covered with grease stains.
M. de K…delive rs the message to the old man and wants to leave, when
he s uddenly feels pulled by his clothing, and hears the Ephrussi father who
tells him:
– Y ou for got my small profits.
– What do you mean by your small profits? exclaimed M. de K…
Y ou un derstood perfectly well, dear Sir , replies the father of
Rothschild’ s son  in law , while bowing to the ground, I am one of the
curiosities of the Odessa stock exchange; when strangers come to see me
without doing any business they  always give me a small present. My sons
thus send me over 1000 visito rs a year and this helps me to  make ends
meet.
And with a lar ge smile, the noble patriarch adds: they know well that
they will one day be rewarded…my sons!
 
The Ephrussi, les r ois d u blé , are simultaneously loathed as upstarts and
fêted as patrons. One minute th ey are to be reminded of the Odessan grain
merchant, a patriarch with his grease-stained coat and his outstretched hand.
The nex t, Béatrice is at a society ball wearing her tiara of h undreds of
slender ears of trembling golden corn. Maurice, the owner of a vast chateau
at F ontainebleau , put himself down on his marriage certificate to Béatrice
de R othschild as ‘landowner ’, rather than banker . This was n o slip. For
Jews, ow ning land was still a comparatively new experience: it was only
since the Revolution that Jews had full citizenship, a mistake – according to
some commenta tors – as Jews were not capable adults. Just look at how the
Ephrussi lived, suggested one screed, The Original Mr Jacobs,  ‘the love of
bric-a-brac, of all odds and ends, or rather the Jews’ passion for  possession,
is often carried to childishness’.
I wo nder how these brothers li ved their lives in these conditio ns. Did
they shr ug their  shoulders, or did it get to them, this incessant hum of
vilification, mutterings about venality , the sort of constant, bubbling
animosity that the narrator in Proust’ s novels remembers of his grandfather:
‘Whenever I brought a new fri end home my grandfather seldom failed to
start humming “O, God of our fathers” from La Juive , or else “Israel, break
thy chai ns”…The old man would call out “On guard! On guard!” upon
hearing the name of any new friend and if the victim had admitted his
origins, ‘then my grandfather…w ould look at us, humming under his breath
the air of “What! Do you hither guide the feet of this timid Israelite?”’
There were duels. Though outlawed, duels were nonetheless popular
amongst young aristocrats, mem bers of the Jockey Club and army of ficers.
Many of  the quarrels were inconsequential, issues of territoriality amongst
young men. A disparaging ref erence to an Ephrussi-owned horse in an
article in Le sport  star ted a quarr el with the journalist, ‘which led to an
altercation and then a hostile meeting’ with Michel Ephrussi.
But some of the  disputes reveal the growing, alarming fissures within
Parisian society .  Ignace was an accomplished dueller , but choosing not to
fight wa s regard ed as a particula rly Jewish failing. A gloating re port tells of
one exa mple of this when a business deal between Michel  and Count
Gaston de Breteuil had ended with substantial losses on the part of the
count. Michel, a man of business, did not see it as a matter for a duel and
failed to give satisfaction by fighting. When the count returned to Paris after
the refu sed invitation, ‘accordin g to the story current in club circles…he
encountered Ep hrussi…and twi sted the latter ’ s nose with the bank notes
representing the  balance, the pin with which they were fasten ed together
severely scratching the proboscis of the great wheat operator . He resigned
from the Rue Royale Club and gave a million francs to be distributed
amongst the poor of Paris…’ This is recounted as a comedy –  rich Jews,
gross and without honour , and their noses.
They are not above reproach: Jews just don’ t know how to behave.
Michel did fight a bitter run of  duels with the Comte de Lubersac on
behalf o f a Rothschild cousin whose honour had been impugned, and who
was too young t o stand up for himself. One took place on the i sland of the
Grande Jatte, in the River Sein e. ‘At the fourth onslaught, Ephrussi was
wounded in the breast, the count’ s sword striking a rib…The count attacked
vigorously from  the outset, and the combatants parted at the finish without
the customary handshake. The count left the scene in a landau, and was
greeted with cries of “ À bas les juifs! ” and “ V ive l’Armée! ”’
Protecting your name and your family’ s honour was increasingly
dif ficult as a Jew in Paris.
1 1. A ‘VER Y BRILLIANT FIVE O’CLOCK’
In October 1891 Charles took the netsuke to a new home on the avenue
d’Iéna. N umber 1 1 is lar ger than the Hôtel Ephrussi on the rue de Monceau
and more austere on the outside  – no swags, no urns. It is so lar ge that it is
practically invisible. I stand and look. The spaces between the floors are
greater: these are rooms with volume. Charles moved here with his brother
Ignace three years after their widowed mother died. I chance my luck and
ring a bell and explain my mission to a woman with a perfect and
unwavering smi le, who explains, quite slowly to me, that I am  completely
wrong about who lived here, th at it is private and that she has never heard
of this family . She watches me until I am back in the street.
I’m furio us. A week later I find that the brothers’ house was to rn down
and rebuilt in the 1920s.
This new area is even grander than the rue de Monceau. It  is only
twenty years since the Ephrussi  arrived in Paris, but this was a family that
now felt  secure.  The bachelor b rothers’ house was 300 yards d own the hill
from the  grande ur of Jules and Fanny’ s mansion, with its embl ems of ears
of corn above the windows and their entwined initials over the huge
gateway into the courtyard. Lou ise’ s palace was directly across the road in
the rue de Bassano. The area is on the hill to the north of the Champ de
Mars, where the Eif fel T ower ha d just been erected. It was the p lace to be: it
was talked of as the ‘hill of arts’.
Charles’ s taste was still chang ing. His passion for the Japan ese was
being slowly overtaken. The cu lt had become so widespread th at everyone
in the 1880s ha d houses full of  japonaiseries : t hey were now  regarded as
bric-a-brac, settl ing like dust on  every available surface. ‘Everything,’ said
Alexandre Dumas in 1887, ‘is Japanese now’: Zola’ s house outside Paris,
awash w ith Japa nese objets , wa s considered slightly risible. It had become
much more dif ficult to make a claim for their special attributes when they
had beco me mainstream, when the posters for bicycles or absinthe flapping
of f the hoarding s now resembled Japanese woodblock prints. There were
still seri ous collectors of Japanese art – including Guimet, wh o lived next
door – and much more art-historical knowledge than in the melee of ten
years before. Goncourt had pub lished his studies of Hokusai an d Utamaro,
Siegfried Bing had his journal Le Japon artistique , bu t it was no longer
followed with religious intensity in Charles’ s fashionable circle.
Proust records this moment of transition in the drawing-room of
Swann’ s lover , the demi-mondaine  Odette: ‘the Far East was retreating
more and more before the invading forces of the eighteenth century…
nowadays it was rarely in Jap anese kimonos that Odette received her
intimates, but rather in the bright and billowing silk of a W atteau
housecoat’.
It was a change of exoticisms that was noticed in Charles, critic,
collector and curator . A journalist wrote that Charles had begu n ‘little by
little to detach h imself from…[J apan]…and to turn more and more towards
the French XVIIIth century , the productions of Meissen and of the Empire,
of which he has collected an ensemble of creations of the highest quality’.
In hi s ne w house  Charles hung o n the walls of his study a suite of tapestries
depicting childr en’ s games, woven from silver thread. And he created a
series of enfilade rooms, which he decorated with formal suites of pale
Empire furniture with its bronze mounts, on which he placed garnitures of
Sèvres a nd Meissen porcelain: there were careful rhythms here. And then
he hung the Moreaus, Manets and Renoirs.
Proust has the D uchesse de Guermantes rhapsodising over this  kind of
neoclassical furn iture, seen in th e house of the Duc d’Iéna: ‘all those things
invading our houses, the sphinxe s crouching at the feet of the arm chairs, the
snakes c oiled ro und candelabra …all the Pompeian lamps, the little boat-
shaped beds which look as if they have been floating on the N ile’. A bed
has a siren stretched out in relief, she says, that looks just like a Moreau.
It is  in this new house that Charles replaces his lit de parade  with an
Empire bed. It is a lit à la polonaise  hung with silks.
In a second-hand bookshop in P aris I find the sale catalogues of parts of
Michel and Maurice’ s art collections that were dispersed after they had
died. A dealer had been bidding for the clocks, unsuccessfully , annotating
every lo t with the price as it had come up: 10,780 francs for a Louis XV
astronomical clock inlaid with bronze signs of the zodiac. All this porcelain,
the Savonnerie carpets, the paintings by Boucher , the boiseries  and the
tapestries speak of the need of t he Ephrussi family to settle seam lessly into
society . And I began to realise that Charles’ s new taste for Empire paintings
and furn iture as he approached his mid-forties was more than just a way of
creating an ensemble in which to live. It was also a claim on an essential
Frenchness, on belonging som ewhere properly . And perhaps a way of
putting more space between tho se first, jostlingly heterodox rooms and his
authoritative life  as an arbiter of taste. Empire is not le goût Rothschild , not
Jewish. It is patrician, French.
I wo nder how th e netsuke looked here: it is in these formal rooms that
Charles begins to grow away from them. His rooms in the rue de Monceau
had not ‘learnt t heir optical catechism’ they were cut through by the note of
the y ellow armchair . They were  congeries of dif ferent things to pick up and
handle. But I fe el that Charles is becoming grander . He is now  called ‘the
opulent Charles’  by a Parisian wit. There is less to touch here:  you would
not dare to pick up those Meissen vases in their bronze moun ts and hand
them round for i nspection. The furnishings of these rooms are described by
a critic after Charles’ s death as the very best of their kin d: they are
‘ pompeux, ingén ieux et un peu fr oids ’, grandiose, clever and a little cold.
Cold is right, I think, as I surreptitiously reach a hand over a ve lvet rope to
stroke th e arm of an Empire fauteuil  i n the M usée N issim de Camondo in
the rue de Monceau, for research.
I f ind it harder to imagine the vi trine opening and a hand hovering over
the netsuke in indecision between a scramble of ivory puppies and a girl
soaping herself in a wooden tub. I’m not sure they fit in at all.
In th eir new ho use the brothers gave lar ger dinner parties and  soirées.
On 2nd February 1893 Le Gaulois  records one in its column ‘Mondanités’.
There w as a ‘V ery brilliant five o’clock  last evening, at Messrs Charles and
Ignace Ephrussi, in honour of the princess Mathilde,’ it records:
 
Her Imperial Highness, accomp anied by the Baronesse de Galbois, arrived
at the splendid salons of the avenue d’Iéna, where more than 200 people,
the upper echelons of the Parisian and foreign world, gathered together .
Let us mention at random:
Comtesse d’Haussonville, in black satin; Comtesse von Moltke-
Hvitfeldt, also in black; Princesse de Léon, in dark blue velvet; the
Duchesse de Morny in black v elvet; Comtesse de Louis de T alleyrand-
Périgord, in black satin; Comtesse Jean de Ganay , in red and black;
Baronesse Gustave de Rothschild, in black velvet…Comtesse Louise Cahen
d’Anvers, in mauve velvet; Mme Edgard Stern, in green grey; Mme Manuel
de Yturbe, née Diaz, in lilac velvet; Baronesse James de Rothschild, in
black; Comtesse  de Camondo, née Cahen, in grey satin; Barone sse Benoist-
Méchin, in black velvet and fur , etc.
Among the men, notable men included:
The min ister of Sweden, Prince Orlof f, Prince de Sagan, Prince Jean
Bor ghèse, Marquis de Modène, Messrs Forain, Bonnat, Roll, Blanche,
Charles Yriarte Schlumber ger , etc.
Mme Lé on Foul d and Mme Jul es Ephrussi did the honours in greeting
the guests, one in a gown of deep grey and the other in light grey .
The elegant apartments were much appreciated, notably the grand salon
Louis XVI, where one admired the head of king Midas, a marvel by Luca
della Robbia, and Charles Ephrussi’ s rooms, of the most pure Empire.
The rece ption was very lively , and there was a very beautiful musical
programme performed by the tziganes.
The Princesse Mathilde didn’ t leave the avenue d’Iéna until 7 o’clock.
 
It w as a good turn-out for the b rothers. According to the paper it was a
cold and  bright evening with a fullish moon. The avenue d’Iéna is wide,
with plane trees sweeping down the centre, and I imagine the carriages for
the brothers’ party blocking the  road, and the gypsy music coming from
their apartments . I imagine Louise, red-gold and T itian-like in mauve
velvet, walking  the few hund red yards up the hill to her vast faux-
Renaissance mansion and her husband.
A ‘very  brilliant five o’clock’ would have been dif ficult to give the
following year . In 1894, as the painter J. E. Blanche put it, ‘the Jockey club
deserted the table of the Princes of Israel’.
It was the start  of the Dreyfus Af fair , twelve years that convulsed
France and polarised Paris. Alfred Dreyfus, a Jewish of ficer on  the French
General Staf f, was accused of being a spy for Germany on the for ged
evidence of a sl ip of paper fou nd in a waste-paper basket. He was court-
martialled and found guilty , tho ugh it was quite clear to the Ar my General
Staf f tha t the evidence was fabricated. Dreyfus was cashiered i n front of a
howling crowd demanding his execution. T oy gallows were sold on the
streets. He was sent to Devil’ s I sland to serve life-imprisonment in solitary
confinement.
The campaign to have him retrie d began almost immediately , provoking
an i ntense and violent anti-Semitic backlash; the Jews were seen to be
overthrowing natural justice. Their patriotism was impugned: by supporting
Dreyfus they were proving that  they were Jewish first and foremost, and
French only second. Charles an d his brothers, still Russian cit izens, were
typical Jews.
T wo years later evidence emer ged that another French of ficer , Major
Esterhazy , was behind the for gery , but Esterhazy was exonerated on only
the seco nd day of his military trial, and Dreyfus was reconfirmed in his
conviction. Add itional for geries were produced to back up the sham.
Despite Zola’ s impassioned plea to the President, ‘J’accuse…!’ , published
in the newspaper L ’Aur or e  in January 1898, Dreyfus was brought back in
1899 an d reconv icted for a third  time. Zola was convicted of criminal libel
and fled to Eng land. It was not until 1906 that Dreyfus would finally be
cleared.
There were seismic splits into bitter Dreyfusard and anti-Dreyfusard
camps. Friendships were curtailed, families separated and salons where
Jews an d veile d anti-Semites  used to meet became activ ely hostile.
Amongst Charl es’ s artist friends, Degas became the most s avage anti-
Dreyfusard, and  stopped speaking to Charles and to the Jewi sh Pissarro.
Cézanne, too, was convinced of Dreyfus’ s guilt, and Renoir became
actively hostile to Charles and his ‘Jew art’.
The Ephrussi family were Drey fusard by faith and by inclination – and
simply by living in the public e ye. In a letter written to André Gide in the
febrile spring of 1898, a frien d recounts hearing a man cate chising his
children outside  the Ephrussi ho use in the avenue d’Iéna. Who lives here?
‘ Le sale juif! ’ The dirty Jew! Ignace was followed back home from the Gare
du Nord  after a late dinner in th e country , by inspectors of the  police who
had mistaken him for the exiled Zola. ‘Five agents,’ reported the anti-
Dreyfusard Le Gaulois  on 19th October 1898, ‘spent the night in
surveillance. Inspector Frecourt arrived in the afternoon to convey the
summons to court to M. Zola, whom he believed was taking refuge chez
Ephrussi…When he dares to return M. Zola will not escape the vigilant eye
of the police.’
And it was a fam ily battle: Charles and Ignace’ s niece Fanny , the  adored
daughter of their late sister B etty , had married Théodore Reinach, an
archaeologist and Hellenist fro m a prominent Jewish family of French
intellectuals. And Théodore’ s politician brother Joseph was the principal
mover in Dreyfus’ s defence – and the later author of the magisterial
Histoir e de l’affair e Dr eyfus . Re inach became a lightning conductor for
anti-Semitism: much of Drumont’ s ire was directed against this
‘personification of the counterfeit Frenchman’. The ‘Jew Reinach’ was
stripped of his o wn military rank at a court martial, beaten up while leaving
Zola’ s tr ial and became the subject of a national campaign of vi lification of
great viciousness.
Paris ch anged for Charles. He was a mondain  w ith doors shu t in his
face, a patron ostracised by som e of his artists. I think of what it must have
been like, and recall Proust writing of the Duc de Guermantes’ s anger:
 
as f ar as Swan n is concerned…they tell me now that he is openly
Dreyfusard. I should never have believed it of him, an epicure, a man of
practical judgement, a collector , a connoisseur of old books, a  member of
the Jock ey , a man who enjoys the respect of all, who knows a ll the good
addresses and used to send us  the best port you could wish to drink, a
dilettante, a family man. Ah! I feel badly let down.
 
In Paris I haunt the archives and pace my routes between old houses and
of fices, vagabonding in museums, aimless one moment and over -purposeful
the next . I am charting a journey into memory . I have a netsuke of a
brindled wolf in my pocket. It is almost too strange to find how interwoven
Charles is with Proust’ s figure of Swann.
I k eep coming o n the places where Charles Ephrussi and Charles Swann
intersect. Before I started my jo urney I knew in the broadest terms that my
Charles was one of the two prin cipal models for Proust’ s protagonist – the
lesser , it was said, of the two. I  remember reading a dismissive remark on
him (‘a Polish Jew…stout, bea rded and ugly , his manner was ponderous
and unco uth’) in  the biography o f Proust published by Geor ge P ainter in the
1950s an d taking  it at face value. The other model acknowledge d by Proust
was a charming  dandy and club man called Charles Haas. He w as an older
man, neither a writer nor a collector .
If there has to be a first owner of my wolf, I want him to be S wann –
driven, l oved, g raceful – but I don’ t want Charles to disappear  into source
material, into literary footnotes. Charles has become so real to me that I fear
losing h im into Proust studies. A nd I care too much about Proust to turn his
fiction in to some  Belle Époque a crostic. ‘My novel has no key ,’ Proust said,
repeatedly .
I try  to map the straightforward correspondences that my Charles and
the fictional Charles share, the lineaments of their lives. I say
‘straightforward’, but when I start to write them out they become quite a
list.
They are  both Jewish. They are both mondain.  The y have a social reach
from royalty (Charles conducted Queen V ictoria round Paris, Swann is a
friend o f the Prince of W ales) v ia the salons to the studios of a rtists. They
are art-lovers deeply in love w ith the works of the Italian Renaissance,
Giotto a nd Botticelli in particular . They are both experts in  the arcane
subject of V enetian fifteenth- century medallions. They are  collectors,
patrons of the Impressionists, incongruous in the sunshine at a boating-party
of a painter -friend.
Both of them wr ite monographs on art: Swann on V ermeer , my  Charles
on D ürer . They use their ‘erud ition in matters of art…to advise society
ladies w hat pictures to buy a nd how to decorate their houses’. Both
Ephrussi and Swann are dandies and they are both Chevaliers of the Légion
d’honneur . Their lives traverse japonisme  and reach into the new taste fo r
Empire. And they are both Dreyfusards who find that their carefully
constructed lives are deeply riven by their Jewishness.
Proust played with the interpene tration of the real and the invented. His
novels have a p anoply of historical figures who appear as th emselves –
Mme Straus and the Princess  Mathilde, for instance – min gling with
characters reimagined from recognisable people. Elstir , the great painter
who le aves behind his infatuation with japonisme  to become an
Impressionist, has elements of Whistler and Renoir in him, but has his own
dynamic force. Similarly Proust’ s characters stand in front of actual
pictures. The visual texture of the novels is suf fused not just wit h references
to Giotto  and Botticelli, Dürer a nd V ermeer , alongside Moreau, Monet and
Renoir , but, by t he act of looking at paintings, by the act of collecting them
and rememberin g what it was to see something, with a memory of the
moment of apprehension.
Swann catches resemblances in passing: Odette to a Bottic elli, the
profile o f a footman at a recep tion to a Mantegna. And so did Charles. I
cannot help wondering if my gra ndmother , so undishevelled, so  very kempt
in her white laundered frock o n those gravel paths in the garden of the
Swiss ch alet, ev er knew what m ade Charles bend down and ruf f le her pretty
sister ’ s hair and compare her to his Renoir of the gypsy girl?
And when I enc ounter Swann, he is funny and charming, but he has a
quality of reserve ‘like a lock ed cabinet’. He moves through the world
leaving people more alive to the  things he loves. I think of how  the young
narrator , in love with Swann’ s daughter , visits the household and is met
with such courtesy , introduced to the sublimities of his collection.
That is my Charles, taking endless pains to show books or pic tures to
young f riends, to Proust, writing about objects and sculpture with acuity
and honesty , animating the world of things. I know . It is how I h ave come to
see Berthe Morisot for the first time, how I learn to stand back and then
move forward. It is how I have come to listen to Massenet, look at
Savonnerie carp ets, see that Japa nese lacquer is worth spending time with. I
pick up one after another of Ch arles’ s netsuke and think of hi m choosing
them. And I th ink of his reser ve. He belongs in this glitteri ng Parisian
world, b ut he never stops being a Russian citizen. He always ha s this secret
hinterland.
Charles had a poor heart like his father . He was fifty when Dreyfus was
brought back from Devil’ s Islan d to under go his second farcical  trial and be
reconvicted in 1899. In the deli cate engraving of him done in that year by
Jean Pa tricot he is looking do wnwards, inwards, his beard still neatly
trimmed, his cravat held by a pearl. He is more involved in m usic and is
now a patron of the Comtesse Gref fuhle’ s Société des Grandes Auditions
Musicales, ‘where his advice is greatly appreciated, and where he has put
himself to work with ardour ’. He had almost stopped buying pictures,
except for a Monet of the rocks at low tide at Pourville-sur - Mer on the
Normandy coast. It is a be autiful painting, scumbled rocks in the
foreground and strange calligraphies of the fishermen’ s wooden poles
emer ging from the sea. It is, I think, rather Japanese.
Engraving of Charles Ephrussi by Patricot published with his obituary in
the  Gazette des beaux-arts , 1905
Charles had slowed his writing too, though he was punctilious in his
duties at the Gazette , clear about what should get published, ‘never ever
late, eve r diligen t down to the very minutiae of every article, ever seeking
perfection’, happy to bring on new writers.
Louise had a new lover . Char les was superseded by Crown Prince
Alfonso of Spain, thirty years  her junior and rather weak-c hinned, but
nonetheless a future king.
On the cusp of the new century , Charles’ s first cousin in V ienna was to
be m arried. Charles had known  V iktor von Ephrussi since boy hood, when
the whole family had lived together , all the generations under one roof, the
evenings spent in planning their move to Paris. V iktor was the bored little
boy , his  youngest cousin, for whom Charles drew caricatures of the
servants. The clan was close and they had seen each other at parties in Paris
and V ienna, on holiday in V ichy and St Moritz, at Fanny ’ s summer
gatherings at the Chalet Ephrus si. And they shared Odessa – the city they
were both born in, the starting place that is not mentioned.
The thre e brothe rs in Paris all send a wedding-present to V iktor  and his
young bride, the Baroness Emm y Schey von Koromla. The coup le will start
their new life in the enormous Palais Ephrussi on the Ringstrasse.
Jules and Fanny send them a beautiful Louis XVI desk of marquetry
with tapering legs ending in small gilt hooves.
Ignace s ends th em an Old Mas ter painting, Dutch, of two sh ips in a
gale. Perhaps a coded joke a bout marriage from a serial avoider of
commitment.
Charles sends them something special, a spectacular something from
Paris: a black vitrine with green velvet shelves, and a mirrored back that
reflects 264 netsuke.

P a r t  T w o
VIENNA 1899–1938

12. DIE POTEMKINSCHE ST ADT
In M arch 1899, Charles’ s generous wedding gift for V iktor an d Emmy is
carefully crated up and taken f rom the avenue d’Iéna, leaving the golden
carpet, the Empire fauteuils  and the Moreaus. It travels across Europe and is
delivered to the Palais Ephrussi in V ienna, on the corner of the Ringstrasse
and the Schottengasse.
It is time to st op walking with Charles and reading about Parisian
interiors, and start reading the  Neue Fr eie Pr esse  and concentrating on
V iennese street life at the turn of the century . It is October and I find I have
spent almost a year with Charles – far longer than I thoug ht possible,
unwarranted skeins of time reading about the Dreyfus Af fair . I do not have
to move  floors in the library: French literature and German literature are
next to each other .
I am anxious about where my boxwood wolf and my ivory tiger are
moving to. I book a ticket to V ienna and set out for the Palais Ephrussi.
This new home for the netsuke is absurdly big. It looks like a primer on
classical architecture; it even makes the Paris houses of the Ephrussi look
demure. The Palais has Corinthian pilasters and Doric columns, urns and
architraves, four small towers at the corners, rows of caryatids  holding up
the roof. The fir st two storeys ar e powerfully rusticated, surmou nted by two
storeys of pale pink-washed brick, and stone behind the fifth-storey
caryatids. There  are so many of these massive, endlessly patient Greek girls
in th eir h alf-slipped robes – thir teen down the long side of the P alais on the
Schottengasse, s ix on the main Ringstrasse front – that they look a little as
if they are lined up along a wall at a very poor dance. I cannot escape gold:
there is lots of gilding to the ca pitals and balconies. There is even a name
glittering across  the façade, but this is comparatively new: the Palais is now
the headquarters of Casinos Austria.
I do my house-watching here, too. Or , rather , I attempted to do my
house-watching, but the Palais is now opposite a tram sto p above an
under ground station pushing p eople out in a constant stream. There is
nowhere that I can lean against a wall and pause and look. I try to place the
roofline against the winter sky and almost walk into the path of a tram, and
a be arded man in three coats and a balaclava harangues me for my
carelessness, and I give him too  much money to make him go away . The
Palais is  opposite the main building of the University of V ienna, where
three campaigns of protest – Am erican policies in the Middle E ast, carbon
emissions, something to do with fees – compete for noise and signatures. It
is an impossible place to stand.
The house is just too big to absorb, taking up too much space in this part
of the city , too much sky . It is more of a fortress or a watch-tower than a
house. I try to accommodate its size. It is certainly not a house for a
wandering Jew . And then I drop  my glasses and one of the arm s fractures
near the joint, so that I have to pinch them together to see anything at all.
I am  in V ienna, 400 yards across a small park from the front  door to
Freud’ s apartme nt, outside my paternal family house, and I cannot see
clearly . B ring on the symbolism, I mutter , as I hold my glasses up to try  and
see this pink monolith; prove to me that this bit of my journey is going to be
dif ficult. I am wrong-footed already .
The Palais Ephrussi looking along the Schottengasse towar ds the
V otivkir che, V ienna, 1881
So I go for a walk. I push my way through the students and I’m on the
Ringstrasse, and I can move and can breathe.
Except t hat it is a windingly ambitious street, breath-catchingly imperial
in sc ale. It is so big that a critic ar gued, when it was built, that it  had created
an entire ly new neurosis, that of agoraphobia. How clever of the V iennese
to invent a phobia for their new city .
The Em peror Franz Josef had ordered a modern metropolis to be
created around V ienna. The old medieval city walls were to be demolished,
the old moats f illed in and a great arc of new buildings, a city hall, a
Parliament, an opera house, a theatre, museums and a  university
constructed. Thi s Ring would h ave its back to the old city and would look
out into the future. It would be a ring around V ienna of civic and cultural
magnificence, a n Athens, an ideal ef florescence of Prachtbauten  –
buildings of splendour .
These buildings would be of dif ferent architectural styles, but the
ensemble would pull together all this heterogeneity into a whole, the
grandest public space in Euro pe, a ring of parks and open spaces; the
Heldenplatz, the  Bur ggarten and the V olksgarten would be ornamented with
statues celebrating the triumphs of music and poetry and drama.
T o p roduce this spectacle meant  colossal engineering works. For twenty
years it was dust, dust, dust. V ie nna, said the writer Karl Kraus, was being
‘demolished into a great city’.
All the Emperor ’ s citizens from  one end of the Empire to the other –
Magyars, Croats, Poles, Czech s, Jews from Galicia and T rieste, all the
twelve n ationalities, the six of ficial languages, the five religions – would
encounter this kaiserlich-königlich , imperial and royal civilisation.
It works: I find that it is curiously dif ficult to stop on the Ring, with its
endless deferred  promise of a moment when you can see it a ll, together .
This new street is not dominated by any one building; there is no crescendo
towards a palace or a cathedral; but there is this constant trium phant pull
along from one g reat aspect of civilised life to another . I keep th inking there
will be one def ining view through these bare winter trees, one framed
moment glimpsed through my broken glasses. The wind sweeps me on.
I walk away from the university , built in its new Renaissance style,
steps sw eeping up to a great portico flanked by rows of arched windows,
busts of  scholar s in every niche , classical sentinels on the rooftops, golden
scrolls labelling anatomists, poets, philosophers.
I walk on past the T own Hall, fantasy Gothic, towards the bulk of the
Opera, then past the museums and the Reichsrat, the Parliame nt, built by
Theophilus Han sen, the architect of the moment. Hansen was a Dane who
had made his name by study ing classical archaeology in Athens and
designing the Academy of A thens. Here, on the Ring, he built the
Ringstrasse Palais  for the Archduke W ilhelm, then the Musikverein, then
the Academy of Fine Arts, then the V ienna Stock Exchange. And the Palais
Ephrussi. He had won so ma ny commissions by the 1880s that other
architects suspected a conspiracy by Hansen and ‘his vassals…the Jews’.
It was no conspiracy . He was just very good at giving his clien ts what
they wa nted; his Reichsrat is one Greek detail after anothe r . Birth of
democracy , says  the great porti co. Protector of the city , says the statue of
Athena. There is a little some thing everywhere you look to flatter the
V iennese. There are chariots on the roof, I notice.
In fact, as I look up, I see figures everywhere against the sky .
On a nd on. It becomes a musical series of buildings, spaced wit h parks,
punctuated by statues. It has a rhythm that suits its purpose. E ver since it
was of ficially opened on 1st May 1865 with a procession by the Emperor
and Empress, this had been a space for progresses, for d isplay . The
Hapsbur g court lived according to Spanish court ceremonial, a severe code
of ritua l, and there were innumerable opportunities for complex court
processions. An d there was the daily marching of the City Regiment, and
marches on major feast days of the Hungarian Guards, celebrations of the
Imperial Birthday , jubilees, ho nour guards for the arrival of a Crown
Princess, and funerals. All the g uards had dif ferent uniforms: confections of
sashes, f ur trimm ings and plumed hats and epaulettes. T o be on the V ienna
Ringstrasse was  to be within earshot of a marching band, the d rumming of
feet. The Hapsbur g regiments were the ‘best-dressed army in the world’,
with a stage to match.
I r ealise  that I am going too fast , walking as if I had a destination, rather
than a point of d eparture. I remember that this was the street tha t was made
for the slower movement of the daily ‘Korso’, the ritualised stroll for
society a long the Kärntner Ring to meet and flirt and gossip and  be seen. In
the illust rated scandal sheets that proliferated in V ienna around t he time that
V iktor a nd Emmy got married, there were often sketches showing ‘ ein
corso Abenteuer ’, an adventure on the Corso, advances from bewhiskered
men with canes or glances from demi-mondaines . There was a ‘regular
jam’, wrote Felix Salten, ‘of knights of fashion, monocled nobles, members
of the pressed-trouser brigade’.
This wa s a place to get dressed up for . In fact, it was the site of the most
spectacular bit of dressing up in V ienna. In 1879, twenty years before
V iktor and Emmy marry and Charles’ s netsuke arrive, Hans Makart, a
wildly p opular painter of vast c anvases of historical fantasy , orchestrated a
Festzug  or procession of artisans for the twenty-fifth anniversary of the
Emperor ’ s wedd ing. The artisans of V ienna were deployed in forty-three
guilds, each of which had its own float decorated in allegori cal fashion.
Musicians and heralds and pike men and men with banners mi lled around
each float. Everyone wore Renaissance costume, and Makart led the whole
swaggering cava lcade on a white char ger , wearing a wide-brimmed hat. It
occurs to  me that this slippage – a bit of Renaissance, a bit of Ru bens, some
cod-classicism – fits the Ringstrasse perfectly .
It is all so self-consciously gran d, and yet a bit Cecil B. de Mille. I am
the w rong audience for it. A young painter and architecture stu dent, Adolf
Hitler , h ad a proper visceral re sponse to the Ringstrasse: ‘From morning
until lat e at night I ran from o ne object of interest to another , but it was
always t he build ings that held m y primary interest. For hours I could stand
in front of the Opera, for hours I could gaze at the Parliament; the whole
Ringstrasse seem ed to me like an enchantment out of “The Thousand-and-
One-Nights”.’ Hitler would paint all the great buildings on the Ring, the
Bur gtheater , Hansen’ s Parliament, the two great buildings opposite the
Palais Ephrussi, the university and the V otivkirche. Hitler appreciated how
the space could be used for dramatic display . He understood all this
ornament in a dif ferent way: it expressed ‘eternal values’.
All of this ench antment was paid for by selling building lots to the
rapidly growing  class of financiers and industrialists. Many of them were
sold to create th e Ringstrasse Palais , a type of building where a series of
apartments lay behind one form idable façade. Y ou could have th e imposing
Palais  address, with a great front door and balconies and windows onto the
Ringstrasse, a marble entrance hall, a salon with a painted ceiling-and yet
live on just one floor . This floor , the Nobelstock , would have all the main
reception rooms centred on a lar ge ballroom. The Nobelstock  is easy to spot
as it has the most swags around its windows.
And because many of the inhabitants of these new Palais  were the
families who had recently made  good, this meant that the Ringstrasse was
substantially Jewish. W alking away from the Palais  Ephrussi, I pass the
Palais  o f the L iebens, the T odescos, t he Königswaters, the W ertheims, the
Gutmanns, the Epsteins, the Schey von Koromlas. These bravura buildings
are a roll-call o f inter -married Jewish families, an architectura l parade of
self-confident wealth where Jewishness and ornament were interlocked.
As I  walk with  the wind at my back, I think of my ‘vagabonding’
around the rue de Monceau and I remember Zola’ s rapacious Saccard in his
vulgarly opulent  mansion, intrusive on the street. Here in V ien na there are
subtly dif ferent ar guments abou t the Jews of Zionstrasse behin d the great
façades of their Palais . He re, the common talk goes, the Jews had become
so assim ilated, had mimicked their Gentile neighbours so well, that they
had tricked the V iennese and simply disappeared into the fabric of the Ring.
Robert Musil in his novel The Man  W ithou t Qualities  has the old Count
Leinsdorf muse on this disappearing act. These Jews have muddled social
life in V ienna by not staying true to their decorative roots:
 
The who le so-ca lled Jewish Question would disappear without a trace if the
Jews would only make up their m inds to speak Hebrew , go back to their old
names, and wear Eastern dress…Frankly , a Galician Jew who has just
recently made his fortune in V ienna doesn’ t look right on the E splanade at
Ischl, w earing a T yrolean costume with a chamois tuft on his hat. But put
him in a long , flowing robe…Imagine them strolling along on our
Ringstrasse, the only place in th e world where you can see, in the midst of
W estern European elegance at its finest, a Mohammedan with his red fez, a
Slovak in sheepskins, or a bare-legged T yrolean.
 
Go i nto the slum s of V ienna, Le opoldstadt, and you can see Jew s living
as Jews should live, twelve in a room, no water , loud on the streets, wearing
the righ t robes, speaking the right ar got. In 1863 when V iktor arrived in
V ienna f rom Od essa as a three- year -old child, there were fewer than 8,000
Jews in V ienna. In 1867 the Emperor gave civic equality to Jews, removing
the last barriers to their rights to  teach and their ownership of property . By
the time  V iktor was thirty in 1890 there were 1 18,000 Jews in V ienna, many
of the newcomers the Ostjuden  d riven out of Galicia by the horrors of the
pogroms that had erupted throu ghout the previous decade. Jews also came
from small villages in Bohemia , Moravia and Hungary , shtetls where their
living condition s were abject. They spoke Y iddish and some times wore
caftans: they were immersed in their T almudic heritage. According to the
popular V iennese press, these incomers were possibly involv ed in ritual
murder , and certainly were involved in prostitution, hawking second-hand
clothes, peddling goods all over the city with their strange baskets on their
backs.
By the time of V iktor and Emmy’ s marriage in 1899 there were 145,000
Jews in V ienna. By 1910 only W arsaw and Budapest had a lar ger Jewish
population in Europe; only New Y ork had a lar ger Jewish population in the
world. And it was a population like no other . Many of the second generation
of the new migrants had achieved remarkable things. V ienna was a city , said
Jakob W assermann at the turn of the century , where ‘all public life was
dominated by the Jews. The banks. The press, the theatre, literature, social
or ganisations, al l lay in the hands of the Jews…I was amazed at  the hosts of
Jewish physicians, attorneys, clu bmen, snobs, dandies, proletar ians, actors,
newspapermen and poets.’ In fact, 71 per cent of financiers were Jewish, 65
per cent of lawy ers were Jewish, 59 per cent of doctors were Jewish and
half of V ienna’ s journalists w ere Jewish. The Neue Fr eie Pr esse  was
‘owned, edited and written by Jews’, said W ickham Steed in his casually
anti-Semitic book on the Hapsbur g Empire.
And these Jews had perfect façades – they vanished. It was a Potemkin
city and  they were Potemkin in habitants. Just as this Russian general had
put a wood-and-plaster town to gether to impress the visiting C atherine the
Great, so  the Ringstrasse, wrote the young firebrand architect Adolf Loos,
was nothing but a huge pretence. It was potemkinsch . The façades bore no
relation to the buildings. The stone was only stucco, it was all a confection
for parvenus. The V iennese must stop living in this stage-set ‘hoping that no
one will notice t hey are fake’. The satirist Karl Kraus concurred . It was the
‘debasement of practical life by ornament’. What was more, through this
debasement, language had become infected by this ‘catastrophic confusion.
Phraseology is the ornament of the mind.’ These ornamental buildings, their
ornamental disp osition, the ornamental life that went on ar ound them:
V ienna had become orotund.
This is a very complex place to send the netsuke to, I think, as I circle
back to the Pal ais Ephrussi towards dusk, feeling calmer . It is complex
because I’m not sure what all this ornament means. My netsuke are one
material or another , boxwood or ivory . They are hard all the way through.
They are not potemkinsch , not made of stucco and past e. And they are
funny li ttle thin gs, and I can’ t see how they will survive in this self-
consciously grandiloquent city .
But then again, no one could accuse them of being practical , either .
They can certainly be thought of as ornamental, even as a sort of
enchantment. I wonder at the appropriateness of Charles’ s wedding-present
once it reaches V ienna.
13. ZIONSTRASSE
When th e netsu ke arrived at th e Palais, the house was almost thirty years
old, bui lt aroun d the same time as the Hôtel Ephrussi in the rue de
Monceau. The building is a piece of theatre, a show-stopping performance
by the man who commissioned it, V iktor ’ s father , my great-great-
grandfather Ignace.
There are, I am  afraid, three Ig nace Ephrussi in this story , st retching
across three generations. The youngest is my great-uncle Iggie i n his T okyo
flat. Then there is Charles’ s brother , the duelling Parisian with his string of
love-af fairs. An d here in V ienna we meet the Baron Ignace von Ephrussi,
holder of the I ron Cross Third Class, ennobled for his services to the
Emperor , Imperial Counsellor , Chevalier of the Order of St Olaf, Honorary
Consul to the King of Sweden  and Norway , Holder of the Bessarabian
Order of the Fleece, Holder of the Russian Order of the Laurel.
Bar on Ignace von Ephrussi, 1871
Ignace was the second-richest b anker in V ienna, owning another huge
building on the Ringstrasse and a block of buildings for the bank. And that
was just in V ienna. I find an audit which notes that in 1899 he had assets in
the city of 3,308,319 florins, roughly the current equivalent of $200 million;
70 per cent of this wealth was in stocks, 23 per cent in property , 5 per cent
in w orks of art and jewellery and 2 per cent in gold. That is a l ot of gold, I
think, as well as a splendidly Ruritarian list of titles. Y ou wo uld need a
façade with extra caryatids and gilding, if you had to live up to that list.
Ignace was a Gründer , a foun ding fa ther , of the Gründerzeit,  the
founding age of Austrian mod ernity . He had come to V ienna with his
parents and older brother Léon from Odessa. When the Danube flooded
V ienna catastro phically in 1862, water lapping the altar steps of St
Stephen’ s Cathe dral, it was the Ephrussi family who loaned money to the
government for the construction of embankments and new bridges.
I o wn a drawing of Ignace. He must be about fifty , and he is w earing a
rather beautiful jacket with wid e lapels and a fatly knotted tie with a pearl
stuck th rough it . Bearded, with his dark hair swept back from his brow ,
Ignace is looking straight back at me appraisingly and his mouth is set for
judgement.
I have a portrait of his wife Émilie too, grey-eyed with a rope of pearls
spun round and round her neck and sweeping down over a black shot-silk
dress. She is also pretty judgemental, and every time I’ve hung this painting
at home I’ve had to take it down, as she looks down on our domestic life in
disbelief. Émilie  was known in  the family as ‘the crocodile’, with a most
engaging smile – whenever she smiled. As Ignace had af fairs with both of
her sisters, as well as keeping a series of mistresses, I feel luck y that she is
smiling at all.
Somehow I imagine that it was  Ignace who chose Hansen as a rchitect;
he unde rstood how to make sy mbols work. What this rich Jewish banker
wanted was a building to drama tise the ascendancy of his family , a house to
sit alongside all these great institutions on the Ringstrasse.
The con tract bet ween the two m en was signed on 12th May 1869, with
building permiss ion granted by the city at the end of August. By  the time he
came to work on the Palais Ephr ussi, Theophilus Hansen had been raised to
the nobi lity; he was now Theophil Freiherr von Hansen, and his client –
now kni ghted – was Ignace Ritter von Ephrussi. Ignace and Hansen started
by d isagreeing about the scale of the elevation: the plans record endless
revisions as these two strong- willed men worked out how to use the
spectacular site. Ignace demanded stables for four horses as well as a coach-
house ‘f or two to three carriages’. His chief requirement was for a staircase
just for himself, one that couldn’ t be used by anyone else living in the
house. It is all spelt out in an article from 1871 in the architect ural journal
Allgemeine Bauzeitung , illustra ted with  splendid plans and elevations. The
Palais w ould be a grandstand onto V ienna: its balconies would overlook the
city , and the city would pass by its huge oak doors.
I s tand outside. T his is the last moment when I can choose to tur n away ,
cross the road, ta ke the tram and  leave this dynastic house and story alone. I
breathe in. I push the left door , cut into the huge oak double ga tes, and am
in a long, high, dark corridor , a gold cof fered ceiling above me. I go on and
I am in a glazed courtyard f ive storeys high, with internal balconies
punctuating the huge space. Th ere is a life-size statue of a rat her muscle-
bound A pollo ha lf-heartedly stru mming his lyre in front of me, held on his
pedestal.
There are some small trees in planters and a reception desk, and I
explain, poorly , who I am and th at this is my family house, and that I would
love to look aro und if it is not too much of a problem. It is cer tainly not a
problem. A charming man emer ges and asks me what I would like to see.
All I  can  see is marble: there is lots of marble. This doesn’ t say enough.
Everything is marble. Floor , stairs, walls of staircase, columns on staircase,
ceiling o ver stai rcase, moulding s on ceiling of staircase. T urn left and I go
up the family stairs, shallow ma rble steps. T urn right and I go into another
entrance hall. I look down and the patriarch’ s initials are set in  the marble
floor: JE  (for Joachim Ephrussi ) with a coronet above them. By the grand
stairs ar e two torchères, taller than me. The steps go on and on, trippingly
shallow . Black marble frames to the huge double doors – black and gold – I
push, and I enter the world of Ignace Ephrussi.
For rooms covered in gold, it is  very , very dark. The walls are divided
into panels, each delineated b y ribbons of gilding. The fire -places are
massive events of marble. The floors are intricate parquet. All the ceilings
are divided into networks of lo zenges and ovals and triangular panels by
heavy gilded mouldings, raise d and cof fered into intricate scrolls of
neoclassical froth. W reaths and acanthus top the heady mixture. All the
panels are painted by Christian Griepenkerl, the acclaimed decorator of the
ceilings of the a uditorium of the Opera. Each room takes a clas sical theme:
in th e bi lliard-room we have a s eries of Zeus’ s conquests – Led a, Antiope,
Danaë and Europa – each undra ped girl held up by putti and velvet draping.
The music-room  has allegories of the muses; in the salon, miscellaneous
goddesses sprinkle flowers; the smaller salon has random putti. The dining-
room, achingly obvious, has ny mphs pouring wine, draped with grapes or
slung with game. There are more putti, for no good reason, sitting on
doorway lintels.
Everything in this place, I realise, is very shiny . There is nothing to grip
onto wit h these marbled surfaces. Its lack of tactility makes me panic: I run
my hands along the walls and they feel slightly clammy . I thought I’d
worked through  my feelings a bout Belle Époque architectu re in Paris,
craning my neck to see the Baud rys on the ceilings of the Opéra. But here it
is all so much closer , so much more personal. This is aggressively golden,
aggressively lacking in purchas e. What was Ignace trying to do? Smother
his critics?
In the ballroom,  with its three great windows looking across the square
to the V otivkirch e, Ignace suddenly lets something slip. Here, on the ceiling
– where in other Ringstrasse Palais  y ou might find something Elysian –
there is a series of paintings of stories from the biblical Book of Esther:
Esther crowned as Queen of Israel, kneeling in front of the Chief Priest in
his r abbinical robes, being bles sed, with her servants kneeling behind her .
And then there is the destruction of the sons of Hamam, the enemy of the
Jews, by Jewish soldiers.
It is beautifully done. It is a long-lasting, covert way of staking a claim
for who  you are. The ballroom  is the only place in a Jewish household –
however grand, and however rich you might be – that your Gentile
neighbours would ever see socially . This is the only Jewish painting on the
whole of the Ringstrasse. Here on Zionstrasse is a little bit of Zion.
14. HIST OR Y AS IT HAPPENS
This implacably  marble Palais  is whe re Igna ce’ s three children were
brought up. In th e cache of family photographs that my father gave me is a
salon pi cture of these children, caught stif fly between velvet d rapes and a
potted p alm. Ste fan is the eldes t son, handsome and rather anx ious. He is
spending his days at the of fice with his father , learning grain. A nna is long-
faced and huge-eyed, with massed curls, and looks utterly bored, her picture
album almost falling out of her hands. She is fifteen and, apart from
dancing lessons,  spends her day s in a carriage going between at-homes with
her glacial mother . And my gr eat-grandfather is the young V iktor . He is
called b y his father ’ s Russian nickname, T ascha, and is in a velvet suit,
clutching a velvet hat and a cane. He has black, glossy , wav ed hair and
looks as  if he has been promised a reward for spending this lon g afternoon
away from his schoolroom, under all these heavy drapes.
V iktor ’ s schoolr oom has a window looking out towards the build ing site
where they were finishing the university , with its rational series  of columns
telling the V iennese that knowledge is secular and new . For years every
window in this new family house on the Ringstrasse looked out onto dust
and dem olition. And while Charles talks to Mme Lemaire about  Bizet in the
salons of Paris, V iktor sits in this schoolroom in the Palais Ephrussi with his
German tutor , the Prussian Herr  W essel. Herr W essel made V ik tor translate
passages of Edward Gibbon’ s Decline and Fall of the Roman Empir e  from
English into German, taught him how history worked from  the great
German historian Leopold von Ranke, ‘ wie es eigentlich gewesen ist ’ –
history as it actually happened. History was happening now , V iktor was
told; history is rolling like wi nd through fields of wheat on wards from
Herodotus, Cicero, Pliny and T acitus through one empire to another , to
Austria-Hungary and on towards Bismarck and the new Germany .
T o unde rstand history , taught Herr W essel, you must also know Ovid
and you  must know V ir gil. Y ou must know how heroes encounter exile and
defeat a nd retur n. So after hist ory lessons, V iktor must learn parts of the
Aeneid  by heart. And after this, as recreation I suppose, Herr W essel teaches
V iktor about Goethe, Schiller and von Humboldt. V iktor learns that to love
Germany is to love the Enlight enment. And German means emancipation
from backwardness, it means Bildung , culture, knowledge, the journey
towards experience. Bildung,  it is implied, is  in the journey from speaking
Russian to speaking German, from Odessa to the Ringstrasse, from grain-
trading to Schiller -reading. V iktor starts to buy his own books.
V iktor , it is unde rstood in the fa mily , is the bright one and must get this
kind of education. V iktor , like Charles, is the spare son and will not have to
be th e banker . S tefan is being g roomed for this, just like Léon’ s eldest son
Jules. In  a photograph of V iktor  a few years later , he is just twenty-two and
looks lik e a good Jewish schol ar with his neatly trimmed beard, already
slightly plumper  than he should  be, a high white collar and a black jacket.
He has the Ephrussi nose, of course, but what is most noticeable are his
pince-nez, the mark of a young man who wants to become a historian.
Indeed, in ‘his’ café, V iktor is able to discourse at length, as his tutor has
taught h im, on this moment in time and how the forces of react ion must be
seen in the context of progress. And so on.
Every young man has his own café, and each is subtly dif ferent.
V iktor ’ s was the Griensteidl, at the Palais Herberstein close to the Hofbur g.
This wa s a meeting place for young writers, the Jung-W ien of the poet
Hugo von Hofmannsthal, and t he playwright Arthur Schnitzler . The poet
Peter Al tenber g had his post del ivered to his table. There were mountains of
newspapers and a complete run of Meyers Konversations-Lexicon ,
Germany’ s answer to the Encyclopaedia Britannica , to provoke or answer
ar guments or fuel journalistic co py . Y ou could spend your whole day here,
nursing a single cup of cof fee under the high vaulted ceilings, writing, not-
writing, reading  the morning ne wspaper – the Neue Fr eie Pr esse  – while
waiting for the afternoon edition. Theodor Herzl, the paper ’ s Paris
correspondent w ith his apartment in the rue de Monceau, used t o write here
and ar gu e his absurd idea of a Je wish state. Even the waiters we re rumoured
to jo in in the conversations around the huge circular tables. It was, in a
memorable phra se of the satirist Karl Kraus, ‘an experimental station for
the end of the world’.
In a  café you could adopt an attitude of melancholic separatio n. This
was an attitude shared by many of V iktor ’ s friends, the sons of other
wealthy Jewish bankers and industrialists, other members of the generation
that had grown u p in the marble  Palais  of the Ringstrasse. Their fathers had
financed cities and railways, m ade fortunes, moved their families across
continents. It was so dif ficult to  live up to the Gründer  that the most one
could be expected to do was talk.
These sons had a common anxiety about their futures, lives set out in
front of them o n dynastic tram-lines, family expectations d riving them
forward. It meant a life lived under the gilded ceilings of their parents’
homes, marriage  to a financier ’ s daughter , endless dances, years in business
unspooling in front of them. It meant Ringstrassenstil –  Ringstrasse-style –
pomposity , over -confidence, the parvenu. It meant billiards in the billiard-
room with your father ’ s friends after dinner , a life immured  in marble,
watched over by putti.
These young men were seen as either Jewish or V iennese. It doesn’ t
matter that they may have been born in the city: Jews ha d an unfair
advantage over the natural-born V iennese,  w ho had gifted liberty to these
Semitic newcomers. As the English writer Henry W ickham Steed said, this
was:
 
Liberty for the c lever , quick-wit ted, indefatigable Jew to prey upon a public
and a political world totally unfit for defence against or competition with
him. Fresh from T almud and synagogue, and consequently  trained to
conjure with the law and skille d in intrigue, the invading Semite arrived
from Ga licia or Hungary and ca rried everything before him. Unknown and
therefore unchec ked by public opinion, without any ‘stake in t he country’
and therefore reckless, he sought only to gratify his insatiable appetite for
wealth and power…
 
The Jew s’ insatiability was a common theme. They simply did not
know their limits. Anti-Semitism  was part of common day-tod ay life. The
flavour of V iennese anti-Semitism was dif ferent from Parisian anti-
Semitism. In both places it ha ppened both overtly and covertly . But in
V ienna you could expect to ha ve your hat knocked of f your head on the
Ringstrasse for looking Jewish (Schnitzler ’ s Ehrenber g in The W ay into the
Open , Freud’ s father in The Interpr etation of Dr eams ), be abused as a dirty
Jew for opening a window in a train carriage (Freud), be snubbed at a
meeting of a cha rity committee (Émilie Ephrussi), have your lec tures at the
university disrupted by cries of ‘ Juden hinaus! ’ – ‘Jew s out!’ – until every
Jewish student had picked up his books and left.
Abuse also came in more gene ralised ways. Y ou could read th e latest
pronouncements by V ienna’ s o wn version of Édouard Drumont in Paris,
Geor g von Schönerer , or hear his thuggish demonstrations churning their
way along the R ing under your window . Schönerer came to prominence as
the f ounder of t he Austrian Reform Meeting, declaiming again st ‘the Jew ,
the sucking vampire…that knocks…at the narrow-windowed house of the
German farmer and craftsman’ . He promised in the Reichsra t that if his
movement did not succeed now , ‘the avengers will arise from  our bones’
and ‘to the terr or of the Semitic oppressors and their hangers-on’ make
good the principle ‘“An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth”’. Retribution
against t he injus tices of the Jew s – successful and af fluent – was especially
popular with artisans and students.
V ienna Univers ity was a particular hotbed of nationalism and anti-
Semitism, with the Burschenschaften  or stude nt frate rnities leading the way
with their avowal of kicking the Jews out of the university . This is one of
the r easons why many Jewish s tudents considered it necessary  to become
exceptionally expert and dangerous fencers. In alarm, these fraternities
instituted the W aidhofen princip le, which meant there could be  no duelling
with Jews, that J ews had no honour and should not be expected to live as if
they did: ‘It is impossible to insult a Jew; a Jew cannot therefore demand
satisfaction for any suf fered insult.’ Y ou could still beat them up, of course.
It was Dr Karl Lueger , the foun der of the Christian Social Par ty , with
his amia bility and V iennese patois, his followers with their white carnations
in th eir buttonholes, who seemed even more dangerous. His anti-Semitism
seemed more carefully considered, less overtly rabble-rousi ng. Lueger
made h is play as an anti-Sem ite by necessity rather than conviction:
‘wolves, panther s, and tigers are  human compared to these beas ts of prey in
human form…W e object to t he old Christian Austrian Empire being
replaced by a n ew Jewish Empire. It is not hatred for the ind ividual, not
hatred for the po or , the small Je w . No gentlemen, we do not hate anything
but the oppressive big cap ital which is in the hands of the Jews.’ It was
Bankjuden  – the Rothschilds and Ephrussi – who had to be put in their
place.
Lueger gained huge popularity and was finally appointed mayor in
1897, noting with some satisfaction that ‘Jew-baiting is an excellent means
of p ropaganda and getting ah ead in politics’. Lueger then reached an
accommodation with those Jew s he had assailed in his rise to power ,
remarking smug ly that ‘Who is a Jew is something I determine.’ There was
still considerabl e Jewish anxiety: ‘Can it be considered appropriate for the
good name and interests that V ienna be the only great city in  the world
administered by an anti-semitic agitator?’ Though there was no anti-Semitic
legislation, the penalty of Lu eger ’ s twenty years of rhetoric was a
legitimisation of bias.
In 1899, the year that the netsuke arrived in V ienna, it was possible for a
deputy in the Reichsrat to make speeches calling for Schussgelder  –
bounties – for shooting Jews. In V ienna the most outrageous statements
were met with a feeling from the assimilated Jews that it was pr obably best
not to make too much fuss.
It looks as if I am going to spend another winter reading about anti-
Semitism.
It w as th e Empe ror who held o ut against this agitation. ‘I will  tolerate
no Judenhetze  in my Empire,’ he said. ‘I am fully persuaded of the fidelity
and loya lty of the Israelites and they can always count on my protection.’
Adolf Jellinek, the most famous Jewish preacher of the time, pronounced
that ‘Th e Jews are thoroughly dynastical, loyalist, Austrian. The Double
Eagle is  for them a symbol of redemption and the Austrian colours adorn
the banners of their freedom.’
Y oung J ewish men in their caf és had a slightly dif ferent view . They
were living in Austria, part of a dynastic empire, part of a stifling
bureaucracy where every decision was endlessly deferred, where everything
aspired to be ‘ kaiserlich-königlich ’, k & k , i mperi al and royal. Y ou could
not mov e in V ienna without se eing the double-headed Hapsbur g eagle or
the portr aits of the Emperor Franz Josef, with his moustaches and sideburns
and his chest of medals, and his  grandpaternal eyes following you from the
window of the s hop where you bought your cigars, over the little desk of
the maître d’ in the restaurant. Y ou could not move in V ienna if you were
young, w ealthy and Jewish, without being observed by a mem ber of your
extended dynas tic family . Anything you did might end up in a satirical
magazine. V ienna was full of gossips, caricaturists – and cousins.
The natu re of the age was much discussed around these mar ble café
tables and between these earne st young men. Hofmannsthal, the son of a
Jewish financier , ar gued that the nature of the age ‘is multiplicity and
indeterminacy’. It can rest only , he said, on ‘ das Gleitende ’, moving,
slipping, sliding : ‘what other ge nerations believed to be firm is  in fact das
Gleitende ’. The nature o f the age was change itself, something to be
reflected in the p artial and fragmentary , the melancholy and lyri c, not in the
grand, firm, operatic chords of the Gründerzeit  and  the Ringstrasse.
‘Security ,’ said Schnitzler , the  well-of f son of a Jewish professor of
laryngology , ‘exists nowhere.’
Melancholy fits with the perpetual dying fall of Schubert’ s Abschied,
‘Farewell’. Liebestod , the love of death, was one response. Suicide was
terribly common among V iktor ’ s acquaintances. Schnitzler ’ s daughter ,
Hofmannsthal’ s son, three of Ludwig W ittgenstein’ s brothers and Gustav
Mahler ’ s brothe r would all kill themselves. Death was a way of separating
oneself from the mundane, from the snobbery and the intrig ues and the
gossip, d rifting into das Gleitende . Schnitzler ’ s list of reasons for shooting
yourself in The Road into the Open  enc ompasses ‘Grace, or debts , from
boredom with life, or purely o ut of af fectation’. When, on 30th January
1889 the Crown Prince, Archduke Rudolf, committed suicide after
murdering his young mistress Marie V estera, suicide gained its imperial
imprimatur .
It w as understood that none of t he sensible Ephrussi children would go
as far as that. Melancholy had  its place. A café. It shouldn’ t be brought
home.
But other things were brought home.
On 25th June 1889 V iktor ’ s sister , the long-faced, belle laide  Anna,
converted to Catholicism in order to marry Baron Herz von Hertenreid. She
has a long list of possible husbands, and now she has found a banker and a
baron w ho comes from the right  kind of family , even if he is Christian. The
Herz von Hertenreids are a family that – approving tones from my
grandmother – always spoke Fr ench . Conversion was relatively common. I
spend a day looking up the records of the V iennese Rabbinate in the
archives of the J ewish communi ty next to the synagogue in Judengasse, the
names o f every Jew born, married or buried in V ienna. I’m se arching for
her when an archivist turns. ‘I remember her marriage,’ she says, ‘1889.
She has the firmest signature, confident. It almost goes through the paper .’
I can believe this. Anna seems to have been able to create trouble
wherever she went. On the family tree my grandmother made for my father
in the 1970s, there are pencil annotations. Anna has two children, she
writes, a beautiful daughter who marries and then flees with her lover to the
East, and a son who is ‘not married, did nothing’. ‘Anna’, she continues,
‘witch’.
Eleven days after Anna’ s wedding to her banker , Stefan, the heir -
apparent – groomed for the life of the bank, with his fanta stic waxed
moustaches – elopes with his father ’ s Russian Jewish mistress Estiha.
Estiha only spoke Russian – this is written on the annotated family tree –
and br oken German.
Stefan w as immediately disinherited. He was to receive no all owance,
live in no family property , communicate with no member of the family . It
was a proper O ld T estament banishment, admittedly with the particularly
V iennese slant of marrying you r father ’ s lover . One sin piled on another:
apostasy on filial disgrace. And linguistic incompetence in a mistress. I’m
not sure how to read this. Does it reflect badly on father or son, or both?
Cut of f, this couple went first to Odessa, where there were still friends
and a name to use. Then on to Nice. Then a succession of progre ssively less
smart resorts along the Côte d’Azur as their money ran out. In 1893 an
Odessa newspa per notes that the Baron Stefan von Ephrussi has been
received into the Lutheran Eva ngelical faith. By 1897 he is working as a
cashier i n a Russian bank for foreign trade. A letter comes from a shabby
Paris ho tel in the 10th arrondissement in 1898. They have no children, no
heirs to complic ate Ignace’ s plans. I wonder , in passing, if Stefan kept his
fine moustaches as he travelled downwards with Estiha through these
circles of shabbier hotels, waiting for a telegram from V ienna.
And V iktor ’ s world stopped still as a slammed book.
Café mornings or not, V iktor was suddenly going to be in char ge of a
very lar ge and complex international business. He was to be blooded in
stocks and shipments, sent to Pe tersbur g, Odessa, Paris, Frankfurt. Precious
time had been l ost on the other  boy . V iktor had to learn quickly what was
expected of him. And this was just the start. V iktor also had to marry , and
he h ad t o have children: specific ally he had to have a son. All those dreams
of writin g a magisterial history  of Byzantium were lost. He was now the
heir .
I thi nk it might have been at aro und this point that V iktor developed his
nervous tic of taking of f his pince-nez and wiping his hand acr oss his face
from brow to c hin, a reflex m ovement. He was clearing his mind, or
arranging his public face. Or perhaps he was erasing his private face,
catching it in his hand.
V iktor waited until she was seventeen and then proposed to the
Baroness Emmy  Schey von Koromla, a girl he had known since her
childhood. Her parents, Baron Paul Schey von Koromla and the English-
born Evelina Landauer , were family friends, business associates of his
father ’ s, neighb ours on the Ri ngstrasse. V iktor and Evelina were close
friends, as well as contemporaries in age. They shared a love of poetry ,
would d ance tog ether at balls a nd go on shooting parties to Kövecses, the
Scheys’ Czechoslovakian estate.
The young scholar: V iktor , aged 22, 1882
V iktor a nd Emm y were married on 7th March 1899 in the synag ogue in
V ienna. He was thirty-nine and  in love, and she was eighteen and in love.
V iktor was in lo ve with Emmy . She was in love with an artist and playboy
who had  no intention of marrying anyone, let alone this young decorative
creature. She was not in love with V iktor .
Alongside appropriate wedding-presents from all over Europe, laid out
after the wedding breakfast in the library , was a famous rope of pearls from
a g randm other , the Louis XVI desk from cousin Jules and Fanny , the two
ships in  a gale from cousin Ig nace, an Italian Madonna and Child nach
Bellini in a hug e gilt frame fro m uncle Maurice and aunt Béatrice, and a
lar ge di amond from someone whose name is lost. And, from cousin
Charles, there was the vitrine containing the netsuke lined up on the green
velvet shelves.
And then, on 3rd  June, ten week s after the wedding, Ignace died. It was
sudden: there was no malingering. According to my grandmother , he died in
the Palais Ephrussi with Émilie holding one hand and his mistress the other .
This mu st have been another mistress, I realise, a mistress who was neither
his son’ s wife nor one of his sisters-in-law .
I have a photogr aph of Ignace o n his deathbed, his mouth still firm and
decisive. He was buried in the Ephrussi family mausoleum. I t is a small
Doric temple that he had built with characteristic foresight to hold the
Ephrussi clan in the Jewish section of the V ienna cemetery , and where he
had his father , the patriarch Joachim, reinterred. V ery biblical, I  think, to be
buried with your father , and to leave space for your sons. In his will he left
legacies to seventeen of his servants, from his valet Sigmund Donnebaum
(1,380 crowns) and the butler Josef (720 crowns) to the porter Alois (480
crowns) and the maids Adelheid  and Emma (140 crowns). He asked V iktor
to c hoose a pi cture for his nephew Charles from his coll ection, and
suddenly I see a tenderness here, a remembrance from an uncle of his
young bookish nephew and his notebooks forty years before. I wonder what
V iktor found amongst all the heavy gilt frames.
And so V iktor , with his new yo ung wife, inherited the Ephrussi bank,
responsibilities that laced V ienna together with Odessa and St Petersbur g
and London and Paris. Included  in this inheritance was the Palais Ephrussi,
sundry building s in V ienna, a huge art collection, a golden dinner service
engraved with the double E, and the responsibility for the seventeen
servants who worked in the Palais.
Emmy was shown round her new apartment, the Nobelstock , by V iktor .
Her comment was to the point.  ‘It looks,’ she said, ‘like the f oyer of the
Opera.’ The couple decided to stay upstairs on the second great floor of the
Palais, a floor with fewer painted ceilings, less marble around the doors.
Ignace’ s rooms were kept for the occasional party .
The newly married couple, my g reat-grandparents, have a balcony view
onto the Ringstrasse, a balcony v iew for the new century . And the netsuke –
my sleeping monk flat over his begging bowl and the deer scratching his ear
– have a new home.
15. ‘A LARGE SQUARE BOX SUCH AS CHILDREN DRA W’
The vitr ine need s to go somewh ere. The couple have decided to leave the
Nobelstock  a s a m onument to Ignace; and  V iktor ’ s mother Émilie, thank
God, has  decided to go back to h er grand hotel in V ichy , where she can take
the waters and b e horrible to he r maids. So they have a whole floor of the
Palais for themselves. It is already full of pictures and furniture, of course,
and there are the servants – including Emmy’ s new maid, a V iennese girl
called Anna – but it is their own.
After a long hon eymoon in V enice they have to make some de cisions.
Should t hese ivo ries go in the salon? V iktor ’ s study isn’ t quite big enough.
Or the library? H e vetoes his library . In the corner of the dining -room next
to the Boulle sid eboards? Each of these places has its own probl ems. This is
not an apartment of the ‘mo st pure Empire’, like Charles’ s delicate
calibrations of objects and pictu res in Paris. This is an accumulation of stuff
from four decades of af fluent shopping.
The great glass case of beautiful things has a particular dif ficulty for
V iktor , a s it comes from Paris, a nd he doesn’ t want it sitting and reminding
him of an elsewhere, another li fe. The thing is that V iktor and Emmy are
not quite  sure about Charles’ s gift. They are wonderful, these little carvings,
funny an d intric ate, and it is obvious that his favourite cousin Charles has
been exceedingl y generous. But the malachite-and-gilt clock and  the pair of
globes from cousins in Berlin,  and the Madonna, can be placed straight
away – salon, li brary , dining-ro om – and this great vitrine cannot. It is too
odd and complicated, and it is also rather lar ge.
Emmy at eighteen, startlingly beautiful and fabulously dressed, knows
her mind . V iktor defers to her concerning where all these wedd ing-presents
should go.
She is very slim with light-brown hair and beautiful grey eyes. She has
a so rt of lumino sity , that rare quality of someone who is at home  in the way
she moves. Emmy moves beautifully . She has a good figure and wears
dresses that show of f the narrowness of her waist.
As a beautiful young baroness, Emmy has the full hand o f social
accomplishments. She has been brought up in two places, in the city and in
the coun try , and  has the skills for both. Her childhood in V ienn a was in the
Scheys’ Palais , an austere pi ece of grand neoclassicism, a quick ten
minutes’, walk away from her new home with V iktor , facing out across to
the Opera over a statue of Go ethe looking extremely cross.  She has a
charming younger brother called Philippe, universally known a s Pips, and
two little sisters Eva and Gerty , who are still in the nursery .
Until she was thirteen, Emm y had a meek and biddable English
governess, who was keen to keep the peace in the schoolroom. And then
nothing. Her formal education is  full of terra incognita as a result. There are
great swathes about which she knows practically nothing – history being
one – and she has a particular laugh when these things are mentioned.
What she does know are her languages. She is charming in both English
and Fren ch, which she speaks interchangeably at home with her parents.
She kno ws any number of chi ldren’ s poems in both languages and can
quote great sections of “The Hunting of the Snark” and ‘Jabberwocky’. And
she has her German, of course.
Every weekday afternoon in V ie nna since she was eight has included a
dancing hour , and she is now a wonderful dancer , a favourite partner at
balls for  ardent young men, not least for that waist tied with a br ight sash of
silk. Em my can skate like she dances. And she has learnt how to  smile with
interest as her parents’ friends  talk about opera and theatre  at the late
suppers they give, this being a household where business i s not to be
discussed. There are lots of cou sins in their lives. Some of them, like the
young writer Schnitzler , are rather avant-garde.
Emmy k nows how to listen with a particular animation, sensing when to
ask a question, when to laugh, when to turn away with the tilt of her head to
another guest and leave her interlocutor looking at the nape of her neck. She
has a lot of adm irers, some of w hom have experienced her sudden squalls.
Emmy has a considerable temper .
For this  life in V ienna she needs to know how to dress. Her mother ,
Evelina, only eighteen years older , also dresses impeccably and wears only
white. White all year round: from her hats to the boots that she changes
three times a day in the dusty summer . Clothes are a passion that her parents
have indulged her in, partly b ecause Emmy has an aptitude for them.
Aptitude  is too flat a description. It is more driven, more vocational, this
way she  has of changing one p art of what she is wearing to m ake herself
look dif ferent from other girls.
There w as a lot of dressing up in  Emmy’ s youth. I found an album from
a weekend party where the girls had been photographed dressed up as
characters from Old Master pai ntings. Emmy is T itian’ s Isabella d’Este in
velvet a nd fur , while other cousins are pretty Chardin and Pieter de Hooch
servant-girls. I make a note of Emmy’ s social dominanc e. Another
photograph shows the handsome young Hofmannsthal and the teenage
Emmy dressed up as Renaissan ce V enetians at a wedding ma sque. There
was also  a party where they a ll dressed up as characters from a Hans
Makart painting, the perfect opportunity for wide-brimmed hats with
feathers.
Before and after marriage Emmy’ s other life is in Czechoslovakia, at the
Schey country house in Kövecses, two hours by train from V ienna.
Kövecses was a very lar ge and very plain eighteenth-century hou se (‘a lar ge
square b ox such as children draw ’, in the words of my grandmother) set in a
flat land scape o f fields, with be lts of willows, birch forests and  streams. A
great river , the Váh, swept past, forming one of the boundaries t o the estate.
It was a landscape in which you could see storms passing fa r away and
never ev en hear them. There was a swimming lake with fretted Moorish
changing huts, lots of stables and lots of dogs. Emmy’ s mother E velina bred
Gordon setters – the first bitch arriving in a slatted crate on the Orient
Express, the great train stopping at the tiny halt on the estate . And there
were he r father ’ s German pointers for the shooting – hares and partridge.
Her mot her enjo yed shooting and, as the time of a confinement g rew nearer ,
used to go out on the partridge shoots with her midwife following her as
well as the gamekeeper .
In K övecses, Emmy rides. She stalks deer and shoots and walks with
the dogs. As I struggle to bring the two parts of her life together , I am also
slightly aghast. My picture of Jewish life in fin-de-siècle  V ie nna is perfec tly
burnished, mos tly consisting of Freud and vignettes of a cerbic and
intellectual talk in the cafés. I’m  rather in love with my ‘V ienna as crucible
of th e tw entieth century’ motif, as are many curators and academics. Now I
am in the V ienna part of the sto ry , I am listening to Mahler and reading my
Schnitzler and Loos, and feeling very Jewish myself.
My image of the period certainl y doesn’ t stretch to include Jewi sh deer -
stalking or Jewish discussion of the merits of dif ferent gun-dogs for
dif ferent game. I am at sea, when my father rings me up to tell me that he
has foun d something else to ad d to the growing file of photographs. I can
tell that he is ra ther pleased with himself and his own vagabon ding on this
project. He comes down to my s tudio for lunch and produces a small white
book fro m a supermarket bag. I’m not sure what it is, he says, b ut it should
be in your ‘archive’.
The book is bou nd in very soft white suede, sunned and worn a way on
the spine. The cover bears the  dates 1878 and 1903. It is clo sed with a
yellow silk ribbon, which we untie.
Inside a re twelve beautiful pen-and-ink images of members  of the
family on separate cards, each edged with silver , each with its own carefully
designed frame in Secessionist  patterns, each with a cryptic quatrain in
German or Latin or English, part of a poem or a snatch of a song. W e work
out that it must be a present fo r Baron Paul and Evelina’ s silver wedding
anniversary from  Emmy and her  brother Pips. White suede for their mother ,
who was always so particular about white: hats, gowns, pearl s and white
suede boots.
One of the silver anniversary pen-and-ink cards is of Pips in uniform
playing Schubert at the piano: he has received the education that Emmy
never had, with proper tutors. He has a wide circle of friends in the arts and
the thea tre, is a man around town in several capitals and is as impeccably
dressed as his s ister . A childhood memory of my great-uncle Iggie’ s was
seeing in to Pips’ s dressing-room at a hotel in Biarritz where they all spent a
summer . The door of the wardr obe was open, and hanging on a rail were
eight identical suits. They were all white: an epiphany , a vision of heaven.
Pips playing the piano. An image fr om Joseph Olbrich’ s Secessionist album,
1903
Pips app ears as the protagonist of a highly successful novel of the time
by t he German Jewish novelist Jakob W assermann, a sort of M itteleuropa
version of Buchan’ s Richard Hannay in The Thirty-Nine Steps . Our
aesthetic hero is a pal of archdukes and manages to outshoot anarchists. He
is er udite about incunabula and Renaissance art, rescues rare je wels and is
loved by everyone. The book is viscous with infatuation.
Another pen-and-ink sketch in this album shows Emmy dancing at a
ball, leaning back as a slim young man leads her round the floor . A cousin, I
presume, as this willowy dancer is most certainly not V iktor . One drawing
shows P aul Schey almost obscured by the Neue Fr eie Pr esse , an owl  sitting
in deep reserve behind him on his chair . Evelina skating. A pair of legs in
striped bathing shorts disappea ring into the swimming lake at Kövecses.
Each picture also contains a little image of a bottle of eau-de-vie or wine or
schnapps and a few bars of music.
The card s are the work of Josef Olbrich. He was the artist at the  heart of
the radical Secession movement and designer of its pavilion in V ienna with
an owl relief an d a golden dom e of laurel leaves, a quiet, elegant place of
refuge with walls that he des cribed as ‘white and gleaming, holy and
chaste’. Since we are in V ienn a, where everything is subject to intense
scrutiny , it also receives vitriol.  It is the grave of the Mahdi, say the wags,
the c rematorium . That filigree d ome is ‘a head of cabbage’. I giv e Olbrich’ s
album suitable scrutiny , but it is  a lost acrostic puzzle, utterly unknowable.
Why the eau-de-vie, why that piece of music? It is very V iennese, an urbane
view of their cou ntry life in Köv ecses. It is a window into Emmy’ s world, a
whole warm world of family jokes.
How could you possibly not kn ow you had this? I ask my fathe r . What
else have you got in the suitcase under your bed?
16. ‘LIBER TY HALL ’
I feel confiden t that there will be less to puzzle over in Emmy von
Ephrussi’ s marri ed life in V ienn a. This is city life with a very dif ferent kind
of famil y and with its own unshakeable rhythm, just ten minutes’ walk
away from her childhood home in the other Palais.
The new rhythm started soon a fter the return from honeymoon, when
Emmy discovered she was pregnant. Elisabeth, my grandmother , was born
nine mo nths after the wedding. V iktor ’ s mother Émilie – in my portrait,
suave and implacable in her pearls – died in V ichy soon after , at the age of
sixty-four . She was buried in V ichy , rather than returning to Ig nace’ s great
mausoleum, and I wonder if she planned this final separation.
After Elisabeth comes Gisela, born three years later , and Ignace – young
Iggie – is the third. They are  carefully named V iennese children from
careful J ewish parents. Elisabet h is named after the late adored Empress,
Gisela after Archduchess Gisela , the Emperor ’ s daughter . Iggie is the son
and that is straig htforward. Ignace Léon is named after his late  grandfather
and afte r his rich, childless, duel-list Parisian uncle, and after his late great-
uncle Lé on. The  Parisians have only had daughters. Thank Go d there is a
son for the Eph russi at last. A nd that the Palais is big enough to have
nurseries and schoolrooms out of earshot.
The Palais has its diurnal pac e, quickening and slackening for the
servants. There is lots of carrying up and down the corridors. Endless
carrying of hot water to the dre ssing-room, coals to the study , breakfast to
the morning-room, the morning newspaper to the study , covered dishes,
laundry , telegrams, post three times a day , messages, candlesticks for
dinner , the evening newspaper delivered to V iktor ’ s dressing-room.
There is a pattern too for Anna, Emmy’ s lady’ s maid. It starts w hen she
brings the silver can of warm  water at half-past seven and the tray of
English tea to E mmy’ s bedroom. It only ends late at night when she has
brushed Emmy’ s hair and fetched her a glass of water and a plate of
charcoal biscuits.
In the courtyard of the Palais a  fiacre stands attendant all day  with a
coachman in livery . There are two black carriage horses, Rinalda and
Arabella. A second carriage waits to take the children to the Prater or
Schönbrunn. The coachmen wa it. The porter , Alois, stands by the huge
doors to the Ringstrasse ready to open the gates.
V ienna means dinner parties. There are endless discussions of
placement. Ever y afternoon the butler and an assistant footman lay the table
with a tape meas ure. There are d iscussions of whether it is safe to get ducks
from Pa ris, if they come crated the day before on the Orient Express. There
are flori sts, a dinner with a row of small orange trees in p ots bearing
hollowed-out or anges filled with parfait. The children are allowed to watch
through a peephole as all the guests arrive.
There are afternoons at home receiving guests, with a tea table on which
a sil ver samovar steams on a la r ge silver tray: teapot, cream jug and sugar
basin to hand, and trays of open sandwiches and iced cakes from Demel, the
palace o f confectionery in Kohlmarkt near the Hofbur g. Ladies leave their
furs in the hall, and the of ficers their képis and swords, and gent lemen carry
their top  hats and their gloves and place them on the floor next to their
chairs.
There is a pattern to the year too.
January is a cha nce to get awa y from wintry V ienna. Nice o r Monte
Carlo w ith V iktor . The children are left behind. They visit V iktor ’ s uncle
Maurice and aunt Béatrice Ephr ussi in the new pink V illa Île-de-France in
Cap Ferrat – now the V illa Ephrussi-Rothschild. Admire the collections of
French pictures, French Empire furniture, French porcelain. Admire the
improvements in  the gardens, w here parts of the hillside are being removed
and a canal is being dug in imitation of the Alhambra. The twenty gardeners
all wear white.
April is Paris with V iktor . The c hildren are left behind. They s tay chez
Fanny i n the Hôtel Ephrussi in the place d’Iéna, and there  is lots of
shopping for Emmy and days a t the of fices of Ephrussi et Cie for V iktor .
Paris is not the same.
Charles Ephrussi, beloved owner of the Gazette,  Ch evalier of the
Légion d’honne ur , supporter of artists, friend of poets, collector of the
netsuke, V iktor ’ s favourite cousin, has died on 30th September  1905 at the
age of fifty-five.
The not ice in the newspapers begs those who have not received an
invitation not to come to the funeral. The pall-bearers – h is brothers,
Théodore Reina ch, Marquis de C heveniers – were in tears. Ther e have been
numerous obituaries, talking of his ‘ délicatesse natur elle ’ and his
uprightness and sense of propriety . The Gazette  has published a memorial
obituary surrounded by a black border:
 
It was with stup or and profound sorrow that all those who knew  him learnt
– at the end of last September – of the sudden illness and then the death of
the lova ble and good man, of t he highest of intelligence that w as Charles
Ephrussi. In Parisian society , pa rticularly in the world of arts and letters, he
had developed numerous friendships with people who succumbed quite
naturally to the c harm and certainty of his manner , the elevation  of his spirit
and the gentleness of his he art. Anybody who knocked at his door
witnessed his good charming grace, welcoming young artists as he did their
elders, he had befriended – we  can af firm it without a single demur – all
those who had approached him.
 
Proust w rites his condolences to the obituarist. On reading this obituary
in the Gazette , ‘th ose who did  not know M. Ephrussi will come to love him,
and thos e who did know him w ill be full of recollections’. Charles has left
Emmy a  golden  necklace in his will. He has left a pearl collar to Louise,
and his estate to  his niece Fanny Reinach, who is married to t he Hellenist
scholar .
And, sh ockingly , Charles’ s brot her Ignace Ephrussi, mondain , dueller ,
amateur de la fe mme , has  als o died of a poor heart at the age of sixty . He is
remembered as a perfect rider , to be seen on his grey early in the morning in
the Bois de Boulogne saddled à la russe . Ge nerous and punctilious, he h as
left the three yo ung Ephrussi children, Elisabeth, Gisela and Iggie, 30,000
francs e ach in his will and he has even left Emmy’ s younger sisters, Gerty
and Eva , something too. The brothers have been buried together in
Montmartre in the family tomb alongside their long-dead parents and their
beloved sister .
Soon after visiting Paris – mu ch emptier without the animation of
Charles and Ignace – comes the summer . This starts in July with the
Gutmanns, Jewish financiers and philanthropists, V iktor and Emmy’ s
closest friends. They have five children, so Elisabeth, Gisela an d Iggie are
invited for several weeks to thei r country house, Schloss Jaidhof, fifty miles
from V ienna. V iktor stays put in V ienna.
August is Switzerland at the Ch alet Ephrussi with the Parisian cousins
Jules an d Fanny . T ake the child ren and V iktor . Do very little. T ry to keep
the c hildren quiet. Hear about Paris. T ake the boat out onto La ke Lucerne
from the  boatho use where the R ussian imperial flag flies, with one of the
footmen to do the rowing. Go to the Concours Hippique in Lucerne with
Jules in the motor -car to see  the show-jumping, with ices at Hugeni
afterwards.
September and October are at K övecses with the children and parents,
Pips and lots of cousins. V iktor comes for a few days at a time. S wim, walk,
ride, shoot.
At Kövecses there is an eccentric collection of people gathered together
to ed ucate Emmy’ s sisters, Gerty  and Eva, twelve and fifteen years junior to
her . These now include a French lady’ s maid to give them a proper Parisian
accent, an elderly schoolmaster  to teach them the three Rs, a governess
from T ri este for German and Italian, and finally a failed concert pianist (Mr
Minotti) to teach them music and chess. Emmy’ s mother gives them
English dictation and reads Shakespeare with them. There is also the elderly
V iennese boot-maker who makes the white suede boots about which
Evelina is so ve ry particular . Struck low , he comes to convalesce on the
estate, is given a pleasant sunn y room and stays for the rest of his life,
keeping her in footwear and taking char ge of the dogs.
The traveller Patrick Leigh Fe rmor stayed in Kövecses on h is walk
across E urope in  the 1930s and  described it as still having the atmosphere
of an English rectory , with piles of books in all possible languages and
desks cluttered with odd objects made from antlers and silver . It was
‘Liberty Hall’, said Pips, welcoming him in his perfect Eng lish to the
library . Kövecse s radiated the sense of self-suf ficiency that c omes about
when there are lots of children in a big house. In my father ’ s blue paper
folder th ere is a yellowing man uscript of a play called Der Gr ossherzog
( The Ar chduke ) p ut on one sum mer before the First W orld W ar by all the
cousins in the drawing-room. Babies under two and dogs are strictly
forbidden.
Mr Min otti plays the piano eac h night after dinner . The children play
‘Kim’ s g ame’. O bjects – a card case, pince-nez, a shell and once, thrillingly ,
Pips’ s revolver – are placed on  a tray and brought in uncovered for thirty
seconds. The linen is replaced and you then write down what you can recall.
Elisabeth, boringly , wins every single time.
Pips invites his cosmopolitan friends to stay .
December is V ienna and Christmas. Though they are Jewish, they
celebrate with lots of presents.
And Emmy’ s life seems set, not  exactly in stone, but in amber . It seems
preserved, the series of period stories, both generic and prec ious, that I
promised myself I would escape from when I set out a year ago. The
netsuke seem so far away as I keep circling the Palais.
I ext end my stay  in V ienna at the Pension Baronesse. They have kindly
fixed my glasses, but the world is still slightly askew . I can’ t shake of f my
anxiety . My uncle in London has been searching for information for me and
has produced twelve pages of a memoir that my grandmother Elisabeth
wrote ab out gro wing up in the Palais, and I have brought them  to read in
situ . I t is a sunny m orning of breath-catching cold and I take them to the
Café Ce ntral, w ith light streaming through the Gothic windows. There is a
model of the writer Peter Altenber g holding the menu, and everything is
very cle an and carefully presen ted. This was V iktor ’ s second café, I think,
before it all went so wrong.
The café , this street, V ienna itself is a theme park: a fin-de-siècle  film-
set, glitteringly Secessionist. Fiacres trundling round with coachmen in
greatcoats. The waiters have period moustaches. Strauss is everywhere,
seeping from the chocolate shops. I keep expecting Mahler to walk in, or
Klimt to start an ar gument. I keep thinking of a dreadful film I saw years
ago when I was  at university . It  was set in Paris, and Picasso kept walking
past, and Gertrude Stein and Jam es Joyce were discussing Modernism over
their Per nod. This is the problem I’m having here, I realise, assa iled by one
cliché after another . My V ienna has thinned into other people’ s V ienna.
I’ve been reading the seventee n novels of Joseph Roth, the Austrian
Jewish n ovelist, some set in V i enna during the last years of the Hapsbur g
Empire. It is in  the unimpeachable Efrussi Bank – Roth spe lls it in the
Russian manner  – that T rotta deposits his wealth in The Radetzky Mar ch .
Ignace Ephrussi  himself is sketched as a rich jeweller in The Spider ’ s W eb :
‘lank an d tall, and always [wearing] black, with a high collared coat which
just reve aled a black silk stock p inned by a pearl the size of a hazelnut’. His
wife, the beautiful Frau Efrussi, is ‘a lady: Jewish: but a lady’. Everyone
had an easy life , says Theodor , the young and bitter Gentile protagonist,
employed by the family as a tut or , ‘the Efrussis the easiest of all…Pictures
in gold frames hung in the hall and a footman in green and gold livery
bowed as he escorted you in.’
The real keeps slipping out of my hands. The lives of my family in
V ienna were refracted into books, just like Charles in Proust’ s Paris. The
dislike of the Ephrussi keeps turning up in novels.
I s tumbl e. I realise that I do not  understand what it means to be part of
an a ssimilated, acculturated Je wish family . I simply don’ t understand. I
know w hat they  didn’ t do: they  never went to synagogue, but  their births
and marriages are recorded here by the Rabbinate. I know that they paid
their dues to th e Israelitische Kultusgemeinde, the IKA, gav e money to
Jewish c harities. I’ve been to see Joachim and Ignace’ s mauso leum in the
Jewish section of the cemetery , and worried about its broken ca st-iron gate
and whether I sh ould pay to get  it fixed. Zionism didn’ t seem to hold many
attractions, for them. I remember those rude comments from He rzl when he
wrote to them for donations and  got brushed of f. The Ephrussi, speculators.
I wo nder whether it was plain e mbarrassment at the fervent Jewishness of
the enterprise and not wanting to attract attention to themselves.  Or whether
it w as a sympt om of their co nfidence in their new homeland here on
Zionstrasse, or on the rue de M onceau. They simply didn’ t see why others
needed another Zion.
Does as similation mean that they never came up against naked
prejudice? Does  it mean that you understood where the limits of your social
world w ere and you stuck to them? There is a Jockey Club in V ienna, as in
Paris, an d V ikto r was a membe r , but Jews weren’ t allowed to hold of fice.
Did this matter to him in the slightest? It was understood that married
Gentile women never visited Jewish households, never came to leave a
card, never visited on one of the  interminable afternoons. V ienna meant that
only Gentile bachelors, Count Mensdorf f, Count Lubienski, the young
Prince o f Montenuovo, left cards and were then invited. Once married they
never came, no matter how good the dinners were, or how pretty the
hostess. Did this matter at all ? These seem such gossamer threads of
rudeness.
I s pend my last morning of this visit in the records of the V ienna Jewish
community next to the synagogue of f Judengasse. There are police nearby .
In the latest elec tions the far rig ht has just won a third of the popular vote,
and no one kno ws if the synag ogue is a tar get. There have been so many
threats t hat I must pass through a complex security system. Finally inside, I
watch as  the archivist pulls out the folio records, one striped v olume after
another , and lays them on the l ectern. Each birth and marriage and death,
each conversion, the whole of Jewish V ienna faithfully recorded.
In 1 899 V ienna has its own Jew ish orphanages and hospitals,  schools
and libra ries, ne wspapers and journals. It has twenty-two synagogues. And,
I rea lise, I know  nothing about any of them: the Ephrussi family are so
perfectly assimilated they have disappeared into V ienna.
17. THE SWEET YOUNG THING
Elisabeth’ s mem oir is a tonic: twelve unsentimental pages written for her
sons in the 19 70s. ‘The house I was born in stood, and still stands,
outwardly unalte red, on the cor ner of the Ring…’ She gives details of the
running of the h ousehold, she gives the names of the horses, and she walks
me t hrough the rooms in the Palais. Finally , I think, I will find  out where
Emmy has hidden the netsuke.
If Em my turns right out of the nursery and goes along the corridor she
enters the sides of the courtyard with the kitchens and sculleries, the pantry
and the silver -ro om – where th e light burns all day – and then on to the
butler ’ s room and the servants’ hall. At the end of this corridor are all the
maids’ rooms, rooms whose wi ndows open only into the cour tyard, some
yellow l ight filte ring in through the glassed roof, but no fresh air . Her maid
Anna’ s room is down there somewhere.
When E mmy tur ns left she is in her drawing-room. She has hung it with
pale-green silk brocade. The car pets are a very pale yellow . Her furniture is
Louis XV , chairs and fauteuils  of inlaid woods with bronze mounts and fat
striped s ilk cush ions. There are occasional tables, each with their little set-
piece of bibelots, and a lar ger table on which she could p erform the
intricacies of making tea. There is a grand piano that is never played and a
Renaissance Italian cabinet with folding doors, painted on the inside, and
very small drawers that the children aren’ t meant to play with, but do.
When Elisabeth  reached between the tiny gilded twisty columns on either
side of an arch a nd pressed upwards, a tiny secret drawer came out with an
exhaled breath.
There is light in  these rooms, trembling reflections and glints o f silver
and porc elain and polished fruitwood, and shadows from the lind en trees. In
the spring flowers are sent up each week from Kövecses. It is a perfect
place to display a vitrine with cousin Charles’ netsuke, but they are not
here.
On from the drawing-room is the library , the lar gest room on this floor
of the Palais. It is painted black and red, like Ignace’ s great suite of rooms
on the floor below , with a blac k-and-red T urkish carpet and huge ebony
bookshelves lining the walls and lar ge tobacco-coloured leather armchairs
and sofas. A lar ge brass chandelier hangs over an ebony table inlaid with
ivory fla nked by the pair of globes. This is V iktor ’ s room, thousands of his
books ru nning o ver the walls, hi s Latin and Greek histories and his German
literature and his poetry and his lexicons. Some of the bookcases have a
fine golden mesh over them and  are locked with a key that he keeps on his
watch chain. Still no vitrine.
And on  from the library is the dining-room, with walls covered in
Gobelin tapestries of the hunt, bought by Ignace in Paris, and windows
overlooking the courtyard, but w ith the curtains drawn, so that the room is
in perpetual gloom. This must be the dining table where the gold dinner
service is set out, each plate and bowl engraved with ears of corn and a
double E phrussi E slap-bang in t he middle, the boat with its puf fed-out sails
skimming across a golden sea.
The gold dinner service must h ave been Ignace’ s idea. His furniture is
everywhere. Renaissance cabinets, carved baroque chests, a huge Boulle
desk tha t could only be kept in  the ballroom downstairs. His pictures are
everywhere, too . Lots of Old Masters, a Holy Family , a  Florentine
Madonna. There are seventeenth-century Dutch pictures by some quite
good artists: W ouwermans, Cuyp, something after Frans Hals. There were
also lots  and lots of Junge Frauen , some by Hans  Makart; interchangeable
young l adies in  interchangeable  frocks in rooms surrounded by ‘velvets,
carpets, genius, panther skins, knickknacks, peacock feathers, chests, and
lutes’ (M usil in acidic mood). A ll of them framed in heavy gold or heavy
black. No Parisian vitrine full  of netsuke amongst these pi ctures, this
spectacular , theatrical display , this treasure-house.
Everything here, each grand iloquent picture and cabinet,  seems
immovable in the light that filte rs in from the glassed-in courtyard. Musil
understood this atmosphere. In great old houses there is a muddle where
hideous new furniture stands carelessly alongside magnificent old, inherited
pieces. I n the rooms of the Palais  b elongi ng to the ostentatious n ouveaux
riches, e verything is too defined, there is ‘some hardly perceptible widening
of the space between the pieces of furniture or the dominant p osition of a
painting on a wall, the tender , clear echo of a great sound that had faded
away’.
I think of Charles with all his treasures, and know that it was his passion
for them that k ept them moving. Charles could not resist the world of
things: touching  them; studying them; buying them; rearranging them. The
vitrine of netsuke that he has given to V iktor and Emmy made a space in his
salon for something new . He kept his rooms in flux.
The Palais Ephrussi is the exact  opposite. Under the grey-glassed roof,
the whole house is like a vitrine that you cannot escape.
At either end of the long enfilade are V iktor and Emmy’ s private rooms.
V iktor ’ s dressing-room has his cupboards and chests of drawers and a long
mirror . There is a life-size plast er bust of his tutor , Herr W essel, ‘whom he
had very much l oved. Herr W essel had been a Prussian and a g reat admirer
of B ismarck and of all things German.’ The other great thing i n the room,
never discussed,  is a very lar ge – and highly unsuitable – Italian painting of
Leda an d the Swan. In her mem oir Elisabeth wrote that she ‘use d to stare at
it – it w as huge – every time I went in to see my father change into a stif f
shirt and dinner jacket for going out in the evening, and could never
discover what the objection might be’. V iktor has already explained that
there is no space for knick-knacks here.
Emmy’ s dressing-room is at the other end of the corridor , a corner room
with windows looking out across the Ring to the V otivkirche and onto the
Schottengasse. I t has the beauti ful Louis XVI desk given to the couple by
Jules and Fanny , with its gently bowed legs with ormolu mounts ending in
gilt hoo ves, and  drawers that a re lined with soft leather in which Emmy
keeps her writing paper and letters tied up in ribbons. And she has a full-
length mirror hinged in three par ts so that she can see herself pro perly when
dressing. It takes up most of the  room. And a dressing-table and  washstand
with a silver -rimmed glass basin and a matching glass jug with a silver top.
And here at last we find the b lack lacquer cabinet – ‘as tall as a tall
man’ in  Iggie’ s memory – with  its green velvet-lined shelves. Emmy has
put the vitrine in her dressing-room, with its mirrored back and all 264
netsuke from cousin Charles. This is where my brindled wolf has ended up.
This makes so m uch sense, and yet it makes no sense at all. Who comes
into a dressing-room? It is hardly a social space, and certainly not a salon. If
the b oxwood turtles and the persimmon and the cracked little ivory of the
girl in her bath are kept here on  their green velvet shelves, this  means that
they do not have  to be explained  at Emmy’ s at-homes. They do not have to
be mentioned at all by V iktor . Could it be embarrassment that brings the
vitrine here?
Or w as the dec ision to take th e netsuke away from the pub lic gaze
intentional, away from all that M akart pomposity; putting them into the one
room that was completely Emmy’ s own because she was intrigued by them?
W as it to save them from the dead hand of Ringstrassenstil ? There was not
much in  these Ephrussi parade grounds of gilt furniture and ormolu that you
might want to have near you. The netsuke are intimate objects for an
intimate room. Did Emmy want  something that was simply – and literally –
untouched by her father -in-law Ignace? A little bit of Parisian glamour?
This is her room . She spent a great deal of time in it. She chang ed three
times a day – sometimes more. Putting on a hat to go to the races, with lots
of little curls pi nned one by on e to the underside of the hat’ s wide brim,
took forty minutes. T o put on the long embroidered ballgown with a
hussar ’ s jacket, intricate with frogging, took for ever . There was  dressing up
for parties, for shopping, dinner , visiting, riding to the Prater and balls.
Each hour in th is dressing-room  was a calibration of corset, dress, gloves
and hat with th e day , the shru gging-of f of one self and the lacing into
another . She has to be sewn into some dresses, Anna, kneeling at her feet,
producing thread, needle, thimble from the pocket of her apron . Emmy has
furs, sable trimming to a hem, an arctic fox around her neck in one
photograph, a six-foot stole of bear looped over a gown in anoth er . An hour
could pass with Anna fetching dif ferent gloves.
Emmy and an ar chduke, V ienna, 1906
Emmy dresses to go out. It is wi nter 1906 in a V iennese street and she is
talking to an archduke. They are smiling as she hands him some primroses.
She is wearing a pin-striped co stume: an A-line skirt with a deep panel at
the hem cut acro ss the grain and  a matching close-cut Zouave jacket. It is a
walking costume . T o dress for that walk down  Herrengasse would have
taken an  hour and a half: pantalettes, chemise in fine batiste or crêpe de
Chine, c orset to nip in the waist , stockings, garters, button boots, skirt with
hooks up the pla quette, then either a blouse or a chemisette – so  no bulk on
her a rms – with a high-stand collar and lace jabot, then the jac ket done up
with a false front, then her small purse – a reticule – hanging on a chain,
jewellery , fur hat with striped taf feta bow to echo the costume, white
gloves, flowers. And no scent; she does not wear it.
The vitr ine in the dressing-room  is sentinel to a ritual that too k place
twice a year in spring and autumn, the ritual of choosing a wardrobe for the
coming season.  Ladies did no t go to a dressmaker to inspect the new
models; the models were brought to them. The head of a d ressmaker ’ s
would g o to Paris and select go wns that came carefully packed in several
huge boxes, with an elderly , white-haired, black-suited gentleman, Herr
Schuster . His boxes were piled up in the passage, where he sat  with them;
they were carried into Emmy’ s dressing-room one by one by Anna. When
Emmy was dressed, Herr Schus ter was ushered in for pronoun cement. ‘Of
course he always approved, but if he found Mama inclined to favour one of
them to the exte nt of wanting t o try it on again, he waxed ecstatic, saying
that the dress ab solutely “scream ed for the Baroness”.’ The children waited
for t his moment and then would race down the corridor to the nursery in
panicky fits of hysterics.
There is a pictu re of Emmy tak en in the salon soon after she married
V iktor . She must be pregnant w ith Elisabeth already , but not sh owing. She
is dressed like Marie Antoinette in a cropped velvet jacket over a long white
skirt, a play be tween severity and nonchalance. Her ringlets conform to
what is au courant  i n the spring of  1900: ‘coif fure is less stif f than it was
formerly; fringe s are prohibited. The hair is first crimped into l ar ge waves,
then combed back and twisted  into a moderately high coil …locks are
allowed to escape onto the forehead, left in their natural rin ged form,’
writes a journalist. Emmy has a black hat with feathers. One hand rests on a
French marble-topped chest of drawers and the other holds a cane. She must
be just down fro m the dressing-room and of f to another ball. She looks at
me confidently , aware of how gor geous she is.
Emmy has her admirers – many admirers, according to my great-uncle
Iggie – and dressing for others is as much a pleasure as undressing. From
the start of her marriage she has lovers, too.
This is not unusual in V ienna. It is slightly dif ferent from Paris. This is a
city of chambr es séparées  at restaurants, where you can eat and seduce as in
Schnitzler ’ s Reigen  or La Ronde : ‘A  private room in the restaurant “Zum
Riedhof”. Subdued comfortable elegance. The gas fire is burning. On the
table the  remain s of a meal – c ream pastries, fruit, cheese etc. Hungarian
white w ine. The  HUSBAND  is  smoking a Havana cigar , leaning back in one
corner o f the sofa. The SWEET YOUNG THING  i s sittin g in an armchair beside
him, spooning down whipped cr eam from a pastry with evident pleasure…’
In V ienn a at the turn of the ce ntury there is the cult of the süsse Mädel ,
‘simple girls who lived for flirt ation with young men from good homes’.
There is endless flirtation. Stra uss’ s Der Rosenkavalier  with its text by
Hofmannsthal – in which changing costumes, changing lovers and changing
hats are all held in suspended amusement – is new in 191 1 an d is wildly
popular . Schnitz ler has problems, he confides in his journal of his sexual
congresses, in keeping up with the demands of his two mistresses.
Emmy dr essed as Marie Antoinette in the salon of the Palais Ephrussi, 1900
Sex is inescapa ble in V ienna. P rostitutes crowd the pavement s. They
advertise on the back page of the Neue Fr eie Pr esse.  Everything and
everyone is catered for . Karl Kr aus quotes them in his journal Die Fackel :
‘T ravelling Com panion Sought,  young, congenial, Christian, independent.
Replies to “Invert 69” Poste Res tante Habsbur ger gasse’. Sex is ar gued over
by F reud. In Ot to W eininger ’ s Sex and Character , the  cult book of 1903,
women are, by nature, amoral and in need of direction. Sex i s golden in
Klimt’ s Judith , Danaë , The Kiss , dangerous in Schiele’ s tumbled bodies.
T o be a modern woman in V ien na, to be comme il faut , it is understood
that your domestic life has a little latitude. Some of Emmy’ s aunts and
cousins have marriages of convenience: her aunt Anny , for instance.
Everyone knows that Hans Count W iltschek is the natural father of her
cousins, the twin brothers Herb ert and W itold Schey von Koro mla. Count
W iltschek is handsome and extr emely glamorous: an explorer , the funder of
Antarctic exped itions. A close friend of the late Crown Prince Rudolf, he
has had islands named after him.
I’ve dela yed my  return to London – I’m finally on the track of Ignace’ s
will and want t o see how he divided his fortune. The Adler Society , the
genealogical soc iety of V ienna, is only open to members and the ir guests on
W ednesday evenings after six o’clock. The society of fices are through a
grand ha ll on the second floor of a house just down from Freud’ s  apartment.
I du ck th rough a lowish door and into a long corridor hung with  portraits of
V ienna’ s mayors . Bookcases with box-files of deaths and obituaries to the
left, aristocrats, runs of Debr ett’ s  and  the  Almanach de Gotha  to the right.
Everything else and everyone else, straight on. At last I see people at work
on their projects, carrying files, copying ledgers. I’m not sure what
genealogical so cieties are usually like, but this one has completely
unexpected roars of laughter and scholars calling out across the floor ,
requesting help in deciphering dif ficult handwriting.
I as k very delic ately about the friendships of my great-gran dmother
Emmy v on Ephrussi, née Schey von Koromla, circa 1900. There is much
collegiate joshing. Emmy’ s friendships of a hundred years ago are no secret,
all her former lovers are known: someone mentions a cavalry of ficer ,
another a Hungarian roué, a prince. W as it Ephrussi who kept identical
clothes in two dif ferent households so that she could start her day either
with her  husband or her lover?  The gossip is still so alive: th e V iennese
seem to have no secrets at all. It makes me feel painfully English.
I thi nk o f V iktor , son of one sexually insatiable man, brother of another ,
and I see him opening a brown parcel of books from his deal er in Berlin
with a silver paper knife at his  library table. I see him reaching into his
waistcoat pocke t for the thin matches he keeps there for lighting his cigars.
I see the ebb and  flow of ener gy through the house, like water running into
pools an d out again. What I can not see is V iktor in Emmy’ s dressing-room
looking down into the vitrine, unlocking it and picking out a n etsuke. I’m
not s ure that he is even a man who would sit and talk to Emm y as she got
dressed, with Anna fussing around her . I’m not sure what they really talk
about at all. Cicero? Hats?
I s ee him moving his hand across his face as he readjusts himsel f before
he goes every morning to his of fice. V iktor goes out onto the Ring, turns
right, first right into the Schottengasse, first left and he is th ere. He has
begun to take his valet Franz with him. Franz sits at a desk in the outer
of fice, so that V iktor can read undisturbed inside. Thank God for clerks who
can tabulate all those banking columns correctly , as V iktor mak es notes on
history in his beautiful slanting handwriting. He is a middle-aged Jewish
man, in love with his young and beautiful wife.
There is no gossip about V iktor in the Adler .
I thi nk o f Emmy  at eighteen, ne wly installed with her vitrine o f ivories
in the great glassed-in house on  the corner of the Ring; I remember W alter
Benjamin’ s description of a woman in a nineteenth-century interior . ‘It
encased her so d eeply in the dw elling’ s interior ,’ he wrote, ‘that one might
be re minded of a  compass case w here the instrument with all its  accessories
lies embedded in deep, usually violet, folds of velvet.’
18. ONCE UPON A TIME
The chil dren in the Palais Ephrussi have nurses and nannies. The nurses are
V iennese and kind, and the nan nies are English. Because the nannies are
English, their breakfast is English and there is always porridg e and toast.
There is  a lar ge lunch with pud ding, and then there is afternoon tea, with
bread an d butter and jam and small cakes, and after that is suppe r , with milk
and stewed fruit ‘to keep them regular ’.
On special days the children are required to be part of Emm y’ s at-
homes. Elisabet h and Gisela are dressed in starched muslin d resses with
sashes, while poor Iggie, who is on the plump side, has to wear a black
velvet L ittle Lo rd Fauntleroy suit with an Irish lace collar . Gisela has big
blue eyes. She i s a particular pet of the visiting ladies, and Ch arles’ s little
Renoir gypsy when they visit the Chalet Ephrussi, so pretty that Emmy
(tactless) has her portrait done in red chalk, and Baron Albert Rothschild,
an amat eur pho tographer , asks for her to be brought to his studio to be
photographed. The children are driven in the carriage for a daily walk with
the English nannies in the Prater , where the air is less dusty than on the
Ringstrasse. A footman comes too, walking behind in a fawn greatcoat and
wearing a top hat with an Ephrussi badge stuck into it.
There ar e two set times when th e children see their mother: dres sing for
dinner and Sunday mornings. Half-past ten on a Sunday mornin g marks the
moment when the English nanny and governess leave for morning service
at the English church and Mama visits the nursery . In her brief memoir ,
Elisabeth described ‘Those two divine Sunday morning hours…She had
made ha ste that morning with h er toilette and was dressed very  simply in a
black skirt, down to the ground  of course, and a green shirt-waist with a
high stif f white collar and white cuf fs, her hair beautifully piled up on top
of her head. She was lovely and she smelt divinely…’
T ogether , they would take down  the heavy picture books with their rich
maroon covers: Edmund Dulac’ s Midsummer Nig ht’ s Dr eam, Sleeping
Beauty  and, best of all, Beauty and the Beast  with  its  figures of horror . Each
Christmas brought the new Fairy Book  o f Andrew La ng, ordered from
London by the children’ s English grandmother: Grey , V iolet, Crimson,
Brown, Orange, Olive and Rose. A book could last a year . Each child would
choose a favourite story: ‘The White W olf ’, ‘The Queen of the Flowery
Isles’, ‘The Boy Who Found  Fear at Last’, ‘What Came of Picking
Flowers’, ‘The Limping Fox’, ‘The Street Musician’.
Gisela and Elisabeth, 1906
Read aloud, a story from the Fairy Books  i s less t han half  an hour long.
Each story starts with ‘Once upon a time’. Some stories have a cottage on
the edge  of the f orest, like the birch and pine forests at Kövecs es. Some of
the s tories include the white wolf, like the one shot by the gamekeeper near
the h ouse, and shown to the children and their cousins on an early autumn
morning in the stable yard. Or the bronze wolf ’ s head on the door of the
Palais Schey , whose muzzle gets rubbed every time they pass it.
There are strange meetings in these stories, encounters with the bird-
charmer with a flock of finches on his hat and arms – like the one you see
standing in a circle of children on the Ringstrasse outside the gates of the
V olksgarten. Or with pedlars. Li ke the Schnorr er  with his basket of buttons
and pen cils and  postcards hanging from his black coat, who stands by the
gates out onto the Franzensring and to whom they have been told by their
father they must be polite.
Lots of stories include the Princess getting dressed in her gown and tiara
to g o to the ball, like Mama. Lots of stories have a magic pal ace in them
with a ballroom, like the room downstairs that you see lit with candles at
Christmas. All the stories finish with ‘The End’ and a kiss from Mama, and
then no more stories for another whole week. Emmy was a wond erful story-
teller , said Iggie.
The other time that the children regularly see her is when she is dressing
to go out and they are allowed into her dressing-room.
Emmy w ould change out of her day-clothes, in which she had r eceived
or v isited friends, into her clot hes for dinner at home or , the opera, or a
party or ,  best of all, a ball. Dresses would be laid out over the ch aise longue
and ther e would  be a lengthy discussion with the expert Anna  over which
one to wear . The eyes of my great-uncle Iggie used to fire as he described
her anim ation. I f V iktor had Ov id and T acitus – and his Leda  – at one end
of the corridor , then at the other  end Emmy could describe dres ses that her
mother had worn season by sea son, how lengths were changing, how the
weight and fall of a gown alt ered the way you moved, the  dif ferences
between a muslin, gauze or tulle scarf across your shoulders in the evening.
She knows about Paris fashion and what is à la mode  i n V ien na, and how to
play the  two. She is especially good on hats: a velvet hat with a huge ribbon
on it to meet the Emperor; a fur  toque with an ostrich feather , worn with a
column dress trimmed in black fur; the best hat in the line of Je wish ladies
at a char ity do in a small ballroo m somewhere. Something very wide indeed
with a hydrangea on its brim. Fr om Kövecses, Emmy sends to her mother a
postcard of herself wearing a dark Makart hat: ‘T ascha shot a buck today .
How is your cold? Do you like my newest af fected pictures?’
Dressing is the hour when Anna brushes her hair and laces corsets,
fastens innumer able hooks and eyes, fetches variant gloves and shawls and
hats, when Emmy chooses her jewellery and stands in front of the three
great panels of mirror .
And this  is when the children ar e allowed to play with the netsuke. The
key is turned in the black lacquer cabinet and the door is opened.
19. TYPES OF THE OLD CITY
The children in the dressing-room choose their favourite carving and play
with it on the pale-yellow carpe t. Gisela loved the Japanese dan cer , holding
her f an a gainst t he brocade gown, caught in mid-step. Iggie loved the wolf,
a tight dark tangle of limbs, fa int markings all along its flank s, gleaming
eyes and  a snarl. And he loved t he bundle of kindling tied up with rope, and
the beggar who has fallen asleep over his begging bowl so that all you see is
the t op of his bald head. There is also a dried fish, all scales an d shrunken
eyes, wi th a small rat scuttling o ver it proprietorially; its eyes are inlaid jet.
And there is th e mad old ma n with his bony back and bulging eyes,
gnawing on a fi sh with an octo pus in his other hand. Elisabet h, contrary ,
loved the masks with their abstracted memory of faces.
Y ou could arrange these carving s, ivory and wood, all the fourteen rats
in one long row , the three tigers, the beggars over there, the c hildren, the
masks, the shells, the fruits.
Y ou could arrange them by co lour , all the way from the dark -brown
medlar t o the gleaming ivory de er . Or by size. The smallest is th e single rat
with black inlaid eyes chewing his tail, little bigger than the magenta stamp
issued to celebrate the sixtieth year of the Emperor ’ s reign.
Or you muddled them up, so th at your sister can’ t find the girl in her
brocade robes. Or you could sto ckade the dog and her puppies with all the
tigers, and she would have to get out – and she did. Or you could find the
one of the woman washing herself in the wooden bathtub, and the even
more intriguing one that looked  like a mussel shell, until you opened it up
and discovered the man and wo man with no clothes on. Or you could scare
your brother with the one of the  boy trapped in the bell by the witch-snake,
with her long black hair trailing round and round.
And you tell stories about the se carvings to your mother , and she
chooses one and starts a story a bout it to you. She picks up the netsuke of
the child and the mask. She is good with stories.
There are so many that you can never really count them, never know
that you  have seen them all. A nd that is the point of these t oys in their
mirrored cabinet, extending onwards and onwards. They are a complete
world, a complete space to play in, until the time comes to put them back
again, u ntil Mama is dressed an d choosing her fan and her shawl, and then
she gives you a goodnight kiss and you have to put the netsuke back now .
They go back in to the vitrine, th e samurai with the sword half out of the
scabbard as the guard at the front, and the small key is turned in the lock of
the cabin et. Anna rearranges the fur tippet around Emmy’ s neck  and fusses
at th e fall of her sleeves. The nursemaid comes to take you d own to the
nursery .
And wh ile the netsuke are playthings in this room in V ienna, they are
being ta ken very seriously elsewhere. They are being collected across
Europe. The first collections put together by the pioneer collectors are being
auctioned for substantial amoun ts at the Hôtel Drouot. The dealer Siegfried
Bing, no w a force in Paris with his galleries, Maison de l’Art Nouveau, is
putting n etsuke into the best possible hands. He is the expert, t he writer of
prefaces to the s ales catalogues of the collections of the late Ph ilippe Burty
(140 ne tsuke), the late Edmond de Goncourt (140 netsuke), the late M.
Garie (200 netsuke).
The firs t German history of ne tsuke, with illustrations and advice on
how to care for them and even how to display them, is publishe d in Leipzig
in 1905.  The best policy is never to display them at all, and to put them
under lock and key and bring them out occasionally . But then, says the
author , plaintive ly , we must have friends to share our interests, friends who
can devote a few hours to art. This is not possible in Europe. So if you must
have netsuke so that you can see them, then you should hav e a shallow
glass cas e in which you can put two rows of netsuke, and a mirror or green
plush sh ould be placed in the back of the cabinet. W ithout kno wing it, the
vitrine in  the dressing-room overlooking the Ringstrasse obeys many of the
strictures of Herr Albert Brockh aus in his huge and magisterial  book. ‘It is
advisable,’ he writes:
 
to keep them fro m being exposed to dust by putting them into glass cases
with glass edges. Dust fills up the holes, makes the raised work coarse, kills
the g loss and takes away from the carving a great deal of the charm. When
Netsukes are placed together w ith curios, trinkets and other ob jects on the
mantel pieces, there is a danger of their being broken by careless domestics,
swept away , or even carried to an unknown destination in the  folds of a
woman’ s dress upon the occasi on of a friendly visit. One of m y Netsukes
one even ing made such a trip unbeknown to the lady who carrie d it through
the streets until she finally discovered it and returned it to me.
 
The netsuke could not feel safer  than they are here. Careless domestics
do not last long in Emmy’ s Palais : she snaps at the girl who spills the cream
jug on the tray . A broken harle quin in the salon means dismi ssal. In her
dressing-room one of the other servants dusts the furniture, but only Anna is
allowed to open the vitrine for the children, before she lays out her
mistress’ s clothes for the evening.
The netsuke are no longer part o f salon life, no longer part of a game of
sharpened wit. No one is going to comment on the quality of their carving
or th e p allor of their patina. They have lost any connection to  Japan, lost
their japonisme , are  sus pended from critique. They have become true toys,
true bibelots: they are not so s mall when they are picked up by a child.
Here, in  this dressing-room, the y are part of the intimacy of E mmy’ s life.
This is the space where she undresses with the help of Anna, and dresses for
the n ext engagement with V iktor , a friend, a lover . It has its own kind of
threshold.
The longer Emmy lives with th e netsuke and sees her children  playing
with them, the more she realises that they are too intimate a gift to have on
display . Her closest friend, Mari anne Gutmann, has a few of these netsuke –
eleven, to be exact – but only in her country house. They have laughed
about th em toge ther . But how c ould you explain the sheer num ber of these
unconventional and rather overwhelming foreign carvings to the ladies from
the Israelitische  Kultusgemeinde committee – all wearing a small dark
ribbon on their d ress – who gath er to help Galician girls from the shtetls get
honest jobs. It would be impossible.
It is April again and I am back in  the Palais. I look out of the window of
Emmy’ s dressing-room through the bare branches of the lindens, past the
V otivkirche, along Währinger Strasse, and it is the fifth tur ning to Dr
Freud’ s house at Ber ggasse 19, where he is writing up the notes  on Emmy’ s
late grea t-aunt Anna von Lieben as the case of Cäcilie M., a woman with a
‘hysterical psychosis of denial’, severe facial pains and memory lapses, sent
to him ‘because no one knew what do with her ’. For five years she had been
in hi s ca re, talki ng so much that  he had to persuade her to start writing: she
was his Lehrmeisterin , his professor in the study of hysteria.
There are all the cases and cases of antiquities behind his bac k, as he
writes. Rosewood and mahogany and Biedermeier vitrines with wooden
shelves and glass shelves, with Etruscan mirrors and Egyptian scarabs and
mummy portrai ts and Roman death-masks, wreathed in cigar smoke. I
realise at this po int that I am beginning to obsess hopelessly ab out what is
fast becoming my very special subject, the vitrines of the fin de siècle . On
Freud’ s desk is a netsuke in the form of a shishi , a lion.
My time-management skills are seriously awry . I spent a week reading
Adolf Loos on J apanese style as the ‘abandonment of symmetr y’, and how
it fl attens objects and people: they ‘depict flowers, but they are pressed
flowers’. I find that he designed the Secessionist exhibition of 1900, which
included a huge collection of Japanese artefacts. Japan, I think, is
inescapable in V ienna.
Then I decided that I needed to look at the polemical Karl Kraus in
detail. I bought a copy of Die Fackel  f rom an  antiqua rian bookshop in order
to look at the particular colour of its cover . It was red, as any fierce, satirical
magazine calling itself The T or ch  should be. But I worried that the red had
faded over ninety years.
I k eep hoping th at the netsuke w ill be a key that unlocks the whole of
V iennese intellectual life. I worry that I am becoming a Casaubon, and will
spend my life writing lists and notes. I know that the V iennese intelligentsia
like puz zling ob jects, and that lo oking intensely at one thing is  a particular
pleasure. At the moment that this vitrine is being opened every night by the
children as Emmy dresses, Loos is agonising over the design of a salt-cellar ,
Kraus is obsessing over an advert in the newspaper , a phrase from an
editorial in Die Neue Zeitung , F reud about a slip of the tongue. But there is
no escaping the facts that Emmy is not a reader of Adolf Loos, that she
managed to dislike Klimt (‘a be ar with the manners of a bear ’) and Mahler
(‘a racket’), and that she did not buy anything from the W iener W erkstätte
at all (‘tat’). She ‘never took us  to an exhibition’, says my grandmother ’ s
memoir .
I do  know that in 1910 small things, fragments, are very now , and
Emmy is very V iennese. What does she think of the netsuke? She has not
collected them, she is not going to add to them. There are other things, of
course, to pick up and move around in Emmy’ s world. There are the
bibelots in the d rawing-room, th e Meissen cups and saucers, bits  of Russian
silver and malachite on the m antelpieces. This is amateur stuf f for the
Ephrussi, backg round noise to go with the putti hovering like plump
partridges overhead, not like aunt Béatrice Ephrussi-Rothschild
commissioning clocks from Faber gé for her villa in Cap Ferrat.
Emmy , however , loves stories, and the netsuke are small, quic k, ivory
stories. She is thirty: it is only twenty years since she was in a nursery
further round the Ringstrasse, her mother reading her fairy stories of her
own. T oday she reads the lower part of the Neue Fr eie Pr esse , the daily
feuilleton.
Above the ruled line is the news, the news from Budapest, the latest
pronouncement from the mayor Dr Karl Lueger , the Herr gott von W ien , the
Lord God of V ienna. Below the  fold is the feuilleton. Every day there is a
charmingly phrased and sonor ous essay . It could be on the opera or
operetta, or about a particular building that is being demolished . It could be
an a rch memorialising of folk ch aracters from old V ienna. Frau Sopherl, the
Nachsmarkt seller of fruit, Herr Adabei the gossip-monger , walk-on parts in
a Potemkin city . Every day there it is, mild and narcissistic, one filigree
phrase twining around another , as adjectivally sweet as Demel’ s pastries.
Herzl, w ho start s out writing the m, talked of the feuilletonist ‘fa lling in love
with his  own spirit, and thus of losing any standard of judging himself or
others’, and you can see this happening. They are so perfec t, a rif f of
humour , a throwaway , glancin g look at V ienna, ‘a matter of injecting
experience – as it were, intravenously – with the poison of sen sation…the
feuilletonist tur ns this to account. He renders the city strange to its
inhabitants,’ in the words of W alter Benjamin. In V ienna the feuilletonist
renders the city back to itself as a perfect, sensationalised fiction.
I t hink of the netsuke as part o f this V ienna. Many of the netsuke are
Japanese feuilletons in themselves. They depict the kind of Japanese
characters written about in lyrical laments by visitors to Japan. Lafcadio
Hearn, an American-Greek journalist, writes about them in Glimpses of
Unfamiliar Japan , Gleanings in Buddha-Fields  and Shadowings , each short
glimpse or gleaning essay a poetic evocation: ‘the cries of the earliest
itinerant vendors begin – “Daikoyai! kabuya-kabu!” – the sellers of daikon
and othe r strange vegetables. “Moyaya-moya!” – the plaintive call of the
women who sell thin slips of kindling-wood for the lighting of charcoal
fires.’
In the vitrine in Emmy’ s dressing-room are the barrel-maker framed by
the a rc of his half-finished barrel; the street-wrestlers in a swea ty , tumbling
embrace of dark chestnut wood ; the old, drunk monk with his robes awry;
the serv ant girl cleaning the floor; the rat-catcher with his basket open.
When picked out and held, the netsuke are T ypes of Old Edo, just like the
T ypes of the Old City who walk onto V ienna’ s stage every day below the
ruled line in the Neue Fr eie Pr esse .
As they  sit on their green velvet shelves in Emmy’ s dressing-room,
these da ily feuilletons are doing what V ienna likes to do, telling stories
about itself.
And frac tious as this beautiful w oman in this absurd pink Palais  is, she
can glan ce out of her window i nto the Schottengasse and start a story for
her child ren abo ut the elderly d river of the shabby fiacre, the flower -seller
and the student . The netsuke are now part of a childhood, part of the
children’ s world of things. This world is made of things they can touch and
things they cannot touch. There are things that they can touch sometimes
and things they can touch ever y day . There are things that are theirs, for
ever , and things that are theirs but that will be passed on to a sister or
brother .
The children are not allowed in to the silver -room where the footmen
polish the silver , and they are not allowed into the dining-room if there is
going to  be a di nner . They must not touch their father ’ s glass in its silver
holder , out of which he drinks black tea à la Russe  – it was grandfather ’ s.
Lots of things in the Palais were grandfather ’ s, but this is special. Father ’ s
books ar e place d on the library  table when they arrive from Frankfurt and
London and Paris in their brown paper parcels tied up with strin g. They are
not allow ed to touch the sharp silver paper -knife that also lies there. Later
they are given the stamps from the parcels for their album.
There are things in this world that the children hear , but whose sounds
oscillate below an adult’ s sense of pitch. They hear the green-and-gold
clock in  the salon (which has m ermaids on it) tick every slow second as
they sit in starched immobility during visits from great-aunts. They can hear
the shuf fle of the carriage horses in the courtyard, which means they are
finally of f to the park. There is the sound of the rain on the glass roof over
the courtyard, which means they are not.
There ar e things  that the childre n smell that are part of their lan dscape:
the sme ll of their father ’ s cigar  smoke in the library , their mother , or the
smell of schnitzel on covered dishes as it is carried past the nursery for
lunch. The smell behind the itchy tapestries in the dining-room  when they
creep be hind th em to hide. An d the smell of hot chocolate after skating.
Emmy makes this for them sometimes. Chocolate is brought in on a
porcelain dish, and then they are  allowed to break it into pieces the size of a
krone an d these dark shards are  melted in a little silver saucepan by Emmy
over a purple fla me. Then, when it is glaucous, warm milk is poured over it
and sugar stirred in.
There are things that they see w ith complete clarity – the clari ty of an
object seen through a lens. There are also things that they see as a blur: the
corridors chased along, corridor s that go on for ever , one gilded flash of a
picture after another , one marb le table after another . There a re eighteen
doors if you run all the way round the courtyard corridor .
The nets uke hav e moved from a world of Gustave Moreau in Paris to
the world of a Dulac children’ s book in V ienna. They build their own
echoes, they are part of those S unday mornings’ story-telling, part of The
Arabian Nights , the  travels of Sinbad the Sailor and the Rubáiyát of Omar
Khayyám . Th ey are locke d into their vitrine, behind the dressing-room do or ,
which is  along the corridor and up the long stairs from the courtyard, which
is behind the d ouble oak doors with the porter waiting, whic h is in the
fairytale castle of a Palais  on a street that is part of The Tho usand a nd One
Nights .
20. HEIL WIEN! HEIL BERLIN!
The century is f ourteen years old, and so is Elisabeth, a serious young girl
who is allowed to sit at dinner with the grown-ups. These are ‘men of
distinction, high civil servants, professors and high-ranking of f icers in the
army’ an d she listens to the tal k of politics, but is told not to talk herself
unless sh e is talked to. She walks with her father to the bank each morning.
She is building up her own library in her bedroom: each new book has a
neat EE in pencil and a number .
Gisela is a pretty  young girl of ten who enjoys clothes. Iggie is a boy of
nine wh o is slightly overweight and self-conscious about it; he isn’ t good at
maths, but likes drawing very much indeed.
Summer arrives, and the children travel to Kövecses with Emmy . She
has orde red a new costume, black with pleating to the blouse, for riding
Contra, her favourite bay .
On Sunday 28th June 1914 the Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the
Hapsbur g Emp ire, is assassinated in Sarajevo by a you ng Serbian
nationalist. On Thursday the Neue Fr eie Pr esse  writes that ‘the political
consequences of this act are being greatly exaggerated’.
On the following Saturday , Elisabeth writes a postcard to V ienna:
4th July 1914
Dearest Papa
Thank you so m uch for arranging about the Professors for next term.
T oday it  was very warm in the m orning so we could all go swimming in the
lake but now it is colder and it may rain. I went to Pistzan with Gerty and
Eva and  W itold  but I didn’ t like it very much. T oni has had ni ne puppies,
one has died an d we have to feed them with a bottle. Gisela li kes her new
clothes. A thousand kisses.
Y our Elisabeth
 
On Sunday 5th July the Kaiser  promises German support for Austria
against Serbia, and Gisela an d Iggie write a postcard of the river at
Kövecses: ‘Darl ing Papa, My dresses fit very well. W e swim every day as it
is so hot. All well. Love and kisses from Gisela and Iggie.’
On Monday 6th July it is cold at Kövecses and they don’ t s wim. ‘I
painted a flower today . Love and heaps of kisses from Gisela.’
On Saturday 18th July mother and children return to V ienna from
Kövecses. On Monday 20th July the British Ambassador , Sir Maurice de
Bunsen, reports  to Whitehall that the Russian Ambassador to V ienna has
left for a fortnight’ s holiday . That same day the Ephruss i leave for
Switzerland: for their ‘long month’.
The bathing lake at Kövecses
The Russian imperial flag still flies from the boathouse roof. V iktor ,
worried that his son will grow u p and have to do military service in Russia,
has petitioned the T sar to change his citizenship. This year V iktor has
become a subject of His Maj esty Franz Josef, the eighty-four -year -old
Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary and Bohemia, King of Lombardy-
V enetia, of Dalmatia, Croatia, Slavonia, Galicia, Lodomeria and Illyria,
Grand Duke of T uscany , King of Jerusalem and Duke of Auschwitz.
On 2 8th July Au stria declares war on Serbia. On 29th July the Emperor
declares: ‘I put my faith in my  peoples, who have always gat hered round
my throne, in unity and loyalty , through every tempest, who h ave always
been ready for the heaviest sacrifices for the honour , the majesty , the power
of the Fatherland.’ On 1st August Germany declares war on Russia. On the
3rd Germany declares war on F rance, and then the following day invades
neutral B elgium. And the whole pack of cards falls: alliances are invoked
and Brit ain decl ares war on Ger many . On 6th August Austria declares war
on Russia.
Mobilisation lett ers are sent out in all the languages of the Emp ire from
V ienna. T rains are requisitioned. All Jules and Fanny Ephru ssi’ s young
French f ootmen, careful around the porcelain and good at row ing on the
lake, are called up. The Ephrussi are stuck in the wrong country .
Emmy travels to Zurich to enlist the help of the Austrian Consul
General, Theophil von Jäger – a  lover of hers – to get the household back to
V ienna. There are a lot of telegrams. Nannies, maids and t runks need
sorting out. The trains are too c rowded and there is too much luggage, and
the r ailway timetable – the implacable k & k  r ail way , as cert ain as Spanish
court rit ual, as regular as the V i enna City Corps marching past the nursery
window at half-past ten every morning – is suddenly useless.
There is cruelty in all of this. The French, Austrian and German
cousins, Russian citizens, English aunts, all the dreaded consanguinity , all
the terri toriality , all that nomadic lack of love of country , is c onsigned to
sides. How many sides can one  family be on at once? Uncle P ips is called
up, handsome in his uniform with its astrakhan collar , to fight against his
French and English cousins.
In V ienna there is fervent support for this war , this cleansing of the
country of its apathy and stupo r . The British ambassador notes that ‘the
entire people and press clamou r impatiently for immediate and condign
punishment of the hated Serbian race’. W riters join in the excitement.
Thomas Mann writes an essay ‘ Gedanken im Kriege ’, ‘Thanks Be for W ar ’
the poet  Rilke celebrates the resurrection of the Gods of W ar in his Fünf
Gesänge ; Hofmannsthal publishes a patriotic poem in the Neue Fr eie
Pr esse.
Schnitzler disagrees. He write s simply on 5th August: ‘W orld war .
W orld ruin. Karl Kraus wishes the Emperor “a good end of the world”.’
V ienna was en fête : yo ung men in twos and threes with sprigs of
flowers in their hats on their w ay to recruit; military bands pla ying in the
parks. The Jewish community in V ienna was cheerful. T he monthly
newsletter of the Austrian-Israe lite Union, for July and August, declaimed:
‘In this hour of danger we consider ourselves to be fully entitled  citizens of
the s tate…W e want to thank the Kaiser with the blood of our children and
with our possessions for making  us free; we want to prove to the state that
we are its true citizens, as goo d as anyone…After this war , with all its
horrors, there cannot be any more anti-Semitic agitation…we will be able to
claim full equality .’ Germany would free the Jews.
V iktor thought otherwise. It was a suicidal catastrophe. He had
dustsheets put over all the furniture in the Palais, sent the servan ts home on
board wages, sent the family to the house of Gustav Springer , a friend, near
Schönbrunn, the n on to cousins  in the mountains near Bad Ischl, and took
himself to the Hotel Sacher to see out the war with his books  on history .
There is  a bank to run, something that is dif ficult when you are  at war with
France (Ephruss i et Cie, rue de l’Arcade, Paris 8), England (Ephrussi and
Co., King Street, London) and Russia (Efrussi, Petrograd).
‘This E mpire’ s had it,’ says the Count in Joseph Roth’ s novel The
Radetzky Mar ch :
 
As soon as the Emperor says goodnight, we’ll break up into a hundred
pieces. T he Bal kans will be mo re powerful than we will. All the peoples
will set up their own dirty little statelets, and even the Jews will proclaim a
king in Palestine. V ienna stinks  of the sweat of democrats, I can’ t stand to
be on the Rings trasse any more…In the Bur gtheater , they pu t on Jewish
garbage, and they ennoble one H ungarian toilet-manufacturer a week. I tell
you, gentlemen,  unless we start shooting, it’ s all up. In our lif etime, I tell
you.
 
There were lots of proclamation s that autumn in V ienna. Now that the
war is properly under way , th e Emperor addresses the children of his
Empire. The newspapers print ‘Der Brief Sr . Majestät unser es
aller gnädigsten Kaisers Franz J osef I an die Kinder im W eltkriege’,  a letter
from Hi s Majest y , our all-loving Franz Josef I, to the children in  the time of
the W orld W ar: ‘Y ou children a re the jewels of all the peoples o f mine, the
blessing of their future conferred a thousand times.’
After six weeks V iktor realises the war is not going to end and returns
from the Hotel S acher . Emmy and the children are eventually b rought back
from Ba d Ischl. The dustcovers are taken of f the furniture. Ther e is a lot of
activity in the s treet outside the nursery window . There is so much noise
from the demonstrating students  – Musil notes ‘the ugliness of the singing
in the cafés’ in his journal – fro m the marching soldiers, with their bands,
that Em my considers moving the children’ s rooms altogether to a quieter
part of the house. This does no t happen. The house is poorly designed for
families, she says – we are all on show here in one glass box, we might as
well be living on the street itself, for all that your father does about it.
The students’ chants change week by week. They start with ‘ Serbien
muss sterben! ’, ‘S erbia must die!’ Then the Russians get it: ‘One Round,
One Russian!’ Then the French. And it gets more colourful by the week.
Emmy is worried by the war of course, but she is also worried by the ef fect
of a ll this shouting on the children. They have their meals now on a little
table in the music room, which  opens onto the Schottengasse and is a bit
quieter .
Iggie attends the Schottengymnasium. This is a very good school  run by
the Benedictines round the corner , one of the two best schools  i n V ienn a, he
told me.  The plaque on the wa ll that lists famous former poe ts indicates
this. Tho ugh the  teachers are Br others, many of the pupils are Jewish. The
school lays particular stress on t he Classics, but there are also mathematics,
algebra, calculu s, history and geography classes. Languages are studied as
well. Learning these is irrelev ant for these three children, who switch
between Englis h and French with their mother and German with their
father . T hey know only a sma ttering of Russian and No Y iddish. The
children are told to speak only  German outside the house. A ll foreign-
sounding shops in V ienna have  had their names pasted over by men on
ladders.
Girls are  not taught at the Schot tengymnasium. Gisela is taught at home
by her governess in the schoolroom, next to Emmy’ s dressing-room.
Elisabeth has negotiated with V iktor and now has a private tutor . Emmy is
opposed to this. She is so angry about this inappropriate, complicated
arrangement for her daughter that Iggie hears her shouting and then
breaking something, possibly porcelain, in the salon. Elisabeth scrupulously
follows the same curriculum a s the one boys her age are taught at the
Schotten - gymnasium, and is a llowed to go to the school laboratory in the
afternoons and have a lesson by  herself with one of the teachers. She knows
that if she wants to go to the university , then she has to pa ss the final
examination from this school. Elisabeth has known since she w as ten that
she mus t get from this room, he r schoolroom with its yellow ca rpet, across
the Fran zenring to that room, the lecture hall of the university . It  is only 200
yards away – but for a girl, it might as well be a thousand miles. There are
more th an 9,000 students this year , and just 120 of them are female. Y ou
can’ t see into th e hall from Elisa beth’ s room. I’ve tried. But you can see its
window , and imagine the tiered  seating and a professor leani ng over the
lectern at the front. He is talking to you. Y our hand moves in a d ream across
your notes.
Iggie attends the Schottengymnasium reluctantly . Y ou can run there in
three minutes, though I haven’ t  tried this with a satchel. There is a class
photograph from  1914, third form: thirty boys in grey-flannel suits with
ties, or sailor suits, leaning on t heir desks. T wo windows are op en onto the
five-storey centr al courtyard. There is one idiot pulling faces. The teacher is
implacable at the back in his monastic robes. On the reverse of the
photograph are all their signatures – all the Geor gs, Fritzs, Ottos, Maxs,
Oskars and Ernsts. Iggie has signed in a beautiful italic hand: Ignace v .
Ephrussi.
On the back wa ll is a blackboar d scrawled over with geometry proofs.
T oday they have been studying how to work out the surface area of a cone.
Iggie comes home each day wi th homework. He detests it. He is poor at
algebra and calculus and hates  mathematics. Seventy years on, he could
give me  the names of each Bro ther and what they tried unsuc cessfully to
teach him.
And he comes home with rhymes:
Heil W ien! Heil Berlin!
In 14 T agen
In Petersbur g drinn’!
(Hail V ienna! Hail Berlin!
In 14 days
W e’ll be in Petersbur g!)
There are ruder ones than this. These do not go down well with V iktor ,
who loves St Petersbur g and is Russian-born, though he is now , of course,
Austrian and loves V ienna.
For Iggie, the war means playing  soldiers. It is their cousin Piz – Marie-
Louise von Motesiczky – who  proves to be a particularly good soldier .
There is a servants’ staircase in the corner of the Palais, tucked away behind
a fal se door . It is a wide nautilus  spiral of 136 steps that goes up  to the roof
and, if you pull  the door towa rds you, then you are suddenly above the
caryatids and acanthus leaves and you can see everything, th e whole of
V ienna. T urn slowly clockwise from the university , then the V otivkirche,
then St Stephen ’ s, all the way back through the towers and d omes of the
Opera and Bur gtheater and Rat haus to the university again. A nd you can
dare eac h other to crawl right u p to the edge of the parapet and  peer down
through the glass into the courtyard below , or you can shoot all the tiny
scurrying bur ghers and their  ladies in the Franzensring or in the
Schottengasse. F or this you use cherry stones and a roll of stif f paper and a
good blo w . Ther e is a café directly below with wide canvas awnings, which
is a particularly appealing tar get. The waiters in their black aprons look up
and shout, and you have to dodge.
And you can cl imb onto the roofs of the Liebens’ Palais  next door ,
where more cousins live.
Or you are spies and can go dow n the staircase into the cellars – barrel-
vaulted – where there is a tunnel  that takes you all the way across V ienna to
Schönbrunn. Or all the way to the Parliament. Or into the other secret
tunnels that you have been told about, a network that you can get into from
the advertising kiosks on the Ringstrasse. This is where the Kanalstr otter
are meant to live  – furtive, shado wy people who exist on the coins that drop
from pockets through the gratings in the pavements.
The hou sehold and the family make their sacrifices during the  war . In
1915 uncle Pips is serving as an imperial liaison of ficer with the German
high command in Berlin, where  he has been instrumental in helping Rilke
get a desk job away from the front. Papa is fifty-four and e xempt. The
manservants in the Palais have disappeared, apart from the butler Josef,
who is too old to be called up. A small bevy of maids is kept on and a cook
and Ann a, who has now been with the family for fifteen years a nd seems to
be able to anticipate everyone’ s needs and has an ability to calm tempers.
She kno ws everything. There are no secrets from your maid , when you
come back home after luncheon and need to change your day-dress.
The hou se is a lo t quieter these days. V iktor used to invite friend s of the
servants who were between positions to come on Sunday an d share the
midday meal of boiled and r oast meats. This no longer happens: the
servants’ hall is in ebb. There are no grooms or coachmen, n o carriage-
horses, so if you want to go to the Prater you take one of the fiacres from
the stand  in the Schottengasse o r even go by tram. There are ‘ no parties’.
This act ually means that there a re far fewer parties, and that the parties are
dif ferent. Y ou cannot be seen in a ball dress, but you can still go out to
dinner and to the Opera. In her memoir Elisabeth writes that ‘Mama
entertained at tea only , and played bridge.’ Demel still sells its cakes, but
you must not be seen to have too many on display at your at-homes.
Emmy s till dres ses up every ev ening, because it is important n ot to let
standards slip. Herr Schuster is unable to make his annual visi t to Paris to
buy gow ns for his baroness, but Anna knows her so well that she is adept at
managing the wardrobe and reworking gowns with assiduous study of the
latest jou rnals. T here is a photograph of Emmy this spring. She is wearing a
very long black gown and a sort  of black bearskin pillbox hat – a colback –
with a white egret feather and a rope of pearls to her waist, and if there
wasn’ t a date on  the back you wouldn’ t believe that V ienna w as at war . I
wonder if this is a last-season dress and how I could possibly find out.
As e ver , Gisela and Iggie come and talk to Emmy in her dressing-room
in the evening. They are allow ed to unlock the vitrine them selves. Y ou
don’ t play with the netsuke on the carpet if you are a girl of ten a nd a boy of
eight, as  that is r ather childish, but you still reach deep into the g lass to find
the bundle of k indling and the puppies, if it has been a bad day and you
have been shouted at by Brother Geor g.
There ar e many ,  many people o n the streets. There are Jews – 100,000
refugees just from Galicia alon e – who have been driven out in terrible
mass expulsions by the Russian army . Some are put up in barracks where
there are basic a menities, but these are inadequate for families . Many find
their way into Leopoldstadt an d live in appalling conditions. Many are
begging. They are not pedlars with a scant tray of postcards a nd ribbons.
They have nothing to sell. The Israelitische Kultusgemeinde, IKG,
or ganises relief ef forts.
The mor e assimilated Jews worry about these newcomers: they are felt
to be  rat her vulgar in their manners; their speech and dress and customs are
not aligned to the Bildung  of the V iennese. There is anxiety about whether
they wil l impede  assimilation. ‘It is terribly hard to be an Eastern Jew; there
is no harder lot than that of the Eastern Jew newly arrived in V ienna,’ writes
Joseph Roth about these Jews. ‘No-one will do anything for them. Their
cousins and coreligionists, with  their feet safely pushed under desks in the
First District, have already gone  “native”. They don’ t want to be associated
with Eastern Jews, much less taken for them.’ Maybe, I think, this is
anxiety from the recently arrive d towards the very newly arrived. They are
still in transit.
The stre ets are dif ferent. The Ringstrasse is meant for strolling along. It
is m eant for chance encounters, casual cups of cof fee outsid e the Café
Landtmann, hailing friends, hoped-for assignations on the Corso. It is an
easy stream of flowing people.
But V ienna now seems to have two speeds. One is the pace of m arching
soldiers, children racing alongside, and the other is standstill. Y ou notice
that ther e are people queuing outside the shops for food, for ci garettes, for
news. Everyone talks of this phenomenon of Anstellen,  standing in line. The
police n ote when queues start for dif ferent commodities. In the  autumn of
1914 it is for f lour and bread. In early 1915 it is milk and potatoes. In
autumn 1915 it is oil. In March 1916 it is cof fee. The next month it is sugar .
The next month it is eggs. In July 1916 it is soap. Then it is everything. The
city is sclerotic.
The circulation of things in the city is changing, too. There are stories of
hoarding, rich men with rooms stacked high with boxes and boxes of food.
There is profiteering, according  to the rumours, by ‘cof fee-house types’.
The only people who are doing  well are those with food, these ‘types’, or
farmers. T o get food, you part with more and more. Objects a re loosened
from yo ur home and become currency . There are stories about farmers
wearing the tailcoats of the V iennese bour geois, of their wives in silk
gowns. Farmho uses are stuf fed with pianos, porcelain and bibelots and
T urkish carpets.  Piano teachers, say the rumours, are moving out of V ienna
to follow their new pupils into the country .
The park s are dif ferent. There are fewer park keepers and sweepers. The
man wh o waters the paths first thing, in the park across the Ring, is no
longer there. The paths have always been dusty , but now are dustier .
Elisabeth is almost sixteen. She  is now allowed to get her book s bound
in half-morocco  with marbled c overs when V iktor gets his book s bound for
the libra ry . This is a rite of pass age, a way of marking that her reading has
significance. It is a way of simultaneously separating her books from her
father ’ s – these go into my library , these into yours – and jo ining them
together . On visits home from B erlin, uncle Pips gives her a job of copying
out letters for him from his theatre director friend, Max Reinhardt.
Gisela is eleven and starts draw ing lessons in the morning-room. She is
very goo d. Iggie  is nine and is not allowed in. He knows the uniforms of
imperial regiments (‘pale blue trousers of the infantry , the bloo d red fezzes
on the heads of the pale blue Bosnians’) and sketches the colours of their
tunics in his little leather notebooks tied up with purple silk. In the dressing-
room, w ith the cabinet of netsuke for gotten, Emmy calls him her adviser on
dress.
He starts to draw dresses. Furtively .
Iggie writes a story in an octavo Manila book with a boat on the cover .
It is February 1916.
 
Fisherman Jack. A story by I.L.E.
 
Dedication. T o darling Mama this little volume is very lovingly dedicated.
 
Preface. This story is not perfect in any way , I am sure, but one thing is well
done, I think: I have described the characters of the book clearly .
 
Chap. 1. Jack and his life. Jack had not been a fisherman all his short life, at
least not until his father died…
 
In M arch the IK G writes an ope n letter to the Jews of V ienna: ‘Jewish
Fellow C itizens! In fulfilment of their obvious duty , our fathers, brothers
and sons devote their blood and  their lives as brave soldiers in our glorious
army . W ith similar consciousness of duty , those who remain a t home also
have happily sacrificed their property on the altar of their beloved
fatherland. Thus  now again the  call of the state should arouse a patriotic
echo in all of us!’ The Jews of V ienna contribute another 500,000 crowns to
the war loans.
Rumours are endemic. Kraus: ‘What do you say about the rumours?/I’m
worried./The ru mour circulating in V ienna is that there are rumours
circulating in Austria. They’re  even going from mouth to mouth, but
nobody can tell you.’
In April in V ienna a group of soldiers on leave, survivors of the battle of
Uscieczko, appe ar on the stage of a V iennese theatre and re-enact the events
of the battle. Kraus, splenetic at this reduction of real events t o spectacle,
lets fly with an  attack on the  increasing theatricality of the war . The
problem is: ‘ die Sphär en fliessen ineinander ’  – the spheres have become
blurred, flow together . Boundaries are indistinct in V ienna during the war .
This me ans that there is plenty f or the children to see. Their balcony is a
splendid vantage point.
On 1 1th May Elisabeth goes to the Opera to hear W agne r ’ s Die
Meistersinger  with her cousin. ‘ Heilige Deutsche Kunst ’ – ‘sacr ed Germ an
art’ – she writes  in her little green book in which she records the concerts
and theatres she attends. She patriotically underlines Deutsche .
In Ju ly the child ren are taken by  V iktor to the V ienna W ar Exhibition in
the Prate r . This has been or gani sed to focus the war ef fort at h ome: it will
raise morale and money . Best of all is a dog show in w hich army
Dobermans go through their rou tines. There are numerous display halls in
which the children can see captured artillery pieces. There is a realistic
mountain panor ama of a battle  site, so that they can imagine the boys
fighting on the b orders with Italy . There are concerts given by s oldiers who
have lost their li mbs, tuba-players with prosthetic legs. As you leave, there
is a cigarette room in which you can donate tobacco for the soldiers.
Elisabeth’ s opera and theatr e notebook, 1916
There is  the first showing of a true-to-life trench. It is advertised, notes
Kraus acidly , as showing ‘life in the trenches with striking realism’.
On 8th August, staying at Kövecses, Elisabeth is given a dark-green
book of poems w ritten by her maternal grandmother Evelina, first published
in V ienna in 1907. It is inscribed by her: ‘These old songs have  faded away
from me. Since they are resonating for you, they also resonate to me again.’
V iktor i s doing his bit at the b ank, a thankless task in wartim e, with
most of the young, competent m en away at the front. He is generous and
patriotic in his financial suppor t. He buys lots of government  war bonds.
Then he  buys some more. Though he is advised by Gutmann and other
friends at the W iener Club to move his money to Switzerland,  as they are
doing, he will not so. It would be unpatriotic. At dinner he moves his hand
over his face, brow to chin, as he says that in every crisis there are
opportunities for those who look for them.
When V iktor arrives home, he spends more time in his study . ‘A
library ,’ he says, quoting V icto r Hugo, ‘is an act of faith.’ F ewer books
arrive for him: nothing from Petersbur g, Paris, London, Florence. He is
disappointed in the quality of a  volume sent from a new dealer in Berlin.
Who knows what he is reading in there, smoking his cigars? Sometimes a
supper tray is p repared and taken in. Things are not so good b etween him
and Emmy , and the children hear her raised voice more often.
Before the war every summer there was an operation with ladders and
buckets and mops over the courtyard roof. Because the re are no
manservants, the glass over the courtyard has not been clean ed for two
years. The light coming in is greyer than ever before.
Boundaries become indistinct. As a child, your patriotism is
simultaneously unequivocal and confused. On the streets and at school you
hear of ‘British envy , French thirst for revenge and Russian rapacity’.
Where you can go diminishes b y the month, for all the family networks are
in su spension. There are letters,  but you cannot see your English or French
cousins, cannot travel as you used to.
In th e su mmer t he family cannot go to the Chalet Ephrussi in Lucerne,
so they go to Kö vecses for the whole long holiday . This means that at least
they can  eat properly . There is roast hare, game pies and plum  dumplings,
to be eaten hot mit Schlag , with whipped cream. In September there is a
shooting party , when cousins w ho are on leave from the shooting at the
Front come to shoot partridge.
On 26th October the prime m inister , Count Karl von Stür gkh, is
assassinated in a restaurant at the Hotel Meissel & Schadn on Kärntner
Strasse. There are two points of general interest. First, that his assassin is
the radic al socialist Fritz Adler , son of the Social Democrat leader V iktor
Adler . S econd, that he had eate n a lunch of mushroom soup, boiled beef
with ma shed tur nips and a pudd ing. He had been drinking a wine spritzer .
There is an anci llary point of in terest that excites the children greatly: it is
at this very  r est aurant that t hey had eaten Ischler T orte,  cho colate cake with
almond and cherry filling, with their parents earlier in the summer .
On 21st November 1916 Franz Josef I dies.
All the newspap ers have black borders: Death of our Emperor , Kaiser
Franz Jo sef, The  Emperor – dea d! Several have engravings of h im with his
characteristic mistrustful look. The Neue Fr eie Pr esse  carries no feuilleton.
The W iener Zeitung  has the most satisfyingly graphic response, a death-
notice on a blank white page. All the weeklies follow suit, apa rt from Die
Bombe , which has a picture of a girl surprised in her bed by a gentleman.
Franz Josef was eighty-six and had been on the throne since 1848. On a
wintry d ay there is a massive funeral cortège through V ienna.  The streets
are l ined with soldiers. His cof fi n is on a hearse pulled by eight  horses with
black plumes. On either side m arch aged archdukes with chests of medals
and representati ves of all the imperial guards. Behind him walk the young,
new Emperor Karl and his wife Zita, in a veil to the ground, and between
them th eir four year -old son Otto wearing white with a black sash. The
funeral takes place in the cathedral with the kings of Bulgaria, Bavaria,
Saxony and Württember g present, fifty archdukes and duchesses and forty
other pr inces and princesses. Then the cortège winds its way to the
Capuchin churc h in the Neue Markt close to the Hofbur g palace. The
destination is the Kaiser gruft , the imperial tomb. There is the drama of
admittance to the church – the guards knock three times and are refused
twice – and then Franz Josef is  buried between his wife Elisab eth and his
long-dead eldest son, the suicide Rudolf.
The children are taken to the M eissel & Schadn Hotel on a corner of
Kärntner Strasse , where they had that delicious cake, to watch the cortège
from a first-floor window . It is extremely cold.
V iktor remembe rs the Makart spectacle with all the floppy h ats with
plumes, thirty-seven years befor e; his father being ennobled, forty-six years
previously . It is a generation sin ce Franz Josef opened the Ring strasse, the
V otivkirche, the Parliament, the Opera House, the City Hall, the
Bur gtheater .
The children think about all the  other processions that the Emperor has
taken part in, th e countless times they have seen him in his carriage in
V ienna and in Bad Ischl. They remember him riding with Frau Schratt, his
companion, when she waved to them, a small discreet wave from a gloved
right hand. They remember the  family joke to be repeated after visiting
grim great-aunt Anna Herz von  Hertenreid, the witch. When y ou have got
safely aw ay from  her and her questioning, you have to repeat the Emperor ’ s
old saying ‘ Es war sehr schön, es hat mich sehr gefr eut ’ – It has been very
nice, I’ve enjoyed myself – before anyone else can say it.
In early  December there is a serious meeting in the dressing-room.
Elisabeth is to be allowed to choose the style of her own dress for the first
time. She has h ad many dresses made for her before, but this is the first
time she is allowed to make the decisions. This is a moment that has been
much an ticipated by Emmy and Gisela and Iggie, all of whom l ove clothes,
and by Anna, who looks after t hem. In the dressing-room on th e dressing-
table is a book of swatches of f abrics and Elisabeth comes up with an idea
for a dress that has a spider ’ s-web pattern over the bodice.
Iggie is absolutely appalled. Seventy years later in T okyo he recounts
how there was c omplete silence when she described what she w anted: ‘She
simply had no taste at all.’
On 17th  January 1917 there is a new edict, which states that th e names
of c onvicted profiteers will be printed in a list in the newspa per and on
notice-boards in  home districts. There has been some pressure to bring back
the stocks. There are many names for profiteer , but increasingly they elide:
hoar der , usur er , Ostjude, Galician, Jew .
In March Emperor Karl institutes a new school holiday to be held on
21st November to commemorate the passing of Franz Josef and his own
ascension to the throne.
In April Emmy goes to a reception at Schönbrunn given for a committee
of w omen who o r ganise someth ing to do with widows of soldiers who have
fallen in defence of the Empire. It is unclear to me exactly what is going on.
But there is a splendid photogra ph of this gathering of a hundred women in
their best in the State Ballroo m, a great arc of hats under the rococo
plasterwork and mirrors.
In May there is an exhibition of 180,000 toy soldiers in V ien na. All
summer everyth ing in the city is helden , heroic. All year there are white
spaces in the ne wspapers where the censors have struck out inf ormation or
comment.
The corridor between Emmy’ s dressing-room, the room with the
netsuke, and V iktor ’ s dressing-room seems to get longer and longer .
Sometimes Emm y does not app ear at the dining-table at one o’clock and
her plac e has to be removed by a maid while everyone pretends not to
notice. Sometimes it is removed again at eight o’clock.
Food is an incre asing problem. There have been queues for bread and
milk and potatoes for two years , but there are now queues for c abbage and
plums a nd beer . Housewives are exhorted to use their imaginations. Kraus
pictures an ef ficient T eutonic w ife: ‘T oday we were well pro vided for…
There w ere all kinds of things. W e had a wholesome broth made with the
Excelsior brand of Hindenbur g c ocoa-cream soup cubes, a tasty ersatz false
hare with ersatz kohlrabi, pot ato pancakes made of paraf fin…’ Coins
change. Before the war , gold kronen were minted, or silver ones. After three
years of war they are copper . This summer they are iron.
Emperor Karl receives fervent acclaim in the Jewish press. The Jews,
says Bloch’ s W ochenschrift,  a re ‘not only th e most loyal su pporters of his
empire, but the only unconditional Austrians’.
In the summer of 1917 Elisabeth stays in Altaussee at the country house
of Baron ess Oppenheimer with her best friend Fanny . Fanny L oewenstein
has spent her ch ildhood living all over Europe and speaks the same run of
languages as Elisabeth. They ar e both seventeen and very keen on poetry:
they write constantly . T o their great excitement, both the poe t Hugo von
Hofmannsthal a nd the composer Richard Strauss are staying too, as are
Hofmannsthal’ s two sons. The other house-guests include the historian
Joseph R edlich, who, Elisabeth wrote sixty years later , ‘impressed us very
unfavourably w ith his predictions of the impending defeat of Austria and
Germany while Fanny and I still believed the of ficial commu niqués of a
victorious outcome’.
In Octo ber the  Reichspost  c laims  that there is an international
conspiracy against Austria-Hungary and that Lenin and Kerensk y and Lord
Northclif fe are all Jews. President W oodrow W ilson is also acting ‘under
the influence’ of the Jews.
On 21st November , the anniversary of the late Emperor ’ s demise, all
schoolchildren get a day of f.
In the spring o f 1918 things are very dif ficult indeed. Emm y , ‘the
dazzling centre of a distinguishe d society circle’, according to Kraus in Die
Fackel , is more dazzling than ever . Sh e has a new lover , a young cou nt in
one of the caval ry regiments. This young count is the son of family friends,
a regular guest at Kövecses, where he brings his own horses.  He is also
extremely good-looking and is far closer to Emmy in age than to V iktor .
In the spring a book is published for the schoolchildren of the Empire,
Unser Kaiserpaar .  I t descr ibes the new Emperor and his wife and son at the
funeral o f Franz  Josef. ‘The illu strious parental couple arranged it that their
first-born child was introduced at the hand of his mother . From this picture
arose quite magically a bond of  understanding between the ruling pair and
the people: the tender gesture of the mother captivated the empire.’
On 1 8th April E lisabeth and Emmy go to see Hamlet  at the Bur gtheater
with the impossibly handsome  Alexander Moissi in the title  role. ‘ Der
grösste Eindruc k meines Lebens ’ –  the most impressive thing in my life –
Elisabeth notes in her green notebook. Emmy is thirty-eight and two
months pregnant.
It is in this spring that there is good family news. Both Emmy’ s younger
sisters are engaged to be married. Gerty , twenty-seven, is to be married to
T ibor , a Hungarian aristocrat with the family name of Thuróc zy de Alsó-
Körösteg et T urócz-Szent-Mihá ly . Eva, twenty-five, is to be married to
Jenö, the less fantastically named Baron W eiss von W eiss und Horstenstein.
In June there is a wave of strike s. The flour ration is now just 35 grams
a da y , en ough to  fill a cof fee-cu p. Numerous bread trucks are a mbushed by
lar ge crowds of women and children. In July milk disappears. It is meant to
be saved for nur sing mothers and the chronically sick, but even  they find it
dif ficult to get hold of. Many V iennese can only survive by foraging for
potatoes in the fields outside the city . The government debates the carrying
of rucks acks. Sh ould city dwellers be allowed to carry them?  If they do,
should they be searched at the rail stations?
There a re rats in the courtyard. These are not ivory rats with  amber
eyes.
There ar e also increasing numbers of demonstrations against the Jews.
On 16th  June there is a German  People’ s Assembly that meets in V ienna to
swear fealty to the Kaiser and reaf firm the goal of pan-German unity . One
speaker has a so lution to the pro blems: a pogrom to heal the wounds of the
state.
On 1 8th June th e prefect of pol ice asks permission of V iktor to  station
men in the courtyard of the Palais, where the car stands, unused for want of
petrol. The police will be on h and in the case of unrest, but out of sight.
V iktor agrees.
Desertions multiply . More of the Hapsbur g army surrender than want to
fight: 2, 200,000 soldiers are taken prisoner . This is seventeen times the
number of British soldiers who are prisoners of war .
On 28th June Elisabeth receives her end-of-year report from the
Schottengymnasium. Seven ‘ sehr gut ’ s for religious study , German, Latin,
Greek, geography and history , philosophy and physics. One ‘ gut ’ for
mathematics. O n 2nd July she gets her matriculation certificate, stamped
with the  head of the old Emperor . The printed word ‘he’ is cros sed out and
‘she’ has been inscribed in blue ink.
It is hot. Emmy is five months p regnant, with the summer ahead of her .
A baby will be loved and cherished, of course – but the bother of it.
August in Kövecses. There are only two old men to tend the gardens,
and the roses on the long verand a are unkempt. On 22nd Septem ber Gisela,
Elisabeth and aunt Gerty go to hear Fidelio  at the Opera. On 25th they go to
see Hildebrand  at the Bur gtheater and Elisabeth notes the Archduke in the
audience. Brazil  declares war on  Austria. On 18th October the Czechs seize
Prague, renounc e the rule of the Hapsbur gs and declare indepe ndence. On
29th October Austria petitions Italy for an armistice. On 2nd November at
ten in the evening there is new s that there has been a breakout of violent
Italian P OWs from an internment camp outside V ienna and th at they are
swarming into the city . At 10.15  the news becomes more graphic  – there are
10,000 or 13,000 of them, and they have been joined by t he Russian
prisoners. Messengers start appearing in the cafés along the Ringstrasse
ordering of ficers to report to pol ice headquarters. Many do so. T wo of ficers
shout to those leaving the Ope ra to return home and lock their doors. At
eleven o ’clock the police chief consults with the military about defending
V ienna. By midnight the Minister of the Interior announces that reports
have been greatly exaggerated. By dawn it is admitted that it was another
rumour .
On 3rd November the Austro-H ungarian Empire is dissolved. The next
day Au stria signs the armistice with the Allies. Elisabeth g oes to the
Bur gtheater and  sees Antigone  w ith cousin F ritz von Lieben. On 9th
November Kaiser W ilhelm abdicates. On 12th November Emperor Karl
flees to Switzerland, and Austria becomes a republic. There are crowds
sur ging past the Palais all day , many with red flags and banners, conver ging
on the Parliament.
On 19th November Emmy gives birth to a son.
He is blond and blue-eyed and t hey call him Rudolf Josef. It is dif ficult
to th ink of a more elegiac name to give a boy just as the Hapsbur g Empire
crashes around them.
It is very , very dif ficult. The influenza is raging, and there is no milk to
be had. Emmy is ill: it is twelve years since Iggie was born, eighteen years
since her first ch ild. Being pregnant during a war is not easy . V iktor is fifty-
eight and surprised by fatherhoo d again. Amongst all the comp lexities and
the surprise at this little boy being born – and these comp lexities are
manifold – Elisabeth is mortified to find that most people think the baby is
hers. She is eighteen after all, and her mother and grandmother had children
early . There are rumours. The Ephrussi are keeping up appearances.
In her short memoir of the period she writes of the unrest, ‘I remember
very little of the details, only our great anxiety and fear .’
But, ‘M eanwhile,’ she adds in the final, triumphant line, ‘I had
registered at the university .’ Sh e had escaped. She had made it from one
side of the Ringstrasse to the other .
21. LITERALL Y ZERO
It was a particul arly cold winter in V ienna in 1918 and the whi te porcelain
stove in the corner of the salon was the only fire that could be kept going all
day and night. E verywhere else – the dining-room, library , bedrooms and
the d ressing-roo m with the netsuke – was freezing. Acetylene lamps gave
of f a noxious smell. That winter V iennese were seen cutting trees in the
woods for fuel. Rudolf was ba rely a fortnight old when the Neue Fr eie
Pr esse  r epo rted that ‘O nly the merest shimmer of light can be seen behind
some of  the windows. The city lies in darkness.’ Almost unthinkably , there
was no cof fee, ‘ only an unnameable mixture tasting of…meat extract and
liquorice. T ea, milkless and lemon-less, of course, is slightly b etter if you
can accustom yourself to the permanent taste of tin.’ V iktor refused to drink
it.
When I try to im agine life in th e family in the weeks after the defeat, I
see the paper blowing along the streets. V ienna had always been so tidy .
Now there were posters and pl acards, leaflets and demonstrations. Before
the war ,  Iggie remembered dropping the paper wrapping from an ice-cream
cone on the grav el walks in the  Prater and being scolded by his nanny and
reprimanded by a succession of men with epaulettes. Now he  kicked his
way to school th rough the detritus of this convulsive, noisy , hectoring city .
The advertising kiosks, cylinders ten feet high topped with a s mall turret,
had beco me plac es where the fra ctious V iennese would tack up l etters to the
Christian Inhabi tants of V ienna, to Fellow Citizens, to Brothers and Sisters
in the Struggle. And all these screeds would be torn down and replaced.
V ienna was anxious and loud.
Emmy , with her new baby , struggled in these first weeks and both she
and Rudolf became weaker and weaker . The English economist W illiam
Beveridge, visit ing V ienna six weeks after the Austrian defeat, wrote that
‘A h eroic ef fort is being made by the mothers in nursing their own children
to keep them a live for their fi rst year , but this is now done only at the
expense of the mothers’ own health, and is lar gely done in vain. ’ There was
talk of trying to get Emmy and Rudolf out of the city an d away to
Kövecses, even of taking Gisela  and Iggie away too, but there w as no petrol
for the car and the trains were in chaos. So they stayed in the Palais in the
mar ginally quieter rooms with their backs to the Ringstrasse.
At the start of th e war the house had felt very exposed, a private house
surrounded by public spaces. No w , the peace seemed more frigh tening than
the war: it was not clear who was fighting who, and it was not clear whether
or not there was going to be  a revolution. Demobilised soldiers and
prisoners of war returned to V ienna with first-hand accounts of the
revolutions in Russia and of the workers’ protests in Berlin.  There was
plenty of ‘free firing’ – random gunfire – at night. The new flag of Austria
was red, white and red, and some of the younger and more riotous element
found that, with a quick rip and stitch, you could make a good red flag.
From ev ery corner of the old Empire imperial civil servants with no
country came to V ienna to find t hat whole imperial ministries to which they
had sent  their careful reports ha d closed. There were many Zitter er  on the
streets – men trembling and shak ing from shell shock – as well as amputees
with me dals pin ned to their ch ests. Captains and majors were to be seen
selling wooden toys on the streets. Meanwhile lar ge bundles of imperial
monogrammed linen somehow found their way into the ho useholds of
bur ghers; imperial saddles and harnesses were found in the mar kets; and, it
was said, security detachments had found their way into the cellars of the
palace and were drinking with  decreasing speed through the Hapsbur g
wine-vaults.
V ienna, with just under two mi llion inhabitants, had gone from being
the capit al of an empire of fifty-two million subjects to a tiny c ountry with
six million citizens: it simply could not accommodate the cataclysm. Much
of the talk was whether Austria  was lebensfähig , viable, as an independent
state. V i ability was not just an issue of economics, it was ps ychological.
Austria seemed not to know how to cope with its diminishment. The
‘Carthaginian P eace’ – harsh a nd punitive – formalised in th e T reaty of
Saint-Germain-en-Laye of 1919 meant the dismemberment of the Empire.
It sanctified the independence of Hungary , Czechoslovakia, Poland and
Y ugoslavia and the State of Slov enes, Croats and Serbs. Istria went. T rieste
went. Several Dalmatian islands were lopped of f and Austria-Hungary
became Austria, a country 500 m iles long. There were punitive reparations.
The arm y was reconstituted as 30,000 volunteers. V ienna, went the bitter
joke, was a W asserkopf , the hydrocephalic head of a shrunken body .
Many things changed, including  names and addresses. In the spirit of
the time s, all imperial titles were  to be abolished – there were to be no more
von, no more Ritter , Baron, Graf, Fürst, Herzog. Every member  of the post
of fice and worker on the railway s, had been able to add k & k  (imperial and
royal) to  their title, but this had now ended. Of course, this bein g Austria, a
country deeply devoted to title, other titles proliferated. Y ou might be
penniless, but you expected to be addressed as Dozent , Pr ofessor , Hofrat ,
Schulrat , Diplomkaufmann , Dir ektor . Or Frau Dozent , Frau Pr ofessor .
Streets changed, too. The von Ephrussi family no longer live d at 24
Franzenring, W ien 1, named for the Hapsbur g Emperor . The Ephrussi now
lived at 24 Der Ring des Zwölf ten Novembers, W ien 1, renamed after the
day of liberation  from the Haps bur g emperors. Emmy complained that this
renaming busine ss was a bit French, that they were going to en d up on rue
de la République.
Anything might happen. The value of the krone was so diminished that
there wa s speculation that the new government might sell the imperial art
collections for food for the starving V iennese. Schönbrunn ‘is t o be sold to
a foreig n consortium and turned into a gambling palace’. The Botanical
Gardens are to be ‘razed for the building of apartments’.
W ith the collapse in the econo my , ‘loud-voiced people were arriving
from all  parts of the world to buy banks, factories, jewels, carpe ts, works of
art or landed estates, and the Je ws were not the last ones to com e. Foreign
sharks, s windlers and for gers poured into V ienna and a pest of lice came
with the m.’ This is the backdrop to the 1925 silent film Die Fr eudlose
Gasse  ( The Joyless Str eet ). Ca r headlights rake along the  night-time queue
outside a butcher ’ s shop. ‘After waiting all night many are turned away
empty-handed.’ A hook-nosed ‘International Speculator ’ plots  to destroy
the value of the stock of a mining company , while a widowed c ivil servant
(could there be a more pitiable V iennese stereotype?) cashes in his pension
to buy shares and loses everything. His daughter , played by Greta Garbo,
hollow-eyed, fa int with hunger , is forced to work in a cabaret. Rescue
comes from a h andsome Red Cross of ficial, a gentleman, the bearer of
tinned food.
Anti-Semitism gained even mor e ground in V ienna during those years.
Y ou cou ld hear the echo of the  demonstrations, of course, with their rants
against the ‘plague of Eastern Jews’, but Iggie remembered tha t they used
to laugh at those, as they laughed at the mass displays of youth groups in
their pro ud uniforms and of Austrians in peasant costumes of  dirndl and
lederhosen. There were lots and lots of these parades.
What w as partic ularly terrifying  were the Krawalle,  b rawls of savage
ferocity , that took place on the steps of the university between the newly
resurrected pan-German student fraternities, the Burschenschaften , and
Jewish and socialist students. Iggie remembered his father white with anger
when he  and Gisela were caught watching one of these bloody fights from
the wind ow of the salon. ‘Don’ t let them see you watching,’ he shouted –
and this from a man who did not shout.
Under the slogan of ‘Keeping the Austrian Alps clean of Je ws’, the
German-Austrian Alpine Club e xpelled all their Jewish members. It was the
club tha t provid ed access to hun dreds of the mountain cabins in  which you
could spend the night and make cof fee over a stove.
Like ma ny of their peers, Iggie and Gisela hiked in the mo untains
during th e early  summer . They would take a train to Gmunden and then set
of f with  a rucksack each, a walk ing stick and a sleeping bag, chocolate and
a screw of cof fee and sugar in brown paper: you could get mi lk and hard
rolls and  a crescent slice of yello w cheese from farmers. It was exhilarating
to be free of the city . And once, said Iggie to me, hiking with a friend of
Gisela’ s, we were caught out at dusk high in the Alps. It was already cold,
but there was a hut, full of students round the stove and cheerful noise.
They asked us for our cards and then us told to get out, told us that Jews
polluted the mountain air .
W e w ere okay , said Iggie, we found a barn lower down the valle y in the
dark, but our fr iend, Franzi, had a card and stayed in the hut. W e never
talked about it.
Not talk ing about anti-Semitism  was possible; not hearing about it was
impossible. The re was no political consensus on what politicians could say
in V ienn a. This was tested by t he publication in 1922, by the novelist and
provocateur Hugo Bettauer , of The City  W ithou t Jews: A Novel About the
Day After T omorr ow . In this unnerving novel he tells the story of V ienna
racked by post-war poverty and the rise of a demagogue – a dead-ringer for
Dr Karl  Lueger , named Dr Ka rl Schwertfeger – who binds the populace
together in one easy way: ‘Let u s look at our little Austria today . In whose
hands is  the press, and therefor e public opinion? In the hands of the Jew!
Who ha s piled billions upon billions since the ill-starred year  1914? The
Jew! Wh o contr ols the tremendous circulation of our money , wh o sits at the
director ’ s desk in the great banks, who is the head of practically all
industries? The Jew! Who owns  our theatre? The Jew!…’ The Mayor has a
solution, a simple solution: Au stria will throw out the Jews. All of them,
including the children of mixed marriages, will be deported in orderly ways
on t rains. Those Jews who atte mpt to continue staying secretly in V ienna
will do so unde r pain of death. ‘At one o’clock in the afternoon whistles
proclaimed that  the last trainl oad of Jews had left V ienna, and at six
o’clock…all the  church bells r ang to announce that there we re no more
Jews in Austria.’
And this novel, with its chilling  descriptions of the painful breakups of
families, desperate scenes at railway stations as closed carriages take away
the Jews, is co unterpointed with the descent of V ienna into a drab,
provincial backw ater as the Jew s who animated it leave. There is no theatre,
no n ewspaper , no gossip, no f ashion and no money until V ienna finally
invites the Jews back.
Bettauer was assassinated by a young Nazi in 1925. He was def ended at
his trial by the leader of the Austrian National Socialists, giving the party
some pr estige amongst the fissile politics of V ienna. That summer , eighty
young Nazis attacked a crowded restaurant shouting ‘ Juden hinaus! ’
Part of the wretchedness of these years was the ef fect of inflation. It was
said tha t if you passed the building of the Austro-Hungari an Bank in
Bankgasse in the early hours of the morning you could hear the printing
presses clatterin g away printing more money . Y ou were passed  banknotes
with their ink still damp. Perhaps, say some bankers, we should change our
currency totally and start again. Schillings are talked of.
‘An entire winter of denominations and zeroes snows down from the
sky . Hundreds of thousands, mil lions, but every flake, every tho usand melts
in your hand,’ wrote the V iennese novelist Stefan Zweig about the year
1919 in his novel The Post-Office Girl . ‘Money dissolves while you’re
sleeping, it flies away while y ou’re changing your shoes (coming apart,
with wo oden he els) to run to the market for a second time; you never stop
moving, but you’re always late. Life becomes mathematics, addition,
multiplication, a  mad whirl of figures and numbers, a vortex that snatches
the last of your possessions into its black insatiable vacuum…’
V iktor looked into his own vacuum: in the safe at the of fice  of f the
Schottengasse w ere stacks of files of deeds and bonds and share-
certificates. The y were worthless. As the citizen of a defeated po wer , all his
assets in  Londo n and in Paris,  the accounts that had been building over
forty years, the of fice building in one city , the share of Ephrussi et Cie in
another , had been confiscated  under the Allied terms of the punitive
settlement after the war . In the B olshevik conflagration the Rus sian fortune
– the gold held  in St Petersbur g, the shares in the Baku o ilfields, the
railways and the banks and the p roperty V iktor still owned in Odessa – had
disappeared. Th at was not just a spectacular loss of money , it was the loss
of several fortunes.
And, mo re perso nally , at the he ight of the war in 1915 Jules E phrussi,
Charles’ s elder brother and own er of the Chalet, had died. Because of the
hostilities his vast fortune, long  promised to V iktor , had been  left to the
French cousins. So no suites of Empire furniture. Or the Monet of willows
overhanging a river bank. ‘Poor Mama,’ wrote Elisabeth ‘all those long
Swiss evenings in vain.’
In 1914 , before the war , V ikto r had a fortune of twenty-five million
crowns, several buildings scattered around V ienna, the Palais E phrussi, the
art collection of ‘100 old paintings’ and an annual income of several
hundred thousan d crowns. It was the equivalent of $400 million today . Now
even the  two floors of the Palai s that he rented out for 50,000 crowns did
not brin g in any more income . And his decision to leave his money in
Austria had proved catastrophic. This newly-minted patriotic Austrian
citizen h ad invested massively  in war bonds late into 1917. They were
worthless, too.
V iktor a dmitted the severity of all this in crisis meetings on 6th and 8th
March 1 921 with his old frien d, the financier Rudolf Gutmann. ‘On the
Börse  th e Ephrussi ha ve the best repu tation in V ienna,’ wrote Gutmann to
another German  banker , one He rr Siepel, on 4th April. The Ephrussi bank
was still  fundam entally viable and its reach across the Balkan s made it a
useful business partner . The G utmanns took part of the bank , putting in
twenty-five mil lion crowns, and the Berlin Bank (a predecessor of the
Deutsche Bank)  put up seventy-five million crowns. V iktor now owned
only half the family bank.
Lodged in the archives of Deutsche Bank are files and files of these
documents, the careful toing an d froing about percentages, the reports of
conversations with V iktor , the deals. But through the Manila shadings you
can still  hear the faint oscillation of V iktor ’ s voice, his weariness, in those
tumbling conson ants. The business was ‘ buchstäblich gleich Null ’. It was
‘literally zero’.
This fee ling of loss, of having fa iled to preserve an inheritance, af fected
V iktor profoundly . He was the heir: it was his legacy and he had lost it.
Each pa rt of his world had closed down – his life in Odessa, St Petersbur g,
Paris an d Londo n was finished a nd only V ienna was left, the hydrocephalic
Palais on the Ringstrasse.
Emmy , t he children and little Rudolf weren’ t exactly destitute. Nothing
had to be sold for food or fuel. But what they possessed comprised the
contents of this vast house. The netsuke still lay in their lacque r cabinet in
the dressing-roo m, and were s till dusted by Anna when she came in to
arrange the flowers on Emmy’ s dressing-table. The walls still held their
Gobelin tapestri es, their Dutch Old Masters. The French furniture was still
polished, clocks  still wound, the  wicks of candles still trimmed. The Sèvres
still lay stacked in the china closet next to the silver -room, service by
service on the linen-covered shelves. The gold dinner -servi ce with its
double E  and the proud little boat with its full sails were still in the safe.
There was still a motor -car in t he courtyard. But the life of objects within
the Palais was less mobile. The world had under gone an Umsturz , an
upheaval, and this led to a kind o f heaviness in the things that made up their
lives. Th ings now had to be preserved, sometimes even cheri shed, where
before they had been just a background, a gilt-and-varnish blur to a busy
social lif e. The uncounted and the unmeasured started at last to be counted
very accurately .
There was a huge falling away; things were so much better and fuller
before. Perhaps this was when there were the very first intimations of
nostalgia. I begin to think that keeping things and losing them a re not polar
opposites. Y ou keep this silver snuf f-box, a token for standing as second in
a duel, a lifetim e ago. Y ou kee p the bracelet given by a lover . V iktor and
Emmy kept everything – all these possessions, all these drawers full of
things, these walls full of pictur es – but they lost their sense of  a future of
manifold possibilities. This was how they were diminished.
V ienna is sticky with nostalgia. It has breached the heavy oak door of
their house.
22. YOU MUST CHANGE YOUR LIFE
Elisabeth’ s first term at univers ity was chaotic. The financial situation of
V ienna U niversity had become so critical that an appeal was was made to
Austria in general, and V ienna in particular , for help. ‘If assistance is not
promptly forthc oming the University will inevitably sink to th e level of a
little Hochschul e. The Professors are on starvation salaries…the library is
not able to fun ction.’ The annual income of a professor , co mmented a
visiting scholar , was inadequate to buy a suit and under garments  for himself
and clot hes for his wife and chil d. In January 1919, lectures we re cancelled
as there was no fuel for the lecture-halls. Against this rose the incendiary
academic climate of possibility . It was, perversely , a fantastic tim e to study:
there were Austrian – or V ien nese – schools of economics, theoretical
physics and philosophy , law , psychoanalysis (under Freud and Adler),
history and art history . Each o f these schools represented extraordinary
scholarship coupled with intense rivalry .
Elisabeth had chosen to study ph ilosophy , law and economics. It was, in
one sen se, a very Jewish choice: all three disciplines had strong Jewish
presences in the faculty . One-th ird of the legal faculty was Jewish. T o be a
lawyer , an Advokat , in V ien na mean t being an intellectual. And that is what
she was, a plain , fierce, focused intellectual eighteen-year -old i n her white
crêpe-de-Chine blouse with a black bow at the neck. It was a way of
making absolute the division between her and the emotional intermittencies
of her mother . And the slowly resur gent domestic life in the Palais, the
nursery , her noisy new infant brother , the fuss.
Elisabeth chose to study under a fearsome economist, Ludwig von
Mises, a man known in the university as der Liberale,  Mr Libertarian.
Mises w as a young economist out to make his reputation through his stress
on the implausib ility of the socialist state. There might be communists on
the s treets of V i enna, but Mises was going to find the economi c ar guments
to prove  them wrong. He starte d a small seminar circle, Privatissimum , in
which h is select ed disciples would give a paper . On 26th November 1918, a
week af ter Rudolf was born, Elisabeth gave the first talk on ‘Carver ’ s
theory of interest’. Mises’ s s tudents remembered the inten sity of the
scrutiny in these seminars, the genesis of a famous school of free-market
economics. I have her student essays on ‘Inflation und Gel dknappkeit’
(fifteen pages of small italic handwriting), on ‘Kapital ’ (thirty -two of the
same) and ‘John Henry Newman’ (thirty-eight pages).
But Elisabeth’ s passion was for poetry . She sent her poems to her
grandmother and to her friend Fanny Lowenstein-Schaf feneck, now
working in an e xciting contemporary art gallery selling the paintings of
Egon Schiele.
Elisabeth and Fanny were in love with the lyric poetry of Rainer Maria
Rilke. It consumed them: they k new the two volumes of his Neue Gedichte
( New Poems ) by  heart and waited impatie ntly for the next poem to be
published: his silence was unbearable. Rilke had been Rodin’ s amanuensis
in Paris, and afte r the war the girls had travelled with their copie s of Rilke’ s
book on the sculptor to pay homage in the Musée Rodin. Elisabeth marked
their excitement in the mar gins in pencilled rushes.
Rilke w as the great radical poet of the day . He combined direc tness of
expression with  intense sensuousness in his Dinggedichte , ‘thing poems’.
‘The thing  is definite, the art-thing  m ust be still m ore definite, removed
from all  accident, reft away from obscurity…’, Rilke wrote. Hi s poems are
full of epiphani es, moments when things come alive – a dancer ’ s first
movement is the flare of a sulp hur match. Or of moments when there is a
change i n the summer weather , a  catch in mood when you see so meone as if
for the first time.
And his poems are full of danger , ‘all art is the result of one’ s having
been in danger , of having gone through an experience all the way to the
end, where no o ne can go any further ’. This is what it is like to be an artist,
he says, breath-catchingly . Y ou are unsteady on the edge of life, like a swan,
before an ‘anxious launching o f himself/On the floods where he is gently
caught’.
‘Y ou mu st chan ge your life,’ R ilke wrote in his poem on the ‘ Archaic
T orso of Apollo’. Could any instruction be more thrilling?
It wa s no t until after Elisabeth died, aged ninety-two, that I reali sed how
important Rilke was to her . I kn ew there were some letters, but they were a
rumour , a muf fled roll of splendour . It was when I stood in front of the
statue of Apollo with his lyre in the courtyard of the Palais Ep hrussi on a
winter ’ s afterno on and haltingly tried to remember Rilke’ s poem, the
marble glistening like ‘a predator ’ s coat’, that I knew I had to find them.
Elisabeth had been given an introduction to Rilke by her uncle. P ips had
helped R ilke wh en he was stra nded in Germany by the outbr eak of war .
Now he wrote to invite Rilke to Kövecses: ‘this house is always open for
you. Y ou would make us all very happy if you would announce yourself
“sans cé rémonie”.’ And Pips begs permission for his favourite n iece to send
some po ems. El isabeth wrote – breathlessly – to Rilke in the summer of
1921, enclosing ‘Michelangelo’, a verse-drama, and asking him whether
she might dedicate it to him. T here was a long delay until the spring – a
delay occasioned by his finishing the Duino Elegies  – but then he wrote
back a five-page letter and they began to correspond, the twenty-year -old
student in V ienna and the fifty-year -old poet in Switzerland.
The corr espondence started with  a refusal. He resisted a dedication. The
best out come w ould be to have  the poem published, then the book ‘would
represent a lasting link to me… It will be a pleasure to accept being a
mentor in your first “Erstling” , but only if you don’ t name me.’ But,
continues the letter , I would be i nterested to see what you are writing. They
wrote to each other for five years. T welve very long letters from Rilke, sixty
pages i nterspersed with manu script copies of his recent poems and
translations, and many volumes of his verse with warm dedica tions of his
own.
Dr Elisabeth Ephrussi, poet and lawyer , 1922
If yo u st and in a library and loo k at Rilke’ s collected works, the  yard or
so of volumes, most of them a re letters, and most of these seem to be to
‘titled, disappointed ladies’, to borrow John Berryman’ s penetrating phrase.
Elisabeth was a young poetic b aroness, and so not unusual amongst many
of his correspondents. But Rilke was a great letter -writer , and these in
particular are wonderful letters,  exhortatory , lyrical, funny and engaged, a
testament to what he called ‘a writing friendship’. They have  never been
translated and only recently transcribed by a Rilke scholar working in
England. I move my pots to one  side and cover the tables with photocopies
of these letters. I spend a happy couple of weeks trying out possible
translations of these sinuous, rhythmical sentences with a German PhD
student.
T ranslating the work of his frie nd, the French poet Paul V alér y , Rilke
writes ab out his ‘great silence’, the years when V aléry didn’ t write poetry at
all. R ilke encloses the translatio n he has just finished. He writes about Paris
and how the rec ent death of Pro ust has af fected him, made him think of his
years th ere, working as Rodin’ s secretary , makes him wish to  return and
study again. Has Elisabeth read Proust? She should do so.
And he is very careful and particular about Elisabeth’ s situation in
V ienna. He is in trigued by the c ontrast between her academic studies at the
university where she is studying law and her poetry:
 
Be t hat as it may , dear friend, I am not anxious for your artistic  abilities, to
which I  attach such a great importance…Even though I can not foresee
which path you will decide to ta ke with your law doctorate, I find the great
contrast between  your two occup ations positive; the more diverse the life of
the m ind, the be tter the chances are that your inspiration will b e protected,
the inspiration which cannot b e predicted, that which is mot ivated from
within.’
 
Rilke reads her recent poems ‘A January Evening’, ‘Roman Night’ and
‘King O edipus’: ‘all three good, however I tend to put Oedipus over the
rest’. In this poem she writes about the King leaving the city into his exile,
his hands over his eyes, wrapped in a cloak, and that ‘the others went back
to th e palace, and all the lights were extinguished one by on e’. She has
spent enough time with her father and his Aeneid  for exile to provoke
powerful emotion in her .
If Elisab eth has time at the end of her studies, she could  read literature,
but Rilke’ s advice is ‘to look into the blue of the hyacinths. And the spring!’
He g ives her specific advice ab out her poems and about trans lation; after
all, ‘it is not the gardener who is encouraging and caring who helps, but the
one with the pruning-shears and spade; the rebuke!’ He shares his emotions
about what it is like to have fi nished a great work. Y ou feel a dangerous
buoyancy , writes Rilke, as if you could float away .
In these letters he becomes lyrical:
 
I b elieve  that in V ienna, when th e dragging wind is not cutting through you,
you can sense the spring. Cities often feel things in anticipation, a paleness
in th e lig ht, an unexpected softness in the shadows, a gleam in the windows
– a slight feeling of embarrassment of being a city…in my own experience
only Par is and (in a naïve way) Moscow absorb the whole nature of the
spring into them as if they were a landscape…
And the n he signs of f: ‘Farewell to you for now: I deeply appreciated
the warm th and  friendship of y our letter . May you keep well ! Y our true
friend RM Rilke.’
Just thin k what  it must have been like to get that letter from him.
Imagine seeing his slightly right-sloping and looping handwriting on the
envelope from Switzerland as the post is brought into the breakfast-room in
the P alais, your father at one en d opening the beige book-catalogues from
Berlin, your mother at the other with the feuilleton, your brother and sister
ar guing quietly . Imagine slitting  open the envelope and findin g that Rilke
has sent you one of his ‘Sonnets to Orpheus’ and a transcription of a poem
of V aléry . ‘It is like a fairytale. I cannot believe it belongs to me ,’ she writes
back that night from her desk pushed up against the window looking onto
the Ring.
They planned to meet. ‘Let it not be a short hour , but a real mo ment of
time,’ he writes, but they were  unable to meet each other in V ienna, and
then Elisabeth got the time wrong for their meeting in Paris and had to
leave before he arrived. I find t heir telegrams. Rilke at the Hôtel Lorius in
Montreux, 1 1H 15 to Mademoiselle Elisabeth Ephrussi, 3 rue Rabelais Paris
( Réponse payée ), and her response forty minutes later and his the next
morning.
Then he  was ill and couldn’ t tra vel, and there is a hiatus while Rilke is
in the sanatorium where they are trying to treat him; then a final letter a
fortnight before  his death. And later a package from Rilke’ s widow in
Switzerland re turning Elisab eth’ s letters to him, reuniting the
correspondence into one envelop e, carefully marked and carefully put away
in one drawer and then another over Elisabeth’ s long life.
As a present ‘for my dear  niece Elisabeth’, uncle Pips had
‘Michelangelo’ written and illum inated by a scribe in Berlin on vellum, like
a medieval missal, and bound in green buckram. It is a gentle echo of an
early volume of Rilke’ s The Boo k of Hours , w here each sta nza is initialled
in carmi ne. Thi s is one of the books my father remembered having, and
looked o ut and brought down t o my studio. I have it on my desk now . I
open it up and there is the epigraph from Rilke and then her poem. It is
quite good, I think, this poem about a sculptor making things. I t is properly
Rilkean.
When she was e ighty , and I was  fourteen or so, I started sending her my
schoolboy poetr y and would get in return careful critiques and suggestions
of w hat to read. I read poetry al l the time. I had a passionate, si lent longing
for the girl in th e bookshop where on Saturday afternoons I w ould spend
my pocket money on slim volumes of Faber poets. I carried poetry in my
pocket at all times.
Elisabeth’ s criticism was direct. She hated sentimentality , ‘emotional
inexactitude’. She thought there was no point in having formal poetic
structures if they didn’ t scan. No points for my sonnet sequence on the
dark-haired girl in the booksho p then. But her greatest scorn was for the
indefinite, a blurring of the real in rushes of emotion.
When sh e died I inherited many of her books of poetry . Her personal
numbering syste m means that Rilke’ s Das Stunden-Buch  i s no. 2 6, his book
on Rodin no. 28 , Stefan Geor ge is EE no. 36 and her grandmot her ’ s books
of poems are nos 63 and 64. I send my father of f to a university library that
has some of her books to check when she read them, and I have  to stop as I
find myself late at night looking through Elisabeth’ s copies of French
poetry , the twelve volumes of Proust, early editions of Rilke, for comments
in the mar gins, scraps of for gotten lyric, a lost letter . I remember Saul
Bellow’ s Herzog  spending his n ights shaking out banknotes that he had left
in volumes as bookmarks.
When I do find things, I wish I hadn’ t. I find a transcription by her of a
poem by Rilke written on the back of a page from a desk diary from
Sonntag Juli 6  (Sunday , 6th July), black and red like a missal. There is a
translucent gentian marking a page in Rilke’ s Ephemeriden ; the address of a
Herr Pannwitz in V ienna tucked  into V aléry’ s Charmes ; a photograph of the
sitting-room at Kövecses in Du côté de chez Swann . An d I feel like a
bookseller judging the sunning of the cover of a book, marking the
annotations, ass essing its possible interest. It is not only a tres pass on her
reading, which feels strange an d inappropriate, but close to a cliché. I am
turning real encounters into dried flowers.
I rem ember that Elisabeth didn’ t really have much feel for the w orld of
objects, netsuke  and porcelain, just as she disliked the fuss and bother
around w hich cl othes you put o n in the morning. In her last fla t she had a
great wall of books, and only a narrow white shelf on which we re balanced
a sm all Chinese terracotta of  a dog and three lidded jars. She was
supportive of my making pots – and wrote me a handsome c heque once
when I was tryi ng to build my first kiln – but was mildly amused by the
idea of me mak ing things for a living. But what she loved was  poetry , the
world of  things,  hard and define d and alive, made lyrical. She would have
hated my fetishising of her books.
In V ienn a in the Palais Ephrussi  there are three rooms in a row .  On one
side is Elisabeth ’ s room, a sort of library , where she sits and writes poetry
and essays and letters to her poetic grandmother Evelina, to Fanny and to
Rilke. On the other is V iktor ’ s library . In the centre is Emmy’ s dressing-
room wi th its great mirror and d ressing-table with its posy of f lowers from
Kövecses and the vitrine of netsuke. It is opened less often.
These ar e hard years for Emmy .  She is in her early forties, with children
who nee d her attention but who turn away . They all worry her  in dif ferent
ways, an d they no longer come to sit and talk and confide abou t their days
as sh e d resses. There is the little boy in the nursery to complicate things.
She takes them to the Opera as i t is neutral territory: T annhäuser  with Iggie
on 28th May 1922, T osca  with Gisela on 21st September 1923, and the
whole family to Die Fledermaus  in December .
In these hard ye ars there are not quite so many excuses for dre ssing up
in V ienna. Anna is no less busy here – a lady’ s maid is always kept busy –
but the room is no longer the centre of the life of the house. It is quiet.
I thi nk o f this room and remember Rilke writing of ‘a vibrating stillness
like that in a vitrine’.
23. ELDORADO 5–0050
The three older children leave the city .
Elisabeth, poet, is the first to g o. She receives a doctorate in law in
1924, the first given to a woman from the University of V ienna. And then a
Rockefeller Sch olarship to travel to America – she is of f. She is
redoubtable, my grandmother , clever and focused, and she w rites about
American archit ecture and idealism for a German journal, how the ardour
and fervour of skyscrapers fit with contemporary philosophy . When she
returns she moves to Paris to st udy political science. She is in love with a
Dutchman she met in V ienna, recently divorced from a cousin of hers, with
a little boy from the marriage.
The beautiful Gisela is next. Sh e marries well, a lovely Spanish banker
called A lfredo B auer , from a ric h Jewish family . The couple are  married in
the s ynagogue in V ienna, which  causes confusion for the secul ar Ephrussi,
who are  unsure of what to do, where to sit or stand. There is a p arty for the
young c ouple an d the great floor of the Palais is opened up for a proper
reception in the gilt ballroom under Ignace’ s triumphant ceilings. Gisela is
ef fortlessly styli sh in a long cardigan and a silver belt low over a print skirt,
a d ark black-and -white dress with a string of dark beads for going away in.
She has an open smile and Alfr edo is handsome and bearded. The couple
move to Madrid in 1925.
Then Elisabeth sends the young  Dutchman, Hendrik de W aal, a note to
say t hat she has heard he is com ing through Paris on Friday wee k and might
they me et? Her phone number is Gobelius 12–85, if he could ring. Henk
was tall with slig htly thinning hair and wore very good suits – grey with the
slightest of charcoal stripes – and a monocle and he smoked Russian
cigarettes. He had grown up in Amsterdam on the Prinzengrac ht, the only
son of a merch ant family that imported cof fee and cocoa. He was well
travelled and played the violin and was charming and very funny . And he
also wrote poetry . I’m not sure  if my grandmother , who at twenty-seven
was wearing her hair drawn back in a severe bun and had round black
spectacles worth y of a Baronin Doktor Ephrussi, had ever b efore been
wooed by such a man. She adored him.
I fin d their we dding notice in the archives of the Adler So ciety in
V ienna. It is rather elegantly printed. W e are gemeinde  (compelled to/led
to/unable not to) announce, it reads, that Elisabeth von Ephrussi  has already
married Hendrik  de W aal. And then V iktor and Emmy’ s na mes in one
corner and the d e W aal parents in the other . My grandparents – one Dutch
Reformed Churc h, the other Jewish – were married in the Anglican church
in Paris.
The gen ealogists are amused by this notice and this use of th is word
gemeinde , with its undercurrents of familial complexity .
Elisabeth and Henk bought an apartment in Paris in the rue Spo ntini in
the 16th arrondissement and furnished it in the newest art deco taste, with
armchairs and carpets by Ruhlmann and rather excitingly moderne  metal
lamps a nd glass ware of impossible lightness from the W iener W erkstätte.
They hu ng lar ge reproductions  of paintings by V an Gogh and, briefly ,
housed a Schiele landscape in th e drawing-room that they bought in V ienna
from Fa nny’ s ga llery . I have a couple of photographs of this apartment, and
you can sense the complete delight this couple took in creating it, the
pleasures of buying new things, rather than inheriting stuf f. No gilt, no
Junge Frauen , no Dutch chests. And no family portraits at all.
When things were going well, t hey lived in this apartment with Henk’ s
son Rob ert and  their two little  boys, born soon after their marriage, my
father V ictor – known, like his g randfather V iktor , by his Russian nickname
T ascha –  and my uncle Constant Hendrik. They played every  day in the
Bois de Boulogn e. When things were going well there was a go verness and
a cook and a maid, and even a  chauf feur , and Elisabeth wrote poetry and
articles for Le Figar o  and improved her Dutch.
Sometimes, when it was wet, sh e would take the boys to the gallery of
the Jeu de Paume on the edge of the T uileries gardens. Here in the long,
bright ro oms the y would look at  the Manets and Degas and Monets coll. C.
Ephrussi , left  to the museum in memory of her uncle Charles by Fanny and
her husb and Thé odore Reinach, the clever scholar who had married into the
family . There are cousins in Paris, but Charles’ s generation has gone,
trailing benefactions to the country it adopted. The Reinachs h ave left the
V illa Kerylos, a fabulous re-cr eation of a Greek temple, to France, and
great-aunt Béatrice Ephrussi-Rothschild has bequeathed the ros e-pink villa
in Cap Ferrat to the Académie française. The Camondos have given their
collections, and the Cahen d’Anvers have given their chateau outside Paris,
too. It is seventy  years since all these first Jewish families built their houses
on the golden rue de Monceau and they are giving something back to this
generous country .
In te rms of relig ious faith it is an interesting marriage. Henk had grown
up in a severe family – they loo k doomed in their black suits and dresses –
but had convert ed to become M ennonite. Elisabeth, who felt  completely
confident of her Jewishness, wa s reading the Christian mystics and talking
about conversion. Not expedient conversion for marriage, or to fit in with
the neighbours, or to Catholicis m – I’m not sure if any Jewish girl brought
up in V ienna opposite the V otiv kirche would choose to do that – but to the
Church of England. They go to the Anglican church in Paris.
When t hings did not go well with the Anglo-Batavian T rading
Company , Henk lost a lot of his own money , and other people’ s too. He lost,
inter alia , a fortune belonging to Piz, the wild cousin and childh ood friend,
who had  become an up-and-coming Expression-ist painter and was living a
bohemian life in Frankfurt. Losing this amount of money was a nightmare,
and the maid and the chauf feur  were let go and the furniture w as put into
storage in Paris and there were discussions of labyrinthine complexity .
Henk’ s incompetence with money was dif ferent from his father -in-law
V iktor ’ s. Henk could make num bers dance. My father talks of how he could
scan three columns, take away a nother column and conjure a (correct) total
with a smile. It was just that he believed he could do the same sleight of
hand wi th mone y . He believed that it was all going to come right, that the
markets would move, the ship s would come into port and that fortunes
would c lick back together like his slim shagreen cigarette case. He was,
simply , deluded in his abilities.
And I understan d that V iktor nev er believed he had any control over the
columns of figures at all. I wonder , very belatedly , what it w as like for
Elisabeth to realise that she had  married a man almost as poor with money
as her father .
Iggie graduated from the Schottengymnasium and was the third to
leave. I have his graduation photograph and can’ t find him at first, until I
suddenly recognise a rather portly young man in the back row in a double-
breasted suit. He looks like a stockbroker . Bow-tie and handkerchief, a
young man practising how to s tand properly , how to look convincing. Do
you, for instance, stand with one hand in your pocket? Or are two hands in
pockets better? Or even, this is most endearing, one hand  inside the
waistcoat, a clubman  pose.
T o celebrate the end of his scho oling, he went for a motoring tour with
his child hood friends the Gutmanns, from V ienna to Paris the long way
round through northern Italy and the Riviera in a Hispano-Suiza, an
elephantine car of fabled luxury . In some cold, bright pass somewhere, three
young things sit in the back with the hood down, swaddled in their
motoring coats with goggles up over their motoring caps. Thei r luggage is
piled in front of them. A chauf fe ur hovers. The bonnet of the car disappears
to the left of the photograph and the boot of the car disappears to the right.
It fe els b alanced on the faintest breath of a fulcrum, hovering be tween deep
descents.
It would have b een dif ficult to have Elisabeth as an older sister if you
were aca demic: Iggie was not bo okish. The family finances are n ot so rocky
in these days – Emmy , an elegant forty-five, is buying clothes again – but
Iggie does need to concentrate and not just spend his time watching endless
looping afternoons of films in the cinemas. V iktor and Emm y are clear
about hi s future . Iggie should join the bank, turn left and left again each
morning with his father , sit at a desk under the shield with the little boat
ploughing its way onwards, Quod honestum,  through the generations from
Joachim to Ignace and Léon, and  then to V iktor and Jules, and n ow to Iggie.
Iggie was, after all, the only young man in the whole of the extended
Ephrussi family , Rudolf being a rather gor geous child of seven.
The fact that Iggie was not particularly good with his figures was swept
aside. Plans were made for him  to continue his studies in finance at the
university in Cologne. This had  the advantage of allowing Pip s – now on
his s econd marriage, this time to a glamorous film actress – to keep an
avuncular eye on him. Iggie w as given a tiny car as a gesture towards
independent living, and he looks good in it. He survived this or deal – three
whole years of German lectures – and started work in a Frankfurt bank,
which ‘gave me the opportunity to acquaint myself with all phases of the
banking business’ as he drily put it in a letter years later .
He wou ld not talk of these years, except to say to me that being a
Jewish banker in Germany in the Depression was unwise . T hese were the
years of the Nazi ascendancy w hen the votes for Hitler spira lled higher ,
when the paramilitary SA doub led its membership to 400,000, and when
street battles became part of the life of cities. Hitler was  appointed
Chancellor on 30th January 1933 and a month later , after the Reichstag fire,
thousands were taken into ‘preventive detention’. The lar gest of these new
detention camps was on the edge of Bavaria in Dachau.
In July 1933 Iggie was expected back in V ienna to start at the bank.
It w as n ot wise  t o stay in Germ any , but it was not a propitious time to
return to  Austria . V ienna was tu rbulent. The Austrian Chancello r , Engelbert
Dollfuss, had suspended the c onstitution in the face of incre asing Nazi
pressure. Ther e were violent confrontations between police and
demonstrators, a nd some days V iktor did not even go to th e bank, but
waited impatiently all day for the evening papers to be brought to him in the
library .
Iggie did  not turn up. He ran aw ay . The list of reasons for running away
started w ith the bank – the smir k that the doorman always gav e him – but
tangled into V ienna. And then tangled further into family: Pa pa, the old
cook Clara and her welcoming veal pie with potato salad, Anna fussing
over his shirts, h is room with its  Biedermeier bed waiting for him along the
familiar long corridor , past the dressing-room, the counterpane turned down
at six.
Iggie ran to Paris. He began work in a ‘third-rung fashion  house’
learning how to sketch tea-gown s. He spent nights learning how to cut in an
atelier , s tarting to sense how th e scissors slip across a billow ing field of
green sh ot-silk. Four hours’ sleep on the floor of a friend’ s ap artment and
then cof fee and back to drawing. Fifteen minutes for lunch, cof fee, and back
again.
He is poor: he le arns the tricks to keeping clothes clean and sm art, how
to take in and hem cuf fs. He has a small allowance from V ienna that
continues, witho ut comment, from his parents. And though it must be
mortifying for V iktor to explain to his friends that Iggie is not  joining the
firm – and perha ps he mumbles when asked what Iggie is actually doing in
Paris – I wonder if he has sym pathy for his son. V iktor must know about
running away and not running away , just as Emmy must know about
staying.
Iggie is twenty- eight. As with E mmy , clothes are a vocation. All those
nightly hours in the dressing-r oom with the netsuke and Anna and his
mother , smoothi ng down a dress , comparing lace details at cuf f or neck. All
those dressing-up games with Gisela, the trunk of old gowns kept in the
box-room at the far corner . The old copies of W iener Mode , por ed o ver on
the parquetry floor of the salon. Iggie could tell you how the trousers of one
imperial regiment dif fered in cut from another and how you could wear
crêpe de Chine on the bias. And now , finally , he finds that he is not as good
as he had hoped, but he has started.
And then, after nine hard months, he runs away again, to New Y ork, to
boys and to fash ion. This was a  trinity so wonderful in its cadence that in
very old  age he couldn’ t help sm ilingly describing the voyage to New Y ork
as a sort of baptismal crossing from one life to another , a voyage in some
way into himself.
I know a little a bout this from his wry attempts to make me dress better
when I first stayed with him in T okyo. It was during that hot, humid June in
Iggie’ s a partment, earnest and gushing and rather grubby from my travels,
that I first unde rstood not that clothes mattered, but how  they mattered.
Iggie and Jiro, his friend in the interlocking apartment, took me to
Mitsukoshi, the grand department store in the centre of the Gi nza, to buy
some proper clothes, some line n jackets for the summer and some shirts
with collars. My jeans and co llarless shirts were taken away by their
housekeeper Mr s Nakano and returned rehemmed, folded with little pins
across th e cuf fs and all my buttons restored to full array . Some things did
not re-emer ge.
On a much later visit to T okyo, Jiro gave me a small card that he had
found: ‘ Baron I. Leo Ephrussi begs to announce his association with
Dorothy Couteaur Inc. formerly of Molyneux, Paris’. The address is 695
Fifth A venue and the phone number Eldorado 5-0050. It seems appropriate.
Fashion was El D orado for Iggie: he has dropped the Ignace bit for Leo, but
kept the Baron in place.
Iggie’ s invitation, 1936
For Dor othy Co uteaur Inc. – a name straight out of Nabokov with its
mocking, drawling version of coutur e  – Iggie designed ‘The Free-Swi nging
Coat’, sh own ‘p osed smartly over a diagonally tucked sheer crêpe frock in
beige, with beige also the background color of the novelty silk crêpe coat
patterned in brown swallows’ . It is very brown indeed. Iggie mostly
designed ‘Sophi sticated gowns for the smart American woman’, though I
did find a reference to ‘Smart Accessories shown for the first time in
California. Belts, Bags, Ceramic Jewelry and Compacts’, which shows
either his financial straits or his astuteness. In W omen’ s W ear Daily  for 1 1
March 1 937 ther e was ‘an impo rtant type of evening ensemble t hat makes a
point of an inter esting fabric alliance, the gown reflecting Grecian influence
in mother -of-pearl satin jersey , the coat in the gayest red chif fon, with pin-
tucks for surface decoration. The scarf can be worn as a girdle on the coat,
giving a redingote suggestion.’
‘An inte resting fabric alliance’  is a wonderful phrase. I look at the
illustration for a long time for the ‘redingote suggestion’.
It w as only whe n I found his design of cruise-wear based on U S Navy
signal fl ags that I realised just how much fun Iggie was havin g. It shows
girls dressed in shorts and skirts being run up the rigging by magnificent
swarthy sailors, while the code helpfully informs us that th e girls are
wearing signals for ‘I need to  have personal communication with you’,
‘Y ou are clear o f all danger ’, ‘I am on fire’ and ‘I cannot h old out any
longer ’.
New Y ork was full of newly impoverished Russians, Austri ans and
Germans escaping Europe, an d Iggie was one of many . His minute
allowance from V ienna had fina lly petered to nothing and his earnings from
his desig ns were  meagre, but he was a happy man. He found his first great
love: Robin Curtis, a dealer in a ntiques, slightly younger , slim and fair . In a
domestic picture  in their apartment shared with Robin’ s sister on the Upper
East Sid e, with both men in pin-striped suits, Iggie perches on the arm of a
chair . There are joint family photographs on their mantelpiece behind them.
In other  picture s they are larking around on a beach in their trunks, in
Mexico, in LA: a couple.
Iggie really did get away .
Elisabeth wouldn’ t sanction m oving back to V ienna. But when the
finances became intolerable – clients had let Henk down, prom ises had not
been fu lfilled, et cetera – she took the boys of f to a farmhouse in
Oberbozen, a beautiful village i n the Italian T yrol. The village had its own
cacophonous ba nd of drums on feast days, and meadows of gentians. It was
beautiful, and the air was mar vellous for the children’ s complexion, but
above all it was  very , very chea p with none of the expenses of a Parisian
lifestyle. The children went briefly to the local school, before she decided to
teach th em hers elf. Henk stayed in Paris and London trying to retrieve the
losses of his T rading Company . ‘When he came to see us,’ my father
recalled, ‘we were told to be very quiet as he was very , very tired.’
Sometimes Elisabeth took the children back to V ienna to see their
grandparents and their uncle Rudolf, now a teenager . The chauf feur took
V iktor and the grandchildren out in the back of the long black car .
Emmy w as not terribly well – a heart condition – and had started  to take
pills. She looks much older in th e few pictures of her from these years, and
slightly surprise d by middle ag e, but is still beautifully dressed  in a black
cloak w ith a white collar , a hat  pinned at an angle to her gre y curls, one
hand on my father and another on my uncle’ s shoulder . Anna must be
looking after her well. And she still falls in love.
She says  she is not ready to be a grandmother , but she sends my father a
series of colourful postcards from the stories of Hans Christian Anderson,
‘The Swineherd ’, ‘The Princess and the Pea’, ‘Jack and the Beanstalk’.
Dozens of cards each with a sh ort message, one every week w ithout fail,
each one signed ‘with a thousa nd kisses from Y our Grandmother ’. Emmy
still cannot resist telling stories.
Rudolf, growing up at home, without his sisters or his brother from one
year to the next , is tall and handsome and in one picture he is dressed in
riding breeches and an army greatcoat, framed by a doorway in the salon of
the P alais. He p lays the saxophone. Its echo must have sounded glorious in
the increasingly empty rooms.
Elisabeth and the boys spent a f ortnight in V ienna at the Palais in July
1934, th e weeks  in which there was an attempted coup led by the Austrian
SS, in which Chancellor Dollfuss was assassinated in his of fice , the signal
for a Nazi uprising. It was put down with heavy casualties, and the new
Chancellor Kurt Schuschnigg was sworn in against a real fear of civil war .
My father remembers waking in the nursery in the Palais and running to the
window to see a  fire-truck rattling down the Ring with its bells ringing. I
have tri ed to get him to remember more (Nazi demonstrati ons? armed
police? crisis?), but he is not suggestible. A fire-truck is the alpha and
omega of his 1934 V ienna.
V iktor hardly pretends to be a banker any more. Perhap s as a
consequence of this, or the competence of his deputy , Herr Steinhausser , the
bank is doing well. He still goes to the bank every day , wher e he studies
long, closely printed catalogues from Leipzig and Heidelber g. H e has taken
up collecting incunabula, early printed books, and his particular passion –
more int ense since the crumbling of the Empire – is for Roman history . The
books are kept in the library  overlooking the Schottengass e in a tall
bookcase with a mesh door , and  the key is kept on his watch chain. Early
printed Latin histories seem a characteristically abstruse thing – and an
expensive thing – to collect, but he is interested in empires.
V iktor and Emmy holiday toget her at Kövecses, but since the death of
her p arents it is a strangely diminished place, with only a coup le of horses
in th e stables a nd fewer gamekeepers and no great weekend  shoots any
more. E mmy walks down to th e bend in the river , past the wil lows where
you can get the  breeze, and ba ck before dinner as she used to with the
children, but with her heart problem she is quite slow . The swi mming lake
has been let go. Its edges are susurrating reeds.
The Ephrussi children are dispersed. Elisabeth is still in the Alps, but
has mov ed to Ascona in Switzerland and comes to V ienna with her boys
when she can. Anna makes a great fuss of them. Iggie is now designing
cruise-wear in Hollywood. And  Gisela and her family have had to leave
Madrid for Mexico because of the Spanish Civil W ar .
By 1938 Emmy is fifty-eight years old and is still very handsome, her
rope of pearls looping around h er neck and down to her waist. V ienna is a
chaotic place to be living in, but life in the Palais is strangely  immobile.
There are eight servants to keep this stasis perfect. Nothing really happens,
though t he table is set in the d ining-room for one o’clock, and again for
dinner at eight, but this time it is Rudolf who does not appear . He is out, she
says, at all hours.
V iktor is seventy-eight and looks exactly like his  father – and like the
portrait of his cousin Charles printed with his obituary . I think of Swann in
his old age, when all his features have become lar ger: the Ephr ussi nose is
resplendent. I look at a picture o f V iktor with his neatly trimmed beard and
realise th at he looks like my  f ath er d oes now , and wonder ho w long I’ve got
before I too start to look like this.
V iktor is so anx ious that he read s several of the papers each day . He is
right to be anxious. There have been years of overt pressure and covert
funding by Germany of the Austrian National Socialists. Hitler has now
demanded that the Austrian Chancellor , Schuschnigg, release members of
the Naz i Party from prison and let them participate in government.
Schuschnigg has  complied. The pressure has increased and now he has had
enough. He has decided to hold a plebiscite on Austria’ s independence from
the Nazi Reich on 13th March.
When V iktor go es to the W iener  Club on the Kärtner Ring on T hursday
10th Ma rch for lunch with his Jewish friends (out the door , tu rn left, 500
yards on  the left) the afternoon disappears in smoky debate about what is
happening. History is not helping V iktor .

P a r t  T h r e e
VIENNA, KÖVECSES, TUNBRIDGE WELLS, VIENNA
1938–1947

24. ‘AN IDEAL SPOT FOR MASS MARCHES’
On 1 0th March 1938 the hopes for the plebiscite were high. T he previous
evening in Innsbruck the Austr ian Chancellor had given a rin ging speech
invoking an old T yrolean hero : ‘Men – the hour has struck!’ It was a
gor geous winter  day , bright an d clear . There were leaflets everywhere,
scattered from trucks, and poste rs illustrated with a dramatic ‘ Ja! ’ on them.
‘W ith Schuschn igg for a free Austria!’ There were the cro sses of the
Fatherland Front painted in white on the walls of buildings and on
pavements. There were crowds in the streets and columns of youth groups
chanting ‘ Heil Schuschnigg! Heil Liberty! ’ And ‘Red-White-Red until
Death!’ The radio played endless broadcasts of Schuschnigg’ s speech. The
Israelitische Kultusgemeinde put up the huge sum of 500,000 schillings –
$80,000 – to help towards the campaign of support: the plebiscite was a
bastion for the Jews of V ienna.
Before dawn on Friday 1 1th the head of the V ienna polic e woke
Schuschnigg to tell him of troo p movements on the German border . Rail
traf fic had been stopped. It was another bright and sunny morning. It was
the last day of Austria, a day of ultimata from Berlin, desperate attempts
from V ienna to see if London or Paris, or Rome, would su pport them
against the increasing German  demands for the Chancellor t o resign in
favour of a pro-Hitler minister , Artur von Seyss-Inquart.
On 1 1th March the IKG ad ded an extra 300,000 schillings to
Schuschnigg’ s c ampaign. There  were rumours that columns of  troops had
crossed over the border from Germany , rumours that the plebisc ite might be
postponed.
The radio – a huge English radio – brown and impressive, with a dial
with names of capital cities on it, is kept in the library , and V iktor and
Emmy spend the afternoon there, listening. Even Rudolf joins them. At
half-past four Anna brings in V i ktor ’ s tea in a glass with the po rcelain dish
bearing a slice of lemon and the sugar , and Emmy her English tea and the
little blue Meissen box with the pills for her heart condition. Th ere is cof fee
for Rudolf, who is nineteen and  contrary . Anna puts the tray on the library
table with its book rest. At seven o’clock Radio V ienna reveals the
postponement of  the plebiscite and then, a few minutes later , the resignation
of the entire cab inet except for t he Nazi-sympathising Seyss-Inquart, who is
to stay on as Interior Minister .
At ten to eight Schuschnigg broadcasts: ‘Austrian men and women!
This day  has brought us face to face with a serious and decisive situation…
The governmen t of the German Reich presented an ultimatum to the
Federal President demanding t hat he choose a candidate chosen by the
Reich government to the of fice of Chancellor…or…German troops would
begin to  cross our frontiers this very hour…W e have, because even in this
solemn h our we are not willing to spill German blood, ordered our army , in
case an invasion is carried o ut, to pull back without any substantial
resistance to await the decisions of the next few hours. So in this hour I take
my leave of the Austrian people  with a German word and a heartfelt wish:
God pro tect Aus tria.’ Gott schütze Österr eich . And then the music plays for
the ‘Gott er halte’ , the Austrian national anthem.
It is as if a switch has been thrown. There are runnels of noise d own the
street, the Schottengasse echoin g with voices. They are shouting, ‘Ein V olk,
ein Reich, ein Führ er!’  and ‘Heil Hi tler , Sieg  Heil!’  And they are screaming
‘Jude V err eke!’  – Perish Judah! Death to the Jews!
It is  a flood of brown shirts. Th ere are taxi horns blaring and there are
men wit h weapons on the stree ts, and somehow the police have swastika
armbands. There  are trucks rush ing along the Ring, past the house, past the
university towards the T own Hall. And the trucks have swastik as on them,
and the trams h ave swastikas on them, and there are young men and boys
hanging of f them, shouting and waving.
And someone turns out the lights in the library , as if being in the dark
will ma ke them  invisible, but the noise reaches into the house, into the
room, in to their  lungs. Someone is being beaten in the street b elow . What
are they going to do? How long can you pretend this is not happening?
Some friends pack a suitcase and go out into the street, push through
these swirling, eddying masses of ecstatic citizens of V ienna to get to the
W estbahnhof. T he night train to Prague leaves at 1 1.15, but by nine it is
completely pack ed. Men in uniforms swarm through the train and pull
people of f.
By 1 1.15 Nazi flags are hang ing from the parapets of gov ernment
ministries. At half-past midnight  President Miklas gives in and approves the
cabinet. At 1.08 a.m. a Major K lausner announces from the balcony ‘with
deep emotion in this festive hour that Austria is free, that Austria is
National Socialist’.
There ar e queues of people on foot or in cars at the Czech frontier . The
radio is now playing the ‘Badenweiler ’ and the ‘Hohenfriedber ger ’,
German military  marches. These are interspersed with slogans. The first
Jewish shop windows are broken.
And it is on that  first night that the sounds of the street become s houting
in th e E phrussi courtyard, echoi ng around the walls and of f the roof. Then
there are  feet pounding up the stairs, the thirty-three shallow steps to the
apartment on the second floor .
There are fists on the door , someone leaning on the bell, and t here are
eight or ten, a knot of them in some sort of uniform – some w ith swastika
armbands, some  familiar . Some are still boys. It is one o’c lock in the
morning and no one is asleep, e veryone is dressed. V iktor and Emmy and
Rudolf are pushed into the library .
This first night they swarm th rough the apartment. There are shouts
from across the courtyard, as a c ouple of them have found the salon with its
French ensembles of furniture  and porcelain. There is laughter from
someone as Emmy’ s closet is ransacked. Someone bangs out a tune on the
piano keys. Some men are in the study pulling out drawers, roug hing up the
desks, p ushing the folios of f th e stand in the corner . They come into the
library and tip t he globes from their stands. This convulsive disordering,
messing up, sweeping of f is bar ely looting; it is a stretching of muscles, a
cracking of the knuckles, a loosening up. The people in the c orridors are
checking, looking, exploring, working out what is here.
They tak e the silver candlesticks held up by slightly drunken fauns from
the dining-room, small animals in malachite from mantelpieces, silver
cigarette boxes, money held in a clip from a desk in V iktor ’ s study . A small
Russian clock, pink enamel and  gold, that rang the hours in the  salon. And
the lar ge clock from the library with its golden dome held up by columns.
They ha ve walk ed past this hous e for years, glimpsed faces at windows,
seen into the cou rtyard as the doorman holds the gate open while the fiacre
trots in. They are inside now , a t last. This is how the Jews li ve, how the
Jews use d our money – room aft er room stacked with stuf f, opul ence. These
are a few souvenirs, a bit of redistribution. It is a start.
The last door th ey reach is Em my’ s dressing-room in the corner , the
room wi th the vitrine containing  the netsuke, and they sweep everything of f
the desk she uses as a dressing-table: the small mirror and the po rcelain and
the silve r boxes and the flowers sent up from the meadows in K övecses that
Anna arranges in the vase, and they drag the desk out into the corridor .
They pu sh Emm y and V iktor an d Rudolf against the wall, and three of
them heave the desk and send it crashing over the handrail until, with a
sound o f splintering wood and gilt and marquetry , it hits the st one flags of
the courtyard below .
This desk – the wedding-present from Fanny and Jules, from Paris –
takes a long time to fall. The so unds ricochet of f the glass roof.  The broken
drawers scatter letters across the courtyard.
Y ou think you own us, you fucking foreign shit.  Y ou’ll be fucking next,
you shit, you fucking  Jews.
This is a W ilde,  unsanctioned Aryanisation. No sanction is needed.
The sound of thi ngs breaking is the reward for waiting for so long. This
night is full of these rewards. It has been a long time coming. This night is
the s tory told by  grandparents to grandchildren, the story of how one night
the J ews will finally be held accountable for all they have done, for all they
have rob bed of f the poor; of how  the streets will be cleaned, how light will
be shon e into all the dark places. Because it is all about dirt, about the
pollution the Jews brought to th e imperial city from their stinking hovels,
the way they took what was ours.
All across V ienna doors are broken down, as children hide behind their
parents, under beds, in cupboards – anywhere to get away from the noise as
fathers and brothers are arrested and beaten up and pulled outside into
trucks, as mothers and sisters a re abused. And across V ienna people help
themselves to what should be theirs, is theirs by right.
It is not that you cannot sleep. Y ou cannot go to bed. When these men
go, whe n these men and boys fi nally go, they say that they’ll be back, and
you know they m ean it. Emmy i s wearing her pearls and they take them of f.
They tak e her rings. Someone pauses to spit handsomely at your feet. And
they cla tter down the stairs, shouting until they reach the courtyard. One
takes a run to kick the debris, a nd they are out through the doors onto the
Ring, a lar ge clock under an overcoated arm.
Snow is on its way .
In th at g rey daw n, on Sunday 13 th March, when there should ha ve been
the plebiscite for a free, German, independent, social, Christian and united
Austria, there are neighbours o n their hands and knees scrubb ing away at
the streets of V ienna – kids and the elderly , the man who  owned the
newspaper kiosk on the Ring, the orthodox, the liberal, the pious and the
radical, the old men who knew  their Goethe and believed in Bildung , the
violin teacher and her mother – surrounded by SS, by Gestapo and by
NSDAP (Nazi Party) members,  by policemen and by the people they have
lived ne xt to for years and years. Jeered at, spat at, shouted at, beaten,
bruised. Scrubbing away at the Schuschnigg plebiscite slogans, making
V ienna clean again, making V ienna ready . W e thank our Führer . He’ s
created work for the Jews.
In a photograph a young man in his shiny jacket oversees the middle-
aged women on their knees in the soapy water . And he has ro lled up his
trouser legs to make sure they do not get damp. It is all about the dirty and
the clean.
The house has been breache d. And that morning, as my  great-
grandmother and  great-grandfather sit in silence in the library , there is Anna
picking up the p hotographs of cousins from the floor , sweeping  the broken
fragments of porcelain and marquetry away , straightening pictur es, trying to
get the carpets clean, trying to close the door that has been opened.
All that day squadrons of Luftwaf fe planes fly low over V ienna. V iktor
and Emmy do not know what to do. They do not know where to go, as that
Sunday morning  the first Germ an troops cross the border to be met with
flowers and crowds. The story is that Hitler is returning home to visit the
grave of his mother .
All t hat day there are arrests – arrests of anyone who has supported any
previous political party , prominent journalists, financiers, civil servants,
Jews. S chuschnigg is in solitary confinement. That evening there is a
torchlit procession through the city led by the NSDAP . There is the din of
‘ Deutschland, De utschland über  Alles ’ sung in the bars. It takes Hitler six
hours to  make the journey from Linz to V ienna. It takes this long  because of
the crowds.
On Mon day 14th March Hitler arrives: ‘before the shadows of the
evening sank over V ienna, when the wind died down and the many flags
fell silent in fest ive rigidity , the great hour became reality and the Führer of
the united German people entered the capital of the Ostmark’.
The Car dinal of  V ienna has ordered the bells of Austria to ring, and the
bells of the V otivkirche opposi te the Palais Ephrussi start pealing in the
afternoon, and the noise of the W ehrmacht  as it grinds round the Ring
makes the house shake. There are flags: flags with swastik as and old
Austrian flags with swastikas painted on them. There are kids climbing the
linden trees. There are already maps in the bookshop windows showing the
new Europe: one solid German nation stretching from Alsace-Lorraine to
the Sudetenland to the Baltic to the T yrol. Half the map is Germany .
On T uesday 15th March the cro wds start early past the Schott engasse,
past the Palais Ephrussi, along the Ring, all going in one direction, towards
the Held enplatz, the Place of Heroes, the huge square outside the Hofbur g;
200,000 people are jammed into the square and the streets. They cling to the
statues, to the branches of trees, to railings. There are figures on the
parapets silhouetted against the  sky . At eleven o’clock Hitler comes onto
the balcony . He can hardly be heard. As he comes to his per oration, the
noise prevents him speaking for  minutes on end. Y ou can hear it all the way
to the Schottengasse. Then: ‘In this hour I can report to the Ger man people
the greatest accomplishment of my life, as Führer and Chancellor of the
German nation and the Reich, I can announce before history the entry of my
homeland into the German Reich.’ ‘The scenes of infatuation at Hitler ’ s
arrival defy description,’ writes the Neue Basler Zeitung .
The Ring is made for this, the massed crowds, the parade ground of
emotion, the uniforms. As a student in 1908, Hitler had planned two huge
arches to  complete the Heldenplatz, an architectural climax: ‘an ideal spot
for mass marches’. Long ago he had watched the imperial pageantry of the
Hapsbur gs. And  now once again the Ringstrasse becomes ‘an enchantment
out of “The Thousand-and One-Nights”’, but one of those stories where
someone is transfigured before y our eyes into something terrible, morphing
out of control as you say the wrong words.
At half-past one Hitler returns to review the massive display of
marching soldiers and trucks , while 400 planes fly overhead. It is
announced that there will be a p lebiscite – another one, this time  legitimate.
‘Do you  acknow ledge Adolf Hitler as our Führer and the reunion of Austria
with the  Germa n Reich which w as ef fected on 13th March 193 8?’ On the
pale-pink ballot there is a huge circle for Ja  and  a diminutive one for Nein .
T o encou rage V ienna to think ha rd about this vote, trams are sheathed in red
bunting, and St Stephen’ s Cathedral is draped in red, and Leopoldstadt, the
old Jewish quarter , is shrouded in Nazi flags. In this pr oper  plebiscite, Jews
are ineligible to vote.
There is terror . People are picked up of f the streets and bundled into
trucks. S everal t housand activis ts, Jews, troublemakers are sent to Dachau.
In these  first few days there ar e messages from friends who are leaving,
desperate phone-calls about people who have been arrested. Emmy’ s
cousins Frank and Mitzi W ooster have left. Their closest friends, the
Gutmanns, have gone, leaving on the 13th. The Rothschilds have gone.
Bernhardt Altm ann, a business colleague of V iktor ’ s, a f riend from
countless dinner -parties, has le ft already: it takes something to walk out
your door and leave everything.
V ienna, 14th Mar ch 1938. V iew along the Ringstrasse fr om the Parliament
and Opera towar ds the Palais Ephrussi
Sometimes it is possible to get people out of police-stations with money .
V iktor helps a couple of cousins who need to get across the border to
Czechoslovakia, but he and Emmy seem incapable of a decision. Friends
tell t hem to go. It is V iktor who has frozen. He cannot leave thi s house, his
father ’ s and grandfather ’ s house. He cannot leave the bank. He  cannot just
leave his library .
Others have left the household. Who wants to be associated with the
Jews? T here are three servants le ft. The cook and Anna, who make sure that
there is still cof fee for the Baron and Baroness, and the porter , Herr
Kirchner , who has the little room by the gate and no known family .
The city is me tamorphosing hour by hour as more German army
personnel appear , men in uniforms on every street corner . The  currency is
now the Reichsmark. Jude  i s painted on Jewish-owned  shops, and
customers are tar geted if they are seen going in or coming ou t. The huge
Schif fmann department store, owned by four Jewish brothers, is
systematically emptied by the SA as crowds look on.
People are disappearing. It is increasingly dif ficult to know  where
anyone is. On W ednesday 16th  March, Pips’ s old friend, the writer Egon
Friedell, jumps out of the window of his flat when he sees storm-troopers
arrive a nd question the porter in his apartment building. There are 160
suicides of Jews in March and A pril. Jews are dismissed from theatres and
orchestras. All state and mun icipal employees have been sacked; 183
Jewish teachers have lost their jobs. All Jewish lawyers and public
prosecutors are relieved of of fice.
In th ese days, th e wild quality o f release, the helping yourself to  Jewish
property , the random beatings o f Jews on the streets change into something
more steely . It b ecomes clear that there has been a lot of planning and that
there are orders. On Friday 18th March, two days after his arrival in V ienna,
the y oung SS li eutenant Adolf Eichmann takes matters persona lly in hand
by p articipating in a raid on the IKG in the Seitenstettengasse during which
documents linking the Jewish community to the Schuschnigg plebiscite
campaign are confiscated. This is followed by the confiscation  of the IKG
library and archive itself. Eichmann is concerned to get the best material of
Judaica and Hebraica for the planned Institute for Research into the Jewish
Question.
It be comes clear that there are plans for the Jews of V ienna. On 31st
March Jewish or ganisations are no longer recognised under pub lic law . The
chaplain of the little English church is baptising Jews. If you c onvert, you
may have more options for esca pe. There are queues outside the  presbytery .
He c urtails instruction into the Christian faith to ten minutes to help more
desperate people.
On 9th April Hitler returns to V ienna. His motorcade goes through the
city and  onto the Ring. At noon  Goebbels steps out onto the balcony of the
Rathaus, the town hall that now  stands in Adolf Hitler Platz, to declaim the
results o f the plebiscite. ‘I proclaim the day of the Greater Germ an Reich’:
99.75 per cent have voted yes to legitimise the Anschluss .
On 2 3rd April a  boycott of Jew ish shops is announced. That sa me day
the Gestapo arrive at the Palais Ephrussi.
25. ‘A NEVER-T O-BE-REPEA TED OPPOR TUNITY’
How ca n I write about this time? I read memoirs, the journals of Musil,
look at the phot ographs of the crowds on this day , the following day , the
day afte r that. I read the V ienna newspapers. On T uesday the Hermansky
bakery i s baking Aryan bread. On W ednesday Jewish lawyers are sacked.
On T hursday non-Aryans are excluded from the football club Schwarz-Rot.
Goebbels gives out free radios on Friday . Aryan razor blades are on sale.
I have V iktor ’ s passport with its stamps and a thin shake of letters
between membe rs of the family ,  and I put these out on my long desk. I read
them ag ain and again, willing th em to tell me what it was like, what V iktor
and Emmy feel as they sit in their house on the Ring. I have folders of notes
from the archives. But I realise that I can’ t do this from London, from a
library . So I go back to V ienna, to the Palais.
I sta nd o n the balcony of the sec ond floor . I have bought a netsuke back
with me , the pale-brown one of three chestnuts with the small w hite grub in
ivory , and I real ise that I’m wo rrying away at it in my pocket, tumbling it
round an d round . I hold the balcony rail hard and look down to the marble
floor and think of Emmy’ s dressing-table falling. I think of the netsuke
undisturbed in their vitrine.
And I hear a gro up of businessmen come in down the passagew ay from
the Ring strasse f or a meeting in the of fices, a knot of talk and la ughter , and
I he ar how the faintest echo of the street comes in with them . It is those
voices th at make  me remember Iggie. He said that the old doork eeper , Herr
Kirchner , who used to swing th e gates of the Palais Ephrussi open with a
flourish and a lo w bow to amu se the children, had conveniently gone out
and left the gates to the Ringstrasse wide open on the day the Nazis came.
Six members of the Gestapo, in perfect uniforms, walk straight in.
They start out quite polite. They have orders to search the apartment as
they have reason to believe t hat the Jew Ephrussi has su pported the
Schuschnigg campaign.
Searching. Searc hing means this: every single drawer is wrenched open,
the con tents of every cupboard pulled out, every single ornament is
scrutinised. Do you know how m uch stuf f there is in this house, how many
drawers in how many rooms? The Gestapo are methodical. They are in no
hurry . This is no W ilde . T he drawers in  the little tables in the salon are rifled
through, papers scattered. The s tudy is taken apart. The filed catalogues of
incunabula are swept through for evidence, letters winnowed. Every drawer
in the Italian cabinet is probed. Books are pulled of f the she lves in the
library and examined and dropp ed. They reach deep into the linen closets.
Pictures are taken of f walls and the stretchers are checked. The tapestries in
the d ining-room  where the child ren used to hide are jerked away from the
wall.
After th ey have searched the twenty-four rooms in the family
apartment, the kitchens and the servants’ hall, the Gestapo requ est the keys
to the safe, to the silver -room and to the porcelain store where the plates are
stacked, service by service. They  need the key to the boxroom in  the corner ,
where a ll the hatboxes, the trunks, the crates with the children’ s toys, the
nursery books, the old Andrew Lang fairy stories are kept. They need the
keys for the cab inet in V iktor ’ s dressing-room where he keep s his letters
from Emmy , from his father , from his old tutor Herr W essel, the good
Prussian, the man who taught him about German values, mad e him read
Schiller . They take V iktor ’ s keys to the of fice at the bank.
And all these things, a world of things – a family geography stretching
from Odessa, from holidays in Petersbur g, in Switzerland, in the South of
France, Paris, Kövecses, Londo n, everything – is gone throug h and noted
down. E very ob ject, every incident, is suspect. This is a scrutiny that every
Jewish family in V ienna is under going.
At the end of these long hours there is a cursory consultation and the
Jew V iktor Ephrussi is accused of having contributed 5,000 schi llings to the
Schuschnigg campaign and this has made him an enemy of the State. He
and Rudolf are arrested. They are taken away .
Emmy is allowed two rooms at the back of the house. I go into these
rooms. T hey ar e small and hig h and very dark, and an opaque window
above the door l ets in a little light from the courtyard. She is no t allowed to
use the main staircase, not allow ed to go into their old rooms. She has no
servants. She has – at this moment – only her clothes.
I d o not know where V iktor and Rudolf were taken. I cannot find the
records. I never asked Elisabeth or Iggie.
It is possible that they were tak en to the Hotel Metropole, wh ich has
been sequestered  as the headquarters of the Gestapo. There are many other
lock-ups for this flood of Jews. T hey are beaten, of course; but they are also
forbidden to shave or wash so th at they look even more degene rate. This is
because it is im portant to address the old af front of Jews not looking like
Jews. This process of stripping away your respectability , taking  away your
watch-chain, or your shoes or your belt, so that you stumble to hold up your
trousers with one hand, is a way of returning everyone to the shtetl,
stripping you back to your es sential character – wandering, unshaven,
bowed with your possessions on your back. Y ou are supposed to end up
looking like a cartoon from Die Stürmer ,  Stre icher ’ s tabloid that is now s old
on the streets of V ienna. They take away your reading glasses.
For thre e days father and son a re in prison somewhere in V ien na. The
Gestapo need a signature, there is a form that you sign, or you a nd your son
get sent to Dach au. V iktor signs it away , the Palais and its contents and all
his other properties in V ienna, the accumulation of all the diligence of the
family , a  hundre d years of posse ssions. And then they are allow ed to return
to th e Pa lais Eph russi, walk in t hrough the open gates, across th e courtyard
to the servants’ staircase in the corner and up to the second floor to these
two rooms that are now their home.
And on 27th Ap ril it is declared  that the property at number 14 Dr Karl
Lueger Ring, V ienna 1, form erly the Palais Ephrussi, has been fully
Aryanised. It is one of the first to receive such an accolade.
As I stand outside the rooms th at they were given, on the other side of
the courtyard, the dressing-roo m and the library seem impossibly close.
This is the moment, I think, that  is the beginning of exile, the mo ment when
home is with you and is very , very far away .
The house wasn’ t theirs any more. It was full of people, some in
uniforms and some in suits. People counting rooms, making lis ts of objects
and pictures, taking things away . Anna is in there somewhere. She has been
ordered to help with this packing-up into boxes and crates, told that she
should be ashamed of working for the Jews.
And it not just their art, not jus t the bibelots, all the gilded stuf f from
tables an d mant elpieces, but their clothes, Emmy’ s winter coats, a crate of
domestic china, a lamp, a bundle of umbrellas and walking-sticks.
Everything that  has taken decades to come into this house,  settling in
drawers and chests and vitrines and trunks, wedding-presents and birthday-
presents and souvenirs, is now being carried out again. This is the strange
undoing of a collection, of a house and of a family . It is the moment of
fissure when grand things are t aken and when family objects, known and
handled and loved, become stuf f.
T o a ssess the va lue of art objects belonging to Jews, appraisal of ficers
are appo inted by  the Property T ransactions Of fice, who will methodically
facilitate the stripping-out of pictures, books, furniture, objec ts from the
houses o f Jews.  Experts from t he museums appraise what is of value. In
these ea rly weeks of the Anschluss  t he museums and the galleries  hum to
the sounds of busy , focused wo rk as letters have to be written and copied,
lists created, queries entered a bout provenance or attribution , and every
picture, every piece of furniture, every objet  ra nked.  For every single thing
there are competing levels of interest.
As I read these  documents I think of Charles as he was in Paris.
Amateur d’art , pas sionate and diligent in his searching out and his listing,
his life of scholarship, his vagabonding to piece together knowledge about
his loved painters, his lacquer , his netsuke collection.
Never h ave art historians been so useful, their opinions attend ed to so
seriously , than in V ienna in the spring of 1938. And because th e Anschluss
means that all Jews lose their jobs in of ficial institutions, there are exciting
opportunities for the right candidates. T wo days after the Anschluss , Fritz
Dworschak, previously the keeper of medals, is made the dir ector of the
Kunsthistorisches Museum (the Museum of Art History). The distribution
of al l this seized  artwork, he announces, is a ‘singular , never -to- be-repeated
opportunity for expansion…in a great number of areas’.
He i s correct. M ost art objects are to be sold on or auctioned of f to raise
money for the Reich. Some item s are to be bartered with dealers for other
objects; some items are to be given to the Führer for his new museum that is
being pl anned for his birthplace of Linz; others to the National Museums.
Berlin closely monitors the situation. ‘The Führer plans to personally decide
on the use of the property after its seizure. He is considering putting
artwork first and foremost at the disposal of small Austrian towns for their
collections.’ Some pictures, som e books, some furniture are earmarked for
the collections of the Nazi leadership.
In the Palais Ep hrussi this process of assessment is now under way .
Everything in this great treasure -house is held up to the light and  examined.
This is what collectors do. In the grey light from the glassed-in courtyard all
these objects from this Jewish family are held accountable.
The Gestapo write rather acidly about the taste behind the collections,
but n ote that thi rty of the Ephrussi pictures are ‘museum-ready’ . Three Old
Masters are given directly to the ‘gallery for painting’ at the
Kunsthistorisches Museum, six to the Austrian Gallery , one Old Master is
sold to a dealer , two terracottas and three paintings traded to a collector , ten
sold to another dealer in the Michaelerplatz for 10,000 schillings. And so on
and on and on.
Numerous ‘artis tic and high-quality pieces that are unsuitable for of fice
purposes’ go to the Kunsthistorisches Museum and the Naturhistorisches
Museum (the Natural History Museum). All other ‘unsuitable’  objects are
taken to  the ‘Depot of Moveables’, a huge storage depot from which other
or ganisations can come and take their pick.
The very , very best pictures in V ienna are photographed and pas ted into
ten leath er -bound albums, and then these albums are sent to Berlin to be
looked over by Hitler .
And in a letter from (initials ill egible), Reference: RK 19694 B, from
Berlin o n 13th October 1938, there is a note that ‘The Reichsfü hrer -SS and
Chief of  the German [sic] submits with letter of 10 August 193 8, received
here 26 Septem ber 1938, 7 inve ntories concerning property and objects of
art confi scated and sequestered  respectively in Austria, also 10 albums of
photographs and the catalogue are available in the of fice, the inventories
and the certific ate are attached.’ And apart from the ‘Palace including
grounds and forest of the Jew Rudolf Gutmann’ and ‘7 estates o f the family
property of the House Habsbur g and Lothringen as well as 4 villas and 1
palace o f Otto V . Habsbur g’, there are the art objects sequestered in V ienna,
including the property of: ‘V ikto r V . Ephrussi, No. 57, 71, 81–87, 1 16–1 18
and 120 –122…Confiscation has been made in favour of vari ous of fices:
Austria, Reichsführer -SS, NSDAP , Armed Forces, Lebensborn and others.’
While Hitler looks over the alb ums and chooses what he wa nts, and
while th ese ma tters are being discussed and the dif ference between
confiscation and sequestration is mulled over , V iktor ’ s libra ry is taken
away: h is histor y books, the Gr eek and Latin poetry , his Ovid  and V ir gil,
the T acitus, the runs of Engli sh, German and French novels, the huge
morocco-leather edition of Dan te with the illustrations by Doré that so
scared the children, the dictiona ries and atlases, Charles’ s books sent from
Paris, the incunabula. Books bought in Odessa and V ienna, se nt from his
dealers in London and Zurich,  his lifetime of reading, are taken of f the
library’ s shelves and sorted and packed into wooden crates, and then the
crates are nailed shut and are ca rried down the stairs into the courtyard and
heaved onto the back of a lorry . Someone (initials illegible ) scrawls a
signature across  a document, an d the lorry coughs and starts up and drives
through the oak doors onto the Ring and disappears.
There is a special or ganisation that identifies particular libraries
belonging to Jews. When I go  through the membership booklet for the
W iener Club for 1935 – Preside nt V iktor v . Ephrussi – I see th at eleven of
his friends have their libraries taken.
Some of these crates are taken to the National Library . Here the books
are p icked over by librarians and scholars and then they are di spersed. As
with the art historians, these are busy days for librarians and scholars. Some
of these books are to stay in V ienna, some end up in Berlin.  Others are
destined for the ‘ Führ erbibliothek ’ pla nned for Linz, still others for Hitler ’ s
private library . And some are earmarked for Alfred Rosenber g’ s Centre.
Rosenber g, the early ideologue of Nazism, is a power in the Reich. ‘The
essence of the c ontemporary wo rld revolution lies in the awakening of the
racial ty pe,’ wro te Rosenber g grandiloquently in his books, ‘for Germany
the Jewish Question is only sol ved when the Last Jew has left the Greater
German space.’ These books, choked with rhetoric, sold in their hundreds
of thousands with a popularity second only to Mein Kampf . One of the
duties of his of fice became the confiscation of research material from
‘ownerless Jewish property’ in France, Belgium and Holland.
All acro ss V ienn a this is happen ing. Sometimes Jews are forced to sell
things fo r next to nothing to raise money for the Reichsflucht  tax in order to
be permitted to leave. Sometimes things are just taken. Sometimes taken
with vio lence, sometimes without, but always accompanied by a penumbra
of of fici al language, a piece o f paper to sign, an admission of guilt, of
involvement in activities that ru n counter to the legality of the R eich. There
is lo ts of  docum entation: the list of the Gutmanns’ collection runs over page
after pag e. The Gestapo take Marianne’ s eleven netsuke of the boy playing
and the dog and the monkey an d the tortoise, the ones that she showed to
Emmy a lifetime before.
How lon g does this separation of people and where they have lived
take? The Dorotheum, V ienna’ s auction house, runs one sale after another .
Every da y there are sales of sequ estered property . Every day all these things
find peo ple will ing to buy them  cheap, collectors willing to add to their
collections. The  sale of the Altmann collection takes five days. It begins on
Friday 17th June 1938 at three o’clock, with an English grand father clock
with W estminste r chimes. It sel ls for only thirty reichsmarks. Each day is
neatly enumerated to reach an impressive 250 entries.
So this is how it  is to be done. It  is clear that in the Ostmark, the eastern
region of the Reich, objects are  now to be handled with care. Every silver
candlestick is to be weighed. Every fork and spoon is to be counted. Every
vitrine is to be opened. The marks on the base of every porcel ain figurine
will be noted. A  scholarly question mark is to be appended to a  description
of an Old Master drawing; the dimensions of a picture will b e measured
correctly . And while this is going on, their erstwhile owners are having their
ribs broken and teeth knocked out.
Jews matter less than what they  once possessed. It is a trial of  how to
look afte r objec ts properly , care for them and give them a pro per German
home. I t is a trial of how to run a society without Jews. V ienna is once
again ‘an experimental station for the end of the world’.
Three days after V iktor and Ru dolf come out of prison, the Gestapo
assign the family apartment to the Amt für W ildbach-und
Lawinenverbauung, the Of fice for Flood and A valanche Control. Bedrooms
become of fices. The grand floor of the Palais, Ignace’ s apartment of gold
and mar ble and painted ceilings , is handed over to the Amt Ro senber g, the
Of fice o f Alfred Rosenber g, the Plenipotentiary of the Führer for the
Supervision of all Intellectual and Ideological Education and Indoctrination
in the National Socialist Party .
I picture  Rosenb er g, slight and w ell dressed, leaning on the huge Boulle
table in Ignace’ s salon overlooking the Ring, his papers arrayed in front of
him. His of fice is responsible for coordinating the intellectual direction of
the R eich, and th ere is so much to do. Archaeologists, literary men, scholars
all n eed his imp rimatur . It is A pril and the linden trees are showing their
first leaves. Out of the three win dows in front of him, across the fresh green
canopy , there are swastika flag s flying from the university , and from the
new flag-pole that has just been erected in front of the V otivkirche.
Rosenber g is installed in his  new V iennese of fice with Ignace’ s
carefully calibra ted hymn to Je wish pride in Zion – his lifetime bet on
assimilation – above his head : the grandiose, gilded picture of Esther
crowned as Queen of Israel. Above him to his left is the painting of the
destruction of the enemies of  Zion. But there are to be no Jews in
Zionstrasse.
On 25th  April there is a ceremonial reopening of the un iversity .
Students in lederhosen flank the steps up to the main entrance as Gauleiter
Josef Bü rckel ar rives. A quota s ystem has been introduced. Only 2 per cent
of the university students and faculty will be allowed to be Jewish: from
now on, Jewish students can on ly enter with a permit; 153 of the Medical
School’ s faculty of 197 have been dismissed.
On 26th  April Hermann Göring commences his ‘transfer -the -wealth’
campaign. Every Jew with assets of more than 5,000 Reichsmarks is
obligated to tell the authorities or be arrested.
The next morning the Gestapo arrive at the Ephrussi Bank. They spend
three da ys looking at the bank’ s records. Under the new regulations –
regulations that are now thirty-s ix hours old – the business has to be of fered
first to any Aryan shareholders . The business also has to be of fered at a
discount. This means that Herr Steinhausser , V iktor ’ s colleague  for twenty-
eight years, is asked if he wants to buy out his Jewish colleagues.
It is only six weeks since the planned plebiscite.
Y es, he says, in a post-war interview on his role at the bank, of course
he boug ht them out. ‘They nee ded cash for the “Reichsfluchtsteuer”, the
Reich flight tax…they of fered me their shares ur gently , because this was the
fastest w ay to get cash. The pri ce, Ephrussi and W iener ’ s price to get out,
was “totally appropriate”…it was 508,000 Reichsmarks…plus the 40,000
Aryanisation tax of course.’
So, on 12th August 1938, Ephrussi and Co. is taken of f the business
register . In the records it says, singularly , ERASED . Three months later the
name is changed to Bankhaus CA Steinhausser . Under its new name it is
revalued, and under its new Gentile ownership is worth six times as much
as under Jewish ownership.
There is no long er a Palais Ephrussi and there is no longer an Ephrussi
Bank in V ienna. The Ephrussi family has been cleansed from the city .
It is on this visit that I go to the Jewish archive in V ienna, the one seized
by Eich mann, to  check up on the details of a marriage. I look through a
ledger to  find V iktor , and there i s an of ficial red stamp across his first name.
It re ads ‘Israel’. An edict decreed that all Jews had to take new names.
Someone has gone through every single name in the lists of V iennese Jews
and stamped them: ‘Israel’ for the men, ‘Sara’ for the women.
I a m wrong. The  family is not erased, but written over . And, fina lly , it is
this that makes me cry .
26. ‘GOOD FOR A SINGLE JOURNEY’
What do V iktor and Emmy and Rudolf need to do to leave the Ostmark of
the Ger man Reich? They can queue outside as many embassies or
consulates as they like – the ans wer is the same. Quotas have already been
filled. T here are  enough refugees, émigrés, needy Jews in England to keep
the l ists closed f or years to come . These queues are dangerous b ecause they
are patrolled by SS, by local police, by those who might hold a grudge.
There is  the endless pulse of fear that any of those police truck s could pick
you up and take you to Dachau.
They need enough money to pay all the inventive taxes, pay for the
many punitive permits to emigra te. They need to have an assets declaration
of what they owned on 27th April 1938. This is collected by the Jewish
Property Declar ation Of fice. They have to declare all domestic and foreign
assets, any real estate, business assets, savings, income, pensions, valuables,
art objects. Then they have to g o to the Finance Ministry to prove that they
do not owe any inheritance or building taxes, and then show evidence of
income, commercial turnover and pension.
And so V iktor , seventy-eight y ears old, begins his tour of h istorical
V ienna, visiting one of fice after another , rebuf fed from one place, unable to
get into another ,  queuing in orde r to get to of fices at which he has to queue
again. All the desks in front of which he has to stand, the questions barked
at him, the stamp resting on the pad of red ink that allows him to leave or
not, and the tax es, edicts and protocols that he needs to understand. It is
only six  weeks since the Anschluss , and with all these new laws and new
men behind desks anxious to g et noticed, anxious to prove th emselves in
the Ostmark, it is mayhem.
Eichmann sets up the Central Of fice for Jewish Emigration in the
Aryanised Rothschild palace in Prinz-Eugen-Strasse to process Jews more
quickly . He is learning about h ow to run an or ganisation ef fi ciently . His
superiors are hugely impressed. This new of fice will show that it is possible
to go  in with your wealth and c itizenship and depart a few hou rs later with
only a permit to leave.
People are becoming the shadow  of their documents. They are  waiting
for t heir papers to be validated, waiting for letters of support fro m overseas,
waiting for promises of a position. People who are already  out of the
country are begged for favours, for money , for evidence of kinship, for
chimerical ventures, for anything written on any headed paper at all.
On 1 st May the nineteen-year -old Rudolf gets permission to emigrate to
the US: a friend has secured him  a job in the Bertig Bros. cotto n company
in Paragould, Arkansas. V iktor and Emmy are left alone in the old house.
All the servants  have now left  except Anna. These three peo ple are not
moving towards complete stasis : they are there already , frozen. V iktor goes
down the unaccustomed steps to the courtyard, passes the statue of Apollo,
avoids th e looks  of the new of ficials, and the looks of his old tenants, out of
the gateway , past the SA guard on duty , onto the Ring. And where can he
go?
He cannot go to his café, to his of fice, to his club, to his cousins. He has
no c afé, no of fic e, no club, no cousins. He cannot sit on a public bench any
more: th e benches in the park outside the V otivkirche have Juden verboten
stencilled on them. He cannot go  into the Sacher , he cannot go in to the Café
Griensteidl, he cannot go into the Central, or go to the Prate r , or to his
bookshop, cannot go to the barber , cannot walk through the park. He cannot
go on a tram: Jews and those w ho look Jewish have been thrown of f. He
cannot go to the cinema. And he cannot go to the Opera. Even if he could,
he w ould not hear music written  by Jews, played by Jews or su ng by Jews.
No Mah ler and no Mendelssohn . Opera has been Aryanised. There are SA
men stationed at the end of the  tram line at Neuwaldegg to prevent Jews
strolling in the V ienna W oods.
Where can he go? How can they get out?
As everyone tries to leave, Elisabeth returns. She has a Dutch passport,
a p ossib le shield against her arrest as a Jewish intellectual and undesirable,
but this is a rem arkably dangerous thing to do. And she is indefa tigable: she
sorts out  permits for her parents , pretends to be a member of the  Gestapo to
get an interview with one pa rticular of ficial, finds ways to pay the
Reichsflucht  ta xes, negotiate s with departments. She refuses to be cowed by
the l anguage of these new legisl ators: she is a lawyer and she is  going to do
this right. Y ou want to be of ficial, I can be of ficial.
V iktor ’ s passpor t shows him in ching towards departure. On 13th May
the stamp Passinhaber ist Auswander er , ‘Passport holder is an emigrant’, is
signed by Dr Raf fer gerst. Five days later , on 18th May , is the stamp
Einmalige Ausr e ise nach CSR , ‘good for a single journey’. That night there
are reports of German troop movements on the border and a partial
mobilisation of the Czechoslov akian army . On 20th May the Nurember g
Laws come into force in Austria. These laws, in existence for three years in
Germany , classify Jewishness. If three out of four of your grandparents are
Jewish, then you are a Jew . Y ou are not allowed to marry a Gentile, have
sex with a Gent ile or display the flag of the Reich. Y ou are not allowed to
have a Gentile servant under the age of forty-five.
Anna is a midd le-aged Gentile servant who has worked for t he Jews
since she was fourteen, for Emmy and V iktor and their four children. She
has to stay in V ienna. She has to find new employers.
On 2 0th May th e Grenzpolizeik ommissariat W ien, the border control in
V ienna, gives V iktor and Emmy their final clearance.
On the morning  of the 21st Elisabeth and her parents go out of the oak
door and  turn left onto the Ring. They have to go to the stati on on foot.
They ea ch carry  a suitcase. The  Neue Fr eie Pr esse  reports that the weather
is a  clement fourteen degrees Celsius. It is a route they h ave done a
thousand times along the Ring. Elisabeth leaves them at the station. She has
to return to the children in Switzerland.
When V iktor and Emmy reach the border , it is almost impossible to
cross into Czechoslovakia as there are fears of an imminent German
invasion. They are detained. ‘Detained’ means that they are ta ken of f the
train and kept standing in a waiting-room for hours while tele phone calls
are made and papers consulted, before they are robbed of 150 Swiss francs
and one of their  suitcases. Then they are allowed to cross. Later that day
Emmy and V iktor arrive at Kövecses.
Kövecses is close to many borders. This has always been one of its
attractions, a good meeting point for friends and family from across Europe,
a shooting-box, a liberty-hall for writers and musicians.
In the summer o f 1938 Kövecses looks much the same as it has done, a
jumble of grand and informal. Y ou can see the summer storms a pproaching
across th e plains , the bands of willows buf feted by the winds on  the edge of
the river . The roses are more unkempt, in a photo from that month, and
Emmy leans into V iktor . It is the only picture I have where they are
touching.
V iktor and Emmy at Kövecses, 18th August 1938
The hou se is much emptier . The four children are dispersed: Elisabeth is
in S witzerland, Gisela in Mexico, and Iggie and Rudolf are in America.
And you wait for the post each day , wait for a newspaper , wait.
The borders are under review  and Czechoslovakia is fissile, and
Kövecses is just too close to danger . That summer there is the crisis in the
Sudetenland, the  area on the western edge of the country: Hitler demands
that the German  population be allowed to secede to the Reich. There is
increasing disrup tion, the threat of war . In London, Chamberlain attempts to
be e mollient, to be tactical and to persuade Hitler that his aspira tions can be
met.
For nine days in July there is an international conference at Evian on the
refugee crisis: thirty-two countries, including the United States, meet and
fail t o pass a resolution condemning Germany . The Swiss police , wishing to
stem the influx of refugees from Austria, have asked the German
government to introduce a sym bol of some kind so that they can identify
Jews at border c heckpoints. This has been agreed. Jews’ passpo rts are now
nullified, must be sent to police stations and will be returned to them
stamped with a letter J.
In the early morning of 30th September , Chamberlain, Mussolini and
the F rench Premier Édouard Da ladier sign the Munich Accord with Hitler:
war ha s been averted. The lightly shaded areas on th e map of
Czechoslovakia are to be handed over by 1st October 1938 and the darker
areas are  to be g ranted plebiscite s. The government in Prague is  not present
as th eir country is dismembered. On this day Czech frontier guards leave
their posts and Austrian and Ge rman refugees are ordered to d epart. There
are the first Jewish persecutions. There is chaos. Hitler enters the
Sudetenland to cheering acclamation two days later . On the 6th there is the
formation of a pro-Hitler Slov ak government. The new border is just
twenty-two miles from the house. On the 10th Germany completes its
annexation.
It is only four m onths since they walked onto the Ring in V ienna to
make th eir way to the station to escape. And now there are German soldiers
on every border .
Emmy dies on 12th October .
Neither Elisabet h nor Iggie used  the word ‘suicide’ to me, but th ey both
said she could not go on, that she did not want to go any further . She died in
the night. Emmy took too many of her heart pills, the ones she kept in the
porcelain box of robin’ s-egg blue.
In the file of documents is her death certificate, folded into four . A
maroon Republi c of Czechoslovakia five-krone stamp with a rampant lion
is fixed  and stamped, though today , the day on which it is filled in,
Czechoslovakia no longer exists . On 12th October 1938, it says in Slovak,
Emmy Ephrussi von Schey , wife of V iktor Ephrussi, daughter of Paul Schey
and Eve lina Lan dauer , died aged fifty-nine. The cause of death  was a fault
with her heart. It is signed ‘Frederik Skipsa, matrikár? ’. And there is a
handwritten note in the bottom l eft-hand corner . The deceased was a citizen
of the Reich and these records are according to the laws of the Reich.
I thi nk o f her suicide. I think that she did not want to be a citizen of the
Reich an d to live in the Reich. I wonder whether it was too much for Emmy
– t hat beautiful and funny and a ngry woman – that the one place in her life
in which she had been completely free had become another trap.
Elisabeth heard the news in a telegram two days later . Iggie and Rudolf
three days after that in America. Emmy was buried in the churchyard of the
hamlet near Kövecses. And my great-grandfather V iktor was alone.
I lay out my thin trail of blue letters from 1938 on the long table in my
studio. T here ar e eighteen or so, a scant trail across the winter . They are
mostly b etween Elisabeth, her uncle Pips and cousins in Paris, attempting to
track where everyone is, how to gain permission for people to leave,
suggestions of how to raise money as surety . How could they ge t V iktor out
of S lovakia? All his property had been sequestered and he was stranded in
the middle of th e countryside, with an Austrian passport that should have
been va lid until  1940, but now  had negligible value as Austri a no longer
existed as a sep arate country . As V iktor had been expelled he could not
apply at a German consulate for  a German passport. He had started to apply
for C zech citizenship, but then that country too disappeared. All  he had was
a docum ent sho wing him to be  a citizen of V ienna and another document
concerning his renunciation of Russian citizenship and acquisition of
Austrian citizenship in 191 1. But that was in the Hapsbur g era.
On 7th November a young Jew  walked into the German Embassy in
Paris an d shot a German diplomat, Ernst von Rath. On the 8t h collective
punishments ag ainst the Jews were announced: Jewish children were no
longer to attend Aryan schools , Jewish newspapers were banned. On the
evening of the 9th von Rath died in Paris. Hitler decided that the
spontaneous dem onstrations sho uld be unchecked, that the polic e should be
withdrawn.
Kristallnacht is a night of terro r: 680 Jews commit suicide in V ienna:
twenty-seven are murdered. Synagogues are burnt across Austria and
Germany , shops are looted, Jews are beaten and rounded up for prison and
the camps.
The letters, flimsy airmail letters , are increasingly desperate. Pips writes
from Switzerland, ‘My correspondence has become a kind of clearing-
house fo r friends and relatives who can’ t write to one another…I am
terribly worried  about them as I hear from reliable sources that sooner or
later all Jewish m en are to be sent to the so-called “preserve” in Poland.’ He
begs friends to i ntercede for V iktor ’ s admission to England. And Elisabeth
writes to the British authorities:
 
As a  result of the radical political changes in Cechoslavaquia, and quite
especially in Slovaquia in which his present residence is situated, his
situation can no longer be deemed safe. Arbitrary measures against Jews,
inhabitants as well as immigrants, have already been taken, and the entire
subservience of the country to G erman domination is suf ficient justification
for apprehending ‘legal’ measures against Jews in a very short time.
 
On 1st March 1939 V iktor receives his visa, ‘Good for a Single
Journey’, from British passport control in Prague. The same day Elisabeth
and the boys lea ve Switzerland. They take the train to Calais a nd the ferry
to Dover . On 4th March V iktor arrives at Croydon airport, south of London.
Elisabeth is there to meet him and takes him to the St Ermin’ s Hotel in
Madeira Park, T unbridge W ells , where Henk has booked rooms for them
all.
V iktor h as one suitcase. He is w earing the same suit Elisabeth h ad seen
him wear to the railway station  in V ienna. She notices that on his watch-
chain he  still carries the key to t he bookcase in the library in the Palais, the
bookcase of his early printed books of history .
He i s an émigré. His land of Dichter  and Denker , p oets and thinkers,
had become the land of Richter  and Henker , judges and hangmen.
27. THE TEARS OF THINGS
V iktor li ved in T unbridge W ells with my grandparents and fathe r and uncles
in a rent ed subu rban house, called St David’ s. A herringbone brick path ran
from a wooden gate between t wo privet hedges up to a porch. It was a
sturdy h ouse wi th gables. There were rose beds and a vegetable garden. It
was an ordinary house in an ordinary Kentish town, thirty miles south of
London, safe and rather staid.
They went to t he Church of King Charles the Martyr for m orning
service on Sundays. The boys – eight, ten and fourteen years old – were
sent to schools where they were not teased for their foreign acc ents, on the
strict ins tructions of the headmaster . They collected shrapnel and soldiers’
buttons and made elaborate cas tles and boats out of cardboard.  They went
for walks in the beech woods at the weekends.
Elisabeth, who had never cooked in her life, learnt to prepare meals.
Her former cook, now living in England, sent her letters that ran to pages,
with recipes for Salzbur ger Nockerln  and schnitzel, and meticulous
instructions: ‘the honoured lady slowly tilts  the frying pan’.
She tutored neighbours’ children in Latin for housekeeping money , and
translated to make enough to buy the boys their bicycles, £8 each. She tried
to write poetry again, but found  she could not. In 1940 she wro te an essay
on Socrates and Nazism – three pages of fury – and sent it to her friend the
philosopher Eric V oegelin in America. She continued her correspondence
with her  scattere d family . Gisela and Alfredo and her boys were in Mexico.
Rudolf w as still  in small-town Arkansas: he sends her a cutting from The
Paragould Soliphone  about ‘Rudolf Ephrussi, Baron Ephrussi as he would
have be en in the old country , a  long, good-looking lad, teasing the latest
tunes out of his saxophone’. Pips and Olga were in Switzerland. Aunt Gerty
had escaped from Czechoslavak ia and now lived in London, but there was
still no news of Elisabeth’ s aunt Eva or uncle Jenö, last seen in Kövecses.
Henk, my grandfather , commuted up to London on the 8.18 and was
involved in helping to sort out  where the Dutch merchant sh ipping fleet
was, and where it should have been.
And V iktor sat in a chair by the  kitchen range, the only warm place in
the hous e. He followed the new s of the war in The T imes  every day and
took the Kentish Gazette  on Thursdays. He read Ovid, particularly T ristia,
his poems of exile. When he read, he ran his hand over his face so that the
children couldn’ t see what the poet did to him. He read for most of the day ,
apart from a short walk up Blatchington Road and back, and a nap.
Occasionally he walked all the way into the centre of the tow n to Hall’ s
second-hand bookshop, where the bookseller Mr Pratley was particularly
kind to V iktor as  he ran his hands along the shelves of Galsworthy , Sinclair
Lewis and H. G. W ells.
Sometimes whe n the boys cam e back from school he told them about
Aeneas and his return to Cartha ge. There, on the walls, are scenes of T roy .
It is  only then, confronted by the image of what he has lost, that Aeneas
finally weeps. Sunt lacrimae r erum , Ae neas says. These are the tears of
things, he reads, at the kitchen table as the boys try to finish their algebra,
‘W rite a Day in the Life of a Pencil’, note ‘The Dissolu tion of the
Monasteries: T riumph or T ragedy?’
V iktor missed the flat matches that you could buy in V ienna that fitted
his waistcoat pocket. He missed  his small cigars. He had his black tea in a
glass, Ru ssian-style. He poured sugar into it. Once he poured in the family’ s
ration for the week and stirred it round, as everyone sat open-mouthed.
In F ebruary 1944, to everyone ’ s delight, Iggie turns up in T unbridge
W ells in his Am erican uniform , an intelligence of ficer with th e 7th Corps
Headquarters. A childhood switching between English, French and German
has made him valuable. Both  of the brothers have taken  American
citizenship to enlist in the army , Rudolf in V ir ginia in July 1941 and Iggie
in California in January 1942, a month after Pearl Harbor .
Iggie during the Normandy campaign, 1944
The nex t they know of Iggie is a photograph on the front of The T imes
on 27th June 194 4, three weeks after the Allied landings in France. It shows
the surrender of a German adm iral and a German general at Cherbour g.
They sta nd in sodden greatcoats across from a now-slightly-balding Captain
I. L. Ephrussi a nd the dapper American Major General J. Lawton Collins.
There are maps of Normandy  pinned to the walls, a tidy desk. And
everyone is canted slightly forward to catch Iggie’ s interpretation of
General Collins’ s terms.
V iktor d ied on 12th March 1945, a month before V ienna was liberated
by t he Russians and two month s before the unconditional surrender of the
German High Command. He was eighty-four . ‘Born Odessa, Died
T unbridge W ell s’ reads his death certificate. Lived, I add as I read it, in
V ienna, the centre of Europe. His grave in the municipal cemetery in
Charing is far a way from his mother ’ s in V ichy . And far aw ay from his
father ’ s and grandfather ’ s in the Doric-pillared mausoleum in V ienna, built
with all that self-confidence to house the dynastic Ephrussi clan for ever in
their new imperial Austrian-Hungarian homeland. It is furthest from
Kövecses.
Soon after the w ar ended Elisabeth received a long letter fro m uncle
T ibor , typed in German. It was sent on from Pips in Switzerland  in October .
It was on paper that was nearly transparent and it contained dreadful news.
 
I do not want to  repeat everything, but have to write about Je nö and Eva
once more. It is  terrible to think about the distress under which they died.
Jenö alre ady had  the certificate in his hand before they were de ported from
Komarom into the Reich, since he was allowed to go home. He did not
want to leave Eva since he believed that they would still be  allowed to
remain together , but they were immediately separated at the German border
and all the bette r clothes they w ore were taken from them too. Both died in
January .
 
Eva, Je wish, had been taken on to the concentration camp at
Theresienstadt, where she died of typhus; and Jenö, Gentile, was sent to a
labour camp. He died of exhaustion.
T ibor go es on to tell news of neighbours at Kövecses, listing the names
of f amily friends and of cousins of whom I know nothing: Samu, Herr
Siebert, the whole Erwin Strasser family , the widow of János Thuróczy , ‘a
second son who is missing since this time’ deported during the war or
disappeared into the camps. He writes of the devastation arou nd him, the
burnt-out village s, the starvation, the inflation. There are no deer left in the
countryside. The estate next to Kövecses, T avarnok, ‘is empty and has
burned. Everyone has left, only the old lady is in T opol’čany . I only possess
what I am wearing.’
T ibor ha d been to V ienna to the Palais Ephrussi: ‘In V ienna a few  things
were sav ed…The picture of Anna Herz (Makart) is still there, a portrait of
Emmy (Angeli) and the picture of T ascha’ s mother (I think also Angeli’ s), a
few pieces of fu rniture, vases etc. Almost all of your father ’ s and my books
have disappeare d, we found a few of them, some with W assermann’ s
dedication.’ A few family po rtraits, a few inscribed books and some
furniture. No mention of who is there.
In December 1945 Elisabeth decides that she has to return to V ienna to
find out who and  what remains. And to rescue the picture of her mother and
bring it home.
Elisabeth wrote  a novel about her journey . It is unpublishe d. And
unpublishable, I think, as I appraise it in typescript, 261 pages with
painstaking T ipp-Exed corrections. The rawness of its emotion  makes for
uncomfortable reading. In it she appears as a fictionalised Jewish Professor ,
Kuno A dler , returning to V ienna from America for the first time since
leaving at the Anschluss .
It is a book about encounters. She writes of her character ’ s visceral
reaction to an of ficial on the train at the border , when asked for a passport:
 
It was the voice, the intonation that hit a nerve somewhere in K uno Adler ’ s
throat; n o, below  the throat, wh ere breath and nourishment plunge into the
depths o f the body , a non-con scious, ungovernable nerve, in the solar
plexus p robably . It was the quality of that voice, of that accent, soft and yet
rough, ingratiating and slightly vulgar , sensible to the ear as a certain kind
of st one is to the touch – the soap-stone that is coarse-grained and spongy
and slightly oily on the surface  – an Austrian voice. ‘Austria n passport-
control.’
 
The exi led professor arrives at the bombed-out station and w anders,
trying to  accommodate himsel f to the squalor , the rapacity of the poor
inhabitants and the ruined landmarks. The Opera, the Stock Exchange, the
Academy of Fine Arts – all destroyed. St Stephen’ s a burnt-out shell.
Outside the Palais Ephrussi the professor stops:
 
Finally , there he was, on the Ring: the massive pile of the Natural History
Museum on his right, the ramp of the Parliament building on his left,
beyond it the spire of the T own Hall, and in front of him the railings of the
V olksgarten and the Bur gplatz. There he was, and there it all was; though
the o nce tree-bordered footpaths  across the roadway were stripped, treeless,
only a few naked trunks still standing. Otherwise it was all there. And
suddenly the dislocation of time which had been dizzying him with illusions
and delu sions snapped into focus, and he was real, everything was real,
incontrovertible fact. He was there. Only the trees were not there, and this
comparatively t rivial sign of destruction, for which he had not been
prepared, caused him incommensurate grief. Hurriedly he cross ed the road,
entered the park gates, sat down on a bench in a deserted avenue and wept.
 
Elisabeth’ s child hood was spent looking through the canopy of the
linden trees in fr ont of the house. In May her bedroom was full of the scent
of the flowers.
On 8 th December 1945, six and a half years since she was last there,
Elisabeth walks into her old h ome. The enormous gates are hanging of f
their hinges. It is now the of fices of the American occupying authorities: the
American Head quarters/Legal Council Property Control S ub-Section.
Motorbikes and jeeps are parked  in the courtyard. Most panes of the glazed
roof are smashe d: a bomb had landed on the building next door , destroying
much of its façade and taking  the Palais’ caryatids, behind which the
children had hidden. There are puddles on the floor . Apollo is still there, on
his plinth, paused with his lyre.
Elisabeth climb s the thirty-three steps, the family stairs, to the
apartment, and she knocks and is shown in by a charming lieutenant from
V ir ginia.
The apa rtment is now a series  of of fices, each room with desks and
filing ca binets and stenographe rs. Lists and memoranda are tacked up on
the walls. In the library a huge map of occupied V ienna is hanging above
the fireplace, with the Russian , American and Allied zones marked in
dif ferent colours . There is a pall of cigarette-smoke, the sound  of talk and
typewriters. She is taken around the of fices with interest and sympathy and
an air of slight disbelief that this – all this – had been a family home. The
American of fice has simply been floated on top of the last Nazi of fice.
There ar e a few pictures still on the walls, the Junge Frauen  in their
heavy gilt frames, some studies of Austrian landscapes in mist and the three
portraits of Emmy , a grandmother and a great-aunt. The heaviest furniture is
still in place, th e dining-table and its chairs, a secretaire, ward robes, beds,
the vast armchairs. A few vases. What is still there seems random. Her
father ’ s desk is still there in the library . There are some carpets on the
floors. But it is still an empty house. More exactly , it is an emptied  house.
The box room is empty . The man telpieces are empty . The silver -room is
empty and so is the safe. There is no piano. There is no Italian cabinet. No
little tab les inlai d with mosaic. In the library there are empty s helves. The
globes are gone, the clocks are gone, the French chairs are gone. Her
mother ’ s dressing-room is dusty . It contains a filing cabinet.
There is  no desk or mirror , but there is a black-lacquer vitrine and it is
empty too.
The kindly lieutenant wants to help and is chatty when he finds that
Elisabeth studied in New Y ork. T ake your time, he says, look around, find
what you can. I’m not sure what we can do for you. It is very c old, and he
of fers her a ciga rette and mentions that there is an old lady who still lives
here – he waves his hand – who might know more. A corporal is sent of f to
find the old woman.
Her name is Anna.
28. ANNA ’S POCKET
There ar e two women, one of th em older . The younger is now middle-aged
with grey hair .
They meet again after a war . It has been eight years since they last met.
They meet in on e of the old rooms, now an of fice full of the c latter of
filing. Or they m eet in the dam p courtyard. All I can see is two women,
each of whom has a story .
27th April. Six weeks after the Anschluss , the  day the doors to the
Ringstrasse were left open by Otto Kirchner and the Gestapo came in. It
was the start of Aryanisation. A nna was told she could no longer work for
Jews, and that she was to work for her country . She was to make herself
useful an d help sort out the belo ngings of the previous occupiers, pack them
into woo den crates. They had lo ts to do, and she should start by  packing up
the silver in the silver -room.
There were crates everywhere, a nd the Gestapo made lists. Onc e she’d
wrapped someth ing, it was ticke d of f. After the silver it was po rcelain. All
around her people were busy taking the apartment to pieces. It was the day
V iktor and Rudolf were arreste d and taken away , and Emmy was barred
from the apartment and sent to the rooms on the other side of the courtyard.
They were taking the silver . ‘And your mother ’ s jewellery , the
porcelain, your mother ’ s dresse s.’ And the clocks that Anna had wound
(library , hall, salon, the Baron’ s dressing-room every week), the books from
the libr ary , the lovely porcelain figures of the clowns in the salon.
Everything. She had looked to see what she could save for Em my and the
children.
‘I co uldn’ t carry anything precio us away for you. So I would s lip three
or fo ur o f the little figures from the Baroness’ s dressing-room, the little toys
you played with when you were children – you remember – and I put them
into the pocket o f my apron whenever I was passing, and I took  them to my
room. I hid them in the mattress of my bed. It took me two weeks to get
them all out of the big glass case. Y ou remember how many there were!
‘And the y didn’ t notice. They w ere so busy . They were busy with all the
grand things – th e Baron’ s paintings and the gold service from the safe, and
the cabinets from the drawing-r oom, and the statues and all your mother ’ s
jewellery . And all the Baron’ s ol d books that he loved so much. They didn’ t
notice the little figures.
‘So I just took them. And I put them in my mattress and I slept on them.
Now you are back, I have something to return to you.’
 
In December 1945 Anna gave Elisabeth 264 Japanese netsuke.
This is the third resting-place in the story of the netsuke.
From Charles and Louise in Paris, the vitrine in the lambent yellow
room with all th ose Impressionist pictures, to Emmy and her  children in
V ienna, the interweaving of stories and dressing up, childhood and make-
believe, to this strange bedding-down with Anna in her room.
The nets uke had been moved around before. Ever since they had arrived
from Japan they had been appraised: picked up, examined, we ighed in the
hand, placed again. That is what dealers do. It is what collectors do, and it is
what ch ildren do . But when I think of the netsuke in Anna’ s apron pocket
with a duster or a spool of thr ead, I think that these netsuke have never
received so much care. It is April 1938 and, with the Anschluss  still giddy
with proclamati ons, the art h istorians are working dedicate dly on the
inventories, pas ting photographs into the Gestapo folders to  be sent to
Berlin, and the librarians are marking up their lists of books so diligently .
They are preserving art for their country . And Rosenber g need s Judaica to
prove his theories on the animality of the Jews for his institute. Everyone is
working so hard, but none of th em come near the dedication an d diligence
of Anna . W ith Anna sleeping on them, the netsuke are looked after with
more respect than anyone has  ever shown them. She has survived the
hunger and the looting, and the fires and the Russian invasion.
Netsuke are small and hard. They are hard to chip, hard to break: each
one is made to be knocked around in the world. ‘A netsuke must be devised
so as not to be a nuisance to the  user ,’ says a guide. They hold themselves
inwards: a deer tucking its legs beneath its body; the barrel-maker
crouching inside his half-finis hed barrel; the rats a tumble around the
hazelnut. Or my favourite, a monk asleep over his alms bowl; one
continuous line of back. They can be painful: the end of the ivory bean-pod
is as  sharp as a knife. I think of them inside a mattress, a stran ge mattress
where boxwood and ivory from Japan meet Austrian horsehair .
T ouch is not only through the fingers, but through the whole body , too.
Each on e of these netsuke for Anna is a resistance to the sap ping of
memory . Each one carried out  is a resistance against the news, a story
recalled, a future held on to. He re that V iennese cult of Gemütlichkeit  – the
easy tear s over sentimental stories, the wrapping of everything in  pastry and
cream, the melancholy falling away from happiness, those candied pictures
of servant girls and their beaux  – meets a place of adamantine hardness. I
think of Herr B rockhaus and his imprecations against the carelessness of
servants, and I think of how wrong he was.
There is  no sentimentality , no n ostalgia. It is something much harder ,
literally harder . It is a kind of trust.
I heard Anna’ s story a long time ago. I heard it in T okyo, the first time I
saw the netsuke  lit up in a long glass vitrine held between bookcases. Iggie
had made me a gin and tonic, and himself a Scotch and soda, and he said –
in p assing, under his breath – that they were a hidden story . B y which he
meant, I  think now , not that he w as hesitant of telling the story , but that the
story was about hiddenness.
I k new the story . I didn’ t feel  the story until my third visit to V ienna,
when I was standing in the co urtyard of the Palais with a man from the
of fices of Casino Austria who asked me if I wanted to see the secret floor .
W e went up the Opera Stairs and he pushed part of the panelling on the
left and we ducked through into a whole floor , room after ro om with no
windows to the outside: when you stand on the Ring, the eye moves
unimpeded from  street level to Ignace’ s grand floor . It maps the great rooms
above, but each of these is compressed. There are only small, opaque square
windows into the courtyard, ins ignificant enough to be disguised as part of
the treat ment of the wall. The only way on or of f the floor is either through
the d oor disguised as a panel of marble that leads onto the gra nd stairs or
via the servants’ stair in the c orner to the courtyard. It is the floor of
servants’ rooms.
The place where Anna slept is  now the company cafeteria. S tanding
amongst the bustle of a workda y lunchtime in V ienna, I feel that lurch of
something not being right – tha t lurch when you have turned a page and
find yourself reading without understanding. Y ou have to go back and start
again, and the w ords seem even more unfamiliar and sound strangely in
your head.
And, said the man responsible for the house, warming to his project,
have you noticed the way that light is brought into the house? How do you
think the Opera Stairs have light? So we climb up the serv ants’ spiral
staircase and push open a little door to a whole roof-landscape of iron
bridges and ladders. W e cross to the parapet above the caryatids and peer
down so  that I can see that: yes,  there are hidden lightwells, too . He fetches
the plans and shows me the way in which the house is conn ected to its
neighbours, and how the subterranean passages into the cellars meant that
you could bring fodder and stra w in for the horses without using the front
gates.
This whole solid house, inlaid and overlaid and gessoed and painted,
marble and gold, was as light as a toy theatre, a run of hidden spaces behind
a façade. Potemkinsche . This marble wall is scagliola , lath and plaster .
It is a h ouse of  hidden children’ s toys, hidden games on the parapets
above the Palais, hide-and-seek in the tunnels and the cellars, secret drawers
in cabin ets with  lovers’ letters to Emmy . But it was also a house of unseen
people and unknown lives. Food appearing from hidden kitchens, linen
disappearing into hidden laundries. People sleeping in airless rooms tucked
between floors.
It was a place to hide where you have come from. It was a place to hide
things in.
I s tarted  the journey with my f iles of family letters, a sketch -map of
sorts. More than a year has pas sed and I keep finding hidden things. Not
just for gotten things: the Gesta po lists and diaries, journals, novels and
poems and press-cuttings. The wills and the shipping manifests. The
interviews with bankers. The overheard comments in a back room in Paris,
and the swatche s of cloth for dresses made for turn-of-the-cent ury cousins
in V ienn a. The pictures and the furniture. I can find the lists of w ho came to
a party a hundred years ago.
I know too much about the traces of my gilded family , but I cannot find
out any more about Anna.
She is not writte n about, refracted into stories. She is not left m oney in
Emmy’ s will: there is no will. She does not leave traces in the ledgers of
dealers or of dress-makers.
I am compelled to keep looking. In libraries, I stumble across things that
lead onw ards, sideways. I am looking to check a fact – the date of the
yellow carpet of the winds, from Charles’ s salon, something on  the painter
of the ceilings in the Palais Ephrussi – when I see a footnote and then a note
in an appendix.  I am winded to find that Louise’ s house in  the rue de
Bassano, the one opposite Jules and Fanny’ s house, up the street from
Charles’ s last house, all golden stone and curlicues, was used by the Nazis
as one of their Paris detention camps. It was one of three ann exes of the
Drancy concentration camp wh ere Jewish inmates had to sort, clean and
repair furniture and objects st olen by Rosenber g’ s or ganisat ion for the
functionaries of the Reich.
Then, te rribly , th ere is a note in brackets that the girl in the blue dress in
Renoir ’ s double portrait of the daughters of Louise Cahen d’A nvers – the
commission so endlessly and a nxiously fussed over by Charles to raise
money for Renoir – had been deported and had died in Auschwitz. And
then I find that  Fanny and Th éodore Reinach’ s son Léon and his wife
Béatrice de Camondo and their  two children were deported. This family
died in Auschwitz in 1944.
All t hose old calumnies, venomous diatribes against the Jewish families
on that golden hill, had their late and appalling flowering in Paris.
Here, in this house, I am wrong-footed. The survival of the netsuke in
Anna’ s p ocket, in her mattress, is an af front. I cannot bear for it to slip into
symbolism. Why should they have got through this war in a hiding-place,
when so  many hidden people did not? I can’ t make people and  places and
things fit together any more. These stories unravel me.
And there are th ings that I have been searching for ever since I heard
the story almost thirty years ago when I first met Iggie in Japan. There is a
space ar ound Anna, like that aro und a figure in a fresco. She wa s a Gentile.
She had  worked  for Emmy sinc e she got married. ‘She was always there,’
Iggie would say .
She gave the n etsuke to Elisabeth in 1945, and Elisabeth put the
persimmon and the ivory stag an d the rats and the rat-catcher and the masks
that she had loved when she was six, and all the rest of this world, into a
little leather attaché case to take back to England. They can expand to fill a
huge vitrine in a Paris salon or a dressing-room in V ienna, but they also fit
into next to nothing.
I d o not even know Anna’ s whole name, or what happened t o her . I
never thought to ask, when I could have asked. She was, simply , Anna.
29. ‘ALL QUITE OPENL Y , PUBLICL Y AND LEGALL Y’
Elisabeth took the little attaché case with the jumble of netsuke home.
England was home now: there was no question that she would take the
family to live in V ienna. Iggie , demobbed from the American army and
searching for work, felt the same. Returning to V ienna was something that
very few  Jews would do. There were 185,000 Jews in Austria at the time of
the Anschluss . Of thes e only 4,500 returned; 65,459 Austrian Jews had been
killed.
Nobody was called to account. The new democratic Austrian Republic
established after  the war gave an amnesty to 90 per cent of members of the
Nazi Party in 1948, and to the SS and Gestapo by 1957.
The return of é migrés was felt to be harassment of those w ho had
stayed. My grandmother ’ s novel of return to V ienna helps me understand
how she  felt. There is one mome nt of confrontation in Elisabeth’ s novel that
is particularly revealing. The Je wish professor is challenged as to why he
returned, what he was expecting out of Austria: ‘Y ou did choose to leave a
little ear ly . I mean you resigned  before you could be dismissed  – and you
left the country .’ This is the key , powerful question: What do you want by
coming back? Have you come back to take something from us? Have you
come ba ck as an accuser? Have  you come back to show us up? And, as a
tremor beneath these other quest ions: Could your war have been  worse than
our war?
Restitution was dif ficult for those who survived. Elisabeth fictionalises
this in one of the strangest moments in the novel, when a collector , Kanakis,
notices ‘two dark, heavily-frame d pictures hanging on the wall just opposite
his chair , and a faint smile creased his eyelids’.
‘Do you really recognise thos e pictures?’ exclaims the new owner .
‘They di d in fact belong to a ge ntleman who was surely an acquaintance of
your fam ily , Ba ron E. Y ou mig ht possibly have seen them a t his house.
Baron E unfortunately died abroad, in England, I believe. His  heirs, after
they had recovered what could be traced of his property , had it all sold at
auction, having no use for this o ld-fashioned stuf f in their modern homes, I
suppose. I acquired them in the auction-rooms, as well as most o f the things
you see in this ro om. All quite o penly , publicly and legally , you understand.
There is no great demand for this period.’
‘There i s no need to apologise, Herr Doktor ,’ replies Kanakis , ‘I can
only congratulate you on your bar gains.’
‘All quite openly , publicly and legally’ were words that Elisabeth was to
hear repeated back to her . She discovered that, on the list of pr iorities in a
shattered society , the restitution of property to those from whom it had been
sequestered cam e near the bottom. Many of those who had appropriated
Jewish p roperty were now respected citizens of the new Austrian Republic.
This wa s also a government that rejected reparations, because i n their view
Austria had been an occupied co untry between 1938 and 1945: Austria had
become the ‘first victim’, rather than an agent in the war .
As the ‘first victim’, Austria had to hold out against those who would
damage it. Dr Karl Renner , a lawyer and post-war president of Austria, was
clear about this. He wrote in April 1945:
 
Restitution of property stolen from Jews…[should be] not to the individual
victims, but to a  collective restitution fund. The establishment of such and
the following foreseeable arran gements is necessary in order t o prevent a
massive, sudden flood of returning exiles…A circumstance, that for many
reasons must be paid very clos e attention to…Basically the entire nation
should be made not liable for damages to Jews.
 
When, on 15th May 1946, the Republic of Austria passed a law which
declared that any transactions that had made use of discriminatory Nazi
ideology were to be deemed n ull and void, it seemed that the path was
open. But the law was strangely unenforceable. If your property had been
sold under the policy of forced Aryanisation, then you might be asked to
buy it back. If an artwork was returned to you that was considered
significant to Austria’ s cultural heritage, then its export was blocked. But if
you don ated wo rks to the muse um, then a permit for other lesser artworks
might be forthcoming.
In deciding what to return and what not to return, the government
agencies used the documents to hand that held the most authority . These
were those put together by the Gestapo, who were note d for their
thoroughness.
One file, on the appropriation of  V iktor ’ s collection of books, no ted that
a lib rary was handed over to the Gestapo, but ‘there is no record describing
its f ull content. However , ther e can only have been a small number of
works, given that the document confirming the takeover mentions the
content of two lar ge and two small boxes as well as of a rotating bookshelf.’
So, on 31st Ma rch 1948, 191 books are returned from the Austrian
National Library to the heirs of V iktor Ephrussi; 191 books are a couple of
shelves full, a few yards out of the hundreds that made up his room.
And so it goes. Where are the records Herr Ephrussi kept? He is still
held culpable, even after death.  V iktor ’ s life of books is lost b ecause of a
document with its initials illegible.
Another file is o n the appropriation of the art collection. It co ntains a
letter between the directors of two museums. They have an inventory made
by the Gestapo, and they have t o sort out what happened to the pictures ‘of
the b anker Ephrussi, W ien I., Lu eggerring 14. The inventory does not form
a partic ularly valuable arts collection but the wall decoration from the
apartment of a wealthy man. From the style it seems clearly to have been
put together according to the taste of the 1870s.’
There are no receipts, but the ‘only paintings, which were not sold, were
the a bsolutely not sellable ones ’. The implication is that there is not much
one can really do.
Reading these letters, I feel idiotically angry . It is not that it matters that
these art historians don’ t like the taste of ‘the banker Ephrussi’ and his wall
decoration, thou gh the phrase is far too close to the Gestapo’ s ‘Jew
Ephrussi’ for comfort. It is the way in which the archives are u sed to close
down the past: t here is no recei pt for this, we cannot read that signature. It
was only nine years ago, I th ink, and these transactions were by your
colleagues. V ienna is a small cit y . How many calls would it take to sort this
out?
My fath er ’ s childhood was punctuated by Elisabeth writing letter after
letter against the backdrop of fa iling expectations that the family would get
their fortune returned. She wrote partly from anger at the way in which
pseudo-legalistic measures were put up to dissuade claimants. She was a
lawyer , after all. But mostly because all four siblings were in re al financial
need and she was the only one in Europe.
Whenever a picture was retrieved, it was sold and the money split. The
Gobelin tapestri es were recovered in 1949 and sold for school fees. Five
years aft er the war the Palais Ephrussi was returned to Elisabeth. It was not
a good time to s ell a war -damaged Palais  in a city still under control of four
armies, and it raised just $30,000. After that Elisabeth gave up.
Herr Steinhausser , V iktor ’ s former business partner who had become
President of the Association of Austrian Banks and Bankers, was asked in
1952 if he knew anything of the history of the Ephrussi Bank that he had
Aryanised. It was believed that the following year , 1953, would be the
centenary of its foundation in V ienna. ‘Know nothing of it,’ he writes back.
‘W on’ t be celebrated.’
The Ephrussi legatees receive d 50,000 schillings on agreeing to a
renunciation of any further claim . It was the equivalent of about $5,000 at
the time.
I fin d al l this stuf f about restitution exhausting. I can see how you could
spend your life tracking someth ing down, your ener gy sapping away with
all these rules and letters and legalities. Y ou know that on someone else’ s
mantelpiece is chiming the cloc k from the salon, with the mermaids twined
liquidly around its base. Y ou open a sales catalogue and see two ships in a
gale, an d sudde nly you are standing by the door to the stairs with nanny
wrapping a muf fler around you r neck ready for your walk along the Ring.
For one held breath you can piece together a life, a broken s etting for a
diasporic family .
It was a family that could n ot put itself back together . Elisabeth
provided a kind of centre in T unbridge W ells, writing and relating news,
sending on photographs of nieces and nephews. After the war Henk started
a g ood job in Lo ndon working for the UN relief association an d they were
more comfortably of f. Gisela was in Mexico. She had lean  times and
worked as a cleaner to support the family . Rudolf was demobbed and living
in V ir ginia. And fashion had ‘given up’ on Iggie – as he put it. He could not
face working on gowns again: the thread from V ienna to Paris to New Y ork
had been broken by his battle experiences in 1944 in France.
He was now w orking for Bunge, an international grain exporter , an
unintentional ret urn to the patriarch’ s roots in Odessa. His first  assignment
had been a long  year in Léopol dville in the Belgian Congo, hated for both
its heat and its brutality .
In O ctober 1947 Iggie visited E ngland between postings. He had been
of fered placements back in the Congo or in Japan, neither of which
appealed. He travelled to T unbridge W ells to see Elisabeth and Henk and
his nephews, and to visit his father ’ s grave for the first time. Then he
planned to make a decision about his future.
It was after supp er . The boys had done their homework and were in bed.
Elisabeth opened the attaché case and showed him the netsuke.
A m elee of rats.  The fox with inlaid eyes. The monkey wrapped around
the gourd. His brindled wolf. T hey take a few out and put t hem on the
kitchen table of the suburban house.
W e didn’ t say anything, Iggie told me. W e had last looked at them
together in our mother ’ s dressing-room, thirty years before, sitting on the
yellow carpet.
It’ s Japan, he said. I’ll take them back.

P a r t  F o u r
T OKYO 1947–2001

30. T AKENOKO
On 1 st D ecember 1947 Iggie received Military Permit no. 4351  for entry to
Japan G1 GHQ FEC, T okyo. Six days later he arrived in the occupied city .
Coming in from Haneda airpor t, the taxi swerved around the worst of
the p otholes in t he roads, swerved to avoid the children, the bi cyclists and
the women in their baggy pat terned trousers trudging towar ds the city .
T okyo w as a strange landscape.  The first thing to notice were the looping
calligraphies of telephone wir es and power cables stretching in every
featureless direction over the red of the rusted iron roofing on the shacks.
Then, in the winter light, Mount Fuji rose up in the south-west.
The Americans had bombed T okyo for three years, but the raids of 10th
March 1945 were cataclysmic . There were walls of flame from the
incendiary bombs, ‘sowing the sky with fire’: 100,000 people were killed
and sixteen square miles of the city were destroyed.
All but a handfu l of buildings w ere flattened or incinerated. Those that
survived include d the Imperial Palace behind its grey ramparts of boulders
and its wide moats, the few built from stone or concrete, the od d kura , the
storehouse in which merchant families kept their treasures, and the Imperial
Hotel. This had been designed by Frank Lloyd W right in 1923, a fantastic,
brash co nfection of concrete temples around a series of pools, a slightly
Aztec version of japonisme . It had a lso survived the earthqu ake of 1923 and
was grazed, but mostly intact. So were the Japanese parliament building,
the Diet, some government min istries, the American Embassy and of fice
buildings in the Marunouchi business district opposite the palace.
All had been req uisitioned for the Occupation authorities. The jo urnalist
James Morris, later Jan Morri s, wrote of this strange area in his 1946
travelogue The Phoenix Cup : ‘M arunouchi is a small American island
surrounded by a Japanese sea of ashes, rubble and rusted cans. W alking
around the blocks, discordant music, from the Armed Forces Radio Station,
batters on the eardrums, and ruminating G.I.s of f duty stand propped against
the nearest convenient wall…one might be in Denver…’
It was here, in the grandest of these buildings, the Dai-Ichi (Number
One) Building, that General Ma cArthur had his headquarters. The Supreme
Commander Allied Powers (SCAP). The Y ankee daimyo.
Iggie arrived two years after the  Emperor had broadcast his dec laration
of defeat in his high falsetto, using a diction and locution unknown outside
the c ourt, warning that ‘the hardships and suf ferings to which our nation is
to be subjected will be great…’ In the months since, T okyo had become
used to its army of occupation. The Americans had declared that they would
rule with sensitivity .
In the photograp h of the Genera l and the Emperor in the US Em bassy in
T okyo th e relati onship was made clear . MacArthur is in khaki uniform, an
open-necked shirt and boots. He has his hands on his hips, a ‘big, ribbonless
American soldier ’, as Life  puts it. The Em peror is alongside. He is slight,
immaculate, in a black suit wit h his wing collar and striped tie, caught in
convention. Sen sitivity and manners, states the photograph, are up for
negotiation now . The Japanese press refuse to publish the pic ture. SCAP
makes sure it is published. The day after the photograph is taken, the
Empress sends Mrs MacArthur  a bouquet of flowers grown in the palace
grounds. And a few days later a lacquer box with the imp erial crest.
Cautious, anxious communications are started with gifts.
Iggie’ s taxi took him to the T eit o Hotel opposite the Palace. It was not
only dif ficult to get papers to get into Japan and permission to stay; it was
then dif f icult to get lodgings when you arrived, because the T eito was one
of only two hotels standing. The non-military expatriate community was
tiny . Apart from the diplomati c corps and the press, there were only a
handful of businessmen like Iggie and a scattering of academ ics. He had
arrived a s the trials of war crim inals, including Hideki T
 j
  and R y
 kichi
T anaka, head of the secret police, were just starting at the I nternational
Military T ribuna l for the Far East. T ojo, according to the W estern press, had
‘the unearthly smugness of the samurai’.
There were constant edicts from SCAP concerning everything from the
minutiae of civic life to how Japan was to be ruled, and these often reflected
American sensitivities. MacArthur had decided that there w as to be a
separation between the Shinto religion – deeply implicated in the rise of
nationalism of the last fifteen years – and the government. He also wanted
the great industrial and commercial conglomerates broken up:
 
The emperor is the head of t he state…his duties and powers will be
exercised in accordance with the new constitution and responsible to the
basic will of the people as provided therein…W ar as a sovereign right of the
nation is  abolished…The feudal  system of Japan will cease…No patent of
nobility will from this time forth embody within itself any national or civic
power of government.
 
MacArthur had also decided tha t women should get the vote for the first
time in Japan’ s history and that the twelve-hour day in factories should be
reduced to eight. Democracy had come to Japan, SCAP announced. The
local and foreign press were censored.
The Am erican army in T okyo h ad their newspapers and magazines, as
well as their radio blaring out f rom sentry boxes. They had th eir brothels
(the RA A, or Recreation and Amusement Association) and their sanctioned
pick-up joints (the Oasis of Ginza, with girls dressed in ‘shoddy imitations
of lo ng, afternoon frocks’, in t he words of one American com mentator).
There w ere special carriages on trains reserved for members of the
Occupation Army . A theatre had been requisitioned and had become the
‘Ernie Pyle’, where soldiers cou ld see films or revues, go to a library or to
one of ‘several lar ge lounges’. A nd there were the Occupation-only stores,
the OSS  (Overse as Supply Store) and the PX, which stocked American and
European food, cigarettes, household utensils and liquor . They accepted
only dollars or MFC: military payment certificates, military scrip.
As t his was an occupied countr y , everything had an acronym –  opaque
to both the defeated and to newcomers.
In this strange defeated city , street names had been removed,  so that
there wa s now an A A venue and  a 10th Street. Alongside the military jeeps
and General MacArthur ’ s 1941 b lack Cadillac, with a master ser geant at the
wheel a nd an escort of white MP jeeps sweeping through the streets en
route to his of fice, were Japanes e vans and trucks burning coal or wood for
propulsion, spewing out smoke, and three-wheeler taxis, the bata-bata ,
getting stuck in the cavernous potholes. There were still notice s up outside
Ueno station asking for information on lost relatives, soldiers returning
from abroad.
The pov erty of those years was extreme. The destruction of 60 per cent
of th e city mea nt overcrowding in the ramshackle houses tha t had been
rebuilt out of any material s to hand. The American army had
commandeered most building materials in the first eighteen months. But it
also mea nt that workers had to struggle for hours to get in from countryside
billets on horrific trains. New clothing was very dif ficult to buy , and it was
common for years after the war to see decommissioned men still in their
uniforms, stripped of their badges, and women in mompei , the baggy
trousers that used to be worn in the fields.
There w as not enough fuel. E veryone was cold. The baths char ged
black-market rat es for the first hour before the water temperatu re dropped.
Of fices were barely heated, but workers were ‘not in a hurry to leave the
of fice, s ince the y have nothing much else to do. Most of the of fices have
some sort of hea ting in winter , and the workers can keep warm as long as
they stay there.’ In one bad winter , train of ficials said that they would
silence the whistles of locomotives to save coal.
Above all, there simply was not enough food. This meant leaving before
dawn on crowded trains to barter in the country for rice. There were
rumours that farmers had stacks  of money a foot high. Or it meant going to
the blue-sky black markets that had sprung up near the railway stations in
T okyo, w here you could buy and sell and barter anything in t he open air
under the disinterested eyes of the army . There was an American Lane in
the market near the Ueno station to cater for goods that had been
appropriated or bartered from Occupation forces. American army blankets
were particularly  sought after . ‘A s the trees shed their leaves, Japanese shed
their kim onos, one by one, to sell for food. They even devised an ironic
name fo r their wretched existence: takenoko,  af ter the bambo o sprout which
peels, la yer after  layer .’ Faced w ith this hardship, the phrase of the moment
was shikata ga nai . I t means ‘noth ing can be done  about it’, with a strong
undercurrent of ‘and don’ t complain’.
Many of  these American goods,  the spam and the Ritz crackers and the
Lucky Strikes, were taken to t he black market by the pan-pan  girls, the
‘squalid tribe of harpies…girls  who go with soldiers for food…In the
daytime, they stroll about in c heap, smart dresses from the PX, noisily
talking and laughing, almost in variably chewing gum, or enraging hungry
citizens in trains and buses by a display of their ill-gotten gains.’
There w as much discussion of these girls and what they meant for
Japan. T here had been so much fear about the American army t hat the pan-
pan  w ere seen as a sacrificial way of preserving the decency of the majority
of Ja panese women. This was allied to horror at their lipstick, t heir clothes
and the way they kissed in publ ic. Kissing became symbolic of the release
from conventions that the Occupation had brought.
There were also gay parties – w hat Y ukio Mishima called gei pāti  in his
novel Kinjiki  ( Forbidden Colours ), seriali sed in the early 1950s. Gei  was
written in roman script, indicat ing that it was already in common usage.
Hibiya Park was a popular pick-up spot. I only have the unreliable Mishima
as a  guide: ‘He  entered the dim , clammy lamplight of the rest room, and
saw what is called an “of fice” among the fellowship. (There are  four or five
such important places in T okyo.) It was an of fice where the tacit procedure
is ba sed on wink s instead of doc uments, tiny gestures instead of print, code
communication in place of a telephone.’
There was a ne ed to be entrepreneurial. This young generation was
known c olloquially as apur e,  ‘ après-guerr e ’. An apur e  is a ‘college student
who freq uents dance-halls, pass es examinations by hiring a proxy , and may
engage in un-orthodox money-making activities’. The key was their
unorthodox way  of surviving, a s much as their aspirations to  achieve an
American standard of life. They had managed to disrupt norms concerning
how to work. ‘Since the war tardiness has become the norm,’ wrote one
Japanese commentator of these apur e . Th ey might be late to wo rk,
dishonest in exams, yet they were also known as hustlers, able to make
money out of nothing. Hustling meant being able to wear aloha shirts, nylon
belts or even rubber -soled sho es, called the ‘three sacred regalia’ in an
ironic re ference to the three sacr ed symbols associated with the Emperor . In
the years after the defeat there was a slew of new magazines aimed at
young men, with articles on ‘How to Save Y1,000,000’ or ‘How to Become
a Millionaire from Scratch’.
In T okyo in the  summer of 1 948 the hit song was ‘T okyo Boogie-
woogie’. It blared out from loudspeakers on the streets and from nightclubs
advertising themselves. ‘T okyo boogie-woogie/Rhythm ookie-
ookie/Kokoro zookie-zookie/W aku-waku.’ This is the start, says the press,
of kasutori , pulp culture: it will overwhelm us. V ulgar and brash,
hedonistic, limitless.
Shops spill into the streets. The re are white-robed veterans begging on
the streets, unscrewed tin legs or arms in front of them, a sign out with a list
of the campaigns they had fought in. Children roam everywhere. W ar
orphans with stories of parents dead of typhus in Manchuria, begging,
stealing, feral. School kids shouting out for chocor etto  or cigarettes, or the
phrases they have learnt from page one of the Japanese–English
Conversation Manual :
Thank you!
Thank you, awfully!
How do you do?
Or , a s they have learnt it in phon etic form: San kyu!  San kyu ofuri! Hau dei
dou?
The sou nds of the pachinko parl ours, the cacophonous cascading din of
thousands of small metal balls r icocheting around the machines . Y ou could
buy twe nty-five for the equivalent of a shilling and, with dexterity , could sit
for seve ral hours under the strip-lights feeding them in. Th e prizes –
cigarettes, razor blades, soap and canned food – can be sold back to the
owner for another cupful of balls, another few hours of oblivion.
Street life, the sprawl on the  pavement outside a bar of drunken
salarymen in their thin black  suits with their thin ties over woollen
overshirts. The peeing in the streets, the spitting. The comment s as to your
height, o r hair colour . The everyday litany of the kids calling gai-jin, gai-
jin , ‘fo reigner , foreigner ’ after you . Then there is the other T okyo s treet life:
the blind masseuses, tatami-mat makers, pickle-sellers, the crippled elderly
women, the monks. Then the sellers of skewers of pork and pep per , ochrous
tea, fat chestnut sweets, salted  fish and seaweed snacks, the smells of
grilling fish over charcoal braziers. Street life means being accosted by
shoe-shine boys, flower -sellers, itinerant artists, bar touts, as well as smells
and noise.
If you were a fo reigner , you were not allowed to fraternise. Y ou were
not allowed to enter the homes of Japanese, or to go to a Japanese
restaurant. But in the streets, you were part of a noisy , jostling world.
Iggie had a sma ll attaché case filled with ivory monks, craftsmen and
beggars, but he knew nothing about this country .
31. KODACHROME
Iggie tol d me that before he arr ived he had read only one book on Japan,
The Chrysanthemum and the Swor d: Patterns of Japanese Cultur e,  bought
en r oute in Hon olulu. It was wr itten by the ethnographer Ruth Benedict at
the i nvitation of the American Of fice of W ar Information, pieced together
through research into press clippings, literature in translation and interviews
with inte rnees. Its clarity is due , perhaps, to the fact that Benedict had no
direct ex perience of Japan. There is a pleasingly simple polarity  in the book
between the samurai sword of self-responsibility and the chrysanthemum,
trained i nto its aesthetic shape only by means of hidden wires. Her famous
thesis th at the Japanese had a cu lture of shame rather than a culture of guilt
was hugely influential amongst the American of ficers in central T okyo
planning the shape of Japanese education, law and political life. Benedict’ s
book was translated into Japane se in 1948 and was enormously  popular . Of
course it was. What could be more intriguing than to see how the
Americans saw Japan? And how a woman saw Japan at that.
Iggie’ s c opy of Benedict is in front of me as I write. His meticulous
pencil notes – mostly exclamation marks – stop seventy page s before the
end and the fin al chapters on self-discipline and childhood. Perhaps his
plane had landed.
Iggie’ s f irst of fice was in the business district of Marunouchi, with its
dull, wide streets. In summer it became impossibly hot, but his memories
were of the cold of that first win ter of 1947. There was a little hibachi , the
stove fed by charcoal, in each of fice, but these only give a vague impression
of heat.  They acknowledge the possibility , but without warming you
properly . Y ou would need to put one under your jacket to make any
dif ference.
It is  night outsid e. The of fices a re lit up beyond the fire escape. Heads
down over the typewriters, the arms of their white shirts folded back twice,
these young men are busy w ith the Japanese miracle. Cigarettes and
abacuses lie amongst their pape rs. They have swivel chairs. Iggie is partly
out o f v iew , standing with a sheaf of papers, in an of fice with opaque glass
and a telephone (rare).
The of fice knows it is the end o f the day when Iggie disappea rs down
the corr idor just  before five o clock. T o shave you need hot water , so he
would heat up the kettle on the of fice hibachi . An d he must shave before
going out.
Iggie ha ted livi ng in the hotel in the Denver -like part of T okyo and
within weeks had moved to his first house. It was in Senzoku, on the edge
of Senzo ku Lake, in the south-eastern part of the city . It was  more of a
pond, he  told me – and, anxious to make it clear , a lar ge Thoreau pond, not
a small English pond. He mov ed in winter , and had been told about the
cherry trees that grew in the garden and round the water , b ut was still
unprepared for the ef fect when spring came. The drama bu ilt over the
weeks in front of him, until there was such abundance of blossom that he
said it was lik e a blinding w hite cloud across your retina. Y ou lost
foreground or background or distance and floated.
After so many y ears of living with only the contents of a sui tcase or
two, this  was Iggie’ s first house . He was forty-two and had lived in V ienna
and Fran kfurt an d Paris and New  Y ork and Hollywood, and in army billets
across F rance and Germany – an d in Léopoldville – but had never been able
to shut a door in his own house until this first liberated, exhilarating spring
in Japan.
A summer party in Senzoku, T okyo, 1951
The house had b een built in the  1920s, with an octagonal dinin g-room
and a balcony o verlooking the lake, perfect for drinks parties. Y ou stepped
out of the sitting-room onto a lar ge, flat boulder and then do wn into the
garden with its clipped pines and azaleas, a terrace of stones arranged in a
careful random pattern, and a moss garden. It was the kind of house that the
young J apanese diplomat Ichiro Kawasaki described: ‘In pre- war years a
university profes sor or army col onel could af ford to build such a house and
live there himself. T oday the owners find these houses so e xpensive to
maintain that they must either sell them or rent them to foreigners.’
I’m looking at t he clutch of small, round-cornered Kodachrom e prints
of t his first ho use of Iggie’ s in T okyo. ‘Zoning is a subject to which
Japanese city planners have giv en little thought. It is quite common to find
a group of slummy wooden shacks of labourers immediately adjacent to the
palatial residenc e of a millionaire.’ That is the case here, though the
rebuilding of the shacks to the left and the right is being done  in concrete
rather than wood and paper . Th is neighbourhood is starting again: temples
and shri nes, the local market, the bicycle-repair man and the cluster of
shops at the end  of the road – more a track than a road – where you can buy
fat white daikon radishes laid out in rows, and cabbages, and little else.
W e start on the front doorstep with Iggie, hand in pocket, tie clip
glinting on a gr een silk tie. He  is a broad man now , given to  keeping a
handkerchief in his jacket pocket. This is something that the youngsters in
his of fic e have started to copy , the coordinating pocket ha ndkerchief–
necktie combo. T oday he is in brogues. He looks a little squirearchical. He
could be  in the Cotswolds if it w ere not for the pruned pines that flank him
and the green tiles of the roof. W e move inside into a long corridor and turn
left, where the cook Mr Haneda is in his whites, eyes closed against the
flash, leaning on the new cooke r , chef ’ s hat set jauntily on the back of his
head. A bottle of Heinz ketchup is the only food in view , Kodachrome
scarlet against all the blindingly clean enamel.
Back in the corridor we move through an open doorway , under a Noh
mask and into the sitting-room. The ceiling is of slatted wood. All the lamps
are on. Objects are displayed  on spare, dark, clean-lined K orean and
Chinese furniture alongside comfortable low sofas, occasional tables and
lamps, and ashtrays and cigarett e boxes. A wooden Buddha from  Kyoto sits
on a Korean chest, a hand raised in blessing.
The bam boo bar  holds an impre ssive quantity of liquor , none of  which I
can iden tify . It is a house made for parties. Parties with small children on
their kne es, and women in kimonos, and presents. Parties with men in dark
suits seated round small tables, loquacious with whisky . Parties at New Y ear
with cut  boughs  of pine trees hanging from the ceiling, and parties under
the cherry trees, and once – in a spirit of poetry – a firefly-viewing party .
There is  lots and lots of fraternis ation here: Japanese and American and
European friend s, sushi and be er served by Mrs Kaneko, the maid in her
uniform. It is Liberty Hall, again.
It is also a house with panache. There is none of the clutter of his
childhood in the Palais: it is a  dramatic interior of golden screens and
scrolls, paintings and Chinese pots created as a new home for the netsuke.
For right in the centre of this house, in the centre of Iggie’ s life , are the
netsuke. Iggie designed a glass  case for them. It has a patterned paper on
the walls behind it, a pale-blue pattern of chrysanthemums. Not only are the
264 nets uke back in Japan, but they are back on show in a salon. They are
placed by Iggie on three long gl ass shelves. There are hidden li ghts so that
at du sk the vitrine glows with all the gradations of cream, bon e and ivory .
At night they can light the whole room.
Here the netsuke became Japanese again.
They los e their strangeness. The y are surprisingly accurate renditions of
the f ood you eat : clams, octopus, peaches, persimmon, bamboo shoots. The
bundle of kindling that is kept by the kitchen door is knott ed like this
netsuke carved by Soko. The slow , emphatic turtles climbing  over each
other on  the edge of the temple pond are your T omokazu netsu ke. Y ou are
not, perhaps, meeting monks and pedlars and fishermen, let alon e tigers, on
the way to your of fice in Marunouchi, but the man at the noodle-stand at the
train station has the same permanent scowl as the disappointed rat-catcher .
The netsuke share their imager y with the Japanese scrolls and  gilded
screens across the room. They have something to talk with in this room,
unlike C harles’ s Moreaus and Renoirs, or Emmy’ s silver and glass scent
bottles o n her dressing-table. They have always been objects t o be picked
up and handled – now they become part of another world of handled
objects. Not only are they fam iliar in material (ivory and boxwood are
gripped every day as chopsticks), but their shapes are deeply embedded.
One wh ole type  of netsuke, the  manju  n etsuke , is named after the sm all,
rounded beancurd sweet cakes eaten daily with tea or given as o-miyage ,
the small gifts you present if you go anywhere in Japan. Manju  are dense
and surp risingly heavy , but they give slightly as you pick them up. When
you pick up a manju  netsuke your thumb expects the same sensation.
Many of Iggie’ s Japanese frien ds had never seen netsuke be fore, let
alone handled them. Jiro just rem embered his grandfather , the entrepreneur ,
dressed in his dark dense grey kimono for weddings and funerals. Five
heraldic motifs on neck and cu f fs and sleeves, white split-toed socks and
geta  or wooden clog s, the wide obi belt in its stif f knot round his wa ist, and
a ne tsuke – some animal? a rat? – hanging on its cord. But netsuke had
disappeared fro m daily use eighty years beforehand in the early Meiji
period, when kimonos for men had been discouraged. At Iggie’ s parties,
with glasses of whisky and pla tes of edamame, crunchy green-bean pods,
scattered on the tables, the cas es were opened. Netsuke were picked up
again, exclaimed over , handed round and enjoyed. And friends explain them
to you. As it is 1951, the Y ear of the Hare in the zodiac, you hold the
netsuke made from the cleares t ivory in the whole collectio n, and it is
explained that it gleams because it is a lunar hare racing across  the waves,
illuminated by moonlight.
The last  time netsuke had been handled in this social way was in Paris
by E dmond de G oncourt, by Degas and Renoir in Charles Ephr ussi’ s salon
of co ntemporary  good taste, a conversation between an eroticised otherness
and new art.
Now they are back home in Japan, the netsuke are a memory of
conversations with grandparents about calligraphy , or poetry , or the
shamisen. For Iggie’ s Japanese guests, they are part of a lost world, made
more as tringent by the bleakness of post-war life. Look, the netsuke
reprove, at this wealth of time there used to be.
Here the y are also part of a new  version of japonisme . Igg ie’ s house h as
its counterpart in 1950s international-design magazines with their emphasis
on th e la yering o f Japanese style into the contemporary home. Japan can be
referenced by a signature Buddh a, a screen, a rough country jar in the new
folk-craft trend. Ar chitectural Digest  is full of residences in America with
these ob jects alo ngside the gold leaf in the hall, a wall of mirrors, the use of
raw silk on the walls, vast plate-glass windows and abstract paintings.
In this T okyo house of an adop ted American there is a tokonoma , the
alcove that is so  important in tra ditional houses, a space held apart from the
rest of the hou se by a pillar of untreated timber . Country grasses are
arranged in a basket near a  scroll painting and a Japanese bowl.
Contemporary J apanese pictures of etiolated figures and horses  by Fukui, a
favourite young painter , hang on the walls. Iggie’ s catholic collection of
books o n Japanese art, Proust up against James Thurber and  stacks and
stacks of American crime, range the shelves.
But here  among st the Japanese art are also a few paintings f rom the
Palais E phrussi i n V ienna, collected by his grandfather in the heady years of
the fami ly’ s asc endancy during the 1870s. A picture of an Arab boy by a
painter w hom Ignace supported  on his travels around the Middle East. A
couple o f Austrian landscapes. A little Dutch painting of some contented
cows that once hung on a ba ck corridor . In his dining-room, above a
sideboard, is a melancholy picture of a soldier with a musket in a
penumbrous wood, which used to be in his father ’ s dressing-room at the
end of the corridor alongside th e vast Leda an d the Swan  and the bust of
Herr W essel.
Here are the bits of restitutio n wrung out of V ienna by Elisabeth,
hanging alongside Iggie’ s Japanese scrolls. This, too, is a bit of
fraternisation: Ringstrassenstil  in Japan.
These photogra phs are vivid: they radiate happiness. Iggie had a
capacity to get along, wherever he was – there are even snaps  of him and
soldier f riends d uring the war , playing with an adopted puppy  in a ruined
bunker . In Japan he is expansive to his Japanese and W estern fr iends in this
eclectic setting.
His hap piness w as compounde d when he moved to another beautiful
house and garden in a more convenient location in Azabu. He hated the idea
of th is area – a gaijin  colony full of d iplomats – but t he house was high up,
with a series of interconnecting  rooms and with a garden falling away in
front of it, full of white camellias.
It was big enoug h to build a separate apartment for his young fri end Jiro
Sugiyama. They  had met in July 1952. ‘I ran into an old classmate outside
the Marunouchi  building who introduced me to his boss Leo Ephrussi…
T wo weeks after that, I had a call from Leo – I always called him Leo –
inviting me to h ave dinner with him. W e had lobster thermidor  on the roof
garden o f the T okyo Kaikan…a nd through him I got a job at an old Mitsui
company , Sumitomo.’ They were to be together for forty-one years.
Jiro was twenty-six, slight and h andsome, fluent in English and a lover
of Fats W aller a nd Brahms. When they met he had just returned  from three
years st udying at an American university on a scholarship. His passport
from the  Administration Of fice Occupation Forces was stamped no. 19. Jiro
remembered his anxiety about how he would be treated in America, and
how the newspapers wrote it up: ‘a young Japanese boy of f to America in a
grey flannel suit and white Oxford shirt’.
Jiro had grown up as the middle child of five siblings in a merchant
family that made lacquered wooden clogs in Shizuoka, the city between
T okyo a nd Y okohama: ‘our family made the very best, painted geta  with
urushi  lacquer on them. My grandfather T okujiro made our fortune out of
geta …W e ha d a lar ge traditional house with ten people working in th e shop,
and they all h ad quarters to live in.’ They were a pros perous and
entrepreneurial f amily , and in 19 44 Jiro, aged eighteen, had been  sent to the
preparatory sch ool for W aseda University in T okyo and then on to the
university itself. T oo young to f ight, he had seen T okyo obliter ated around
him.
Jiro, my Japanese uncle, has be en part of my life for as long as Iggie.
W e sat together in the study of his T okyo apartment and he talk ed of those
early da ys toget her . They would leave the city on Friday nights and ‘have
our weekends around T okyo, in Hakone, Ise, Kyoto, Nikko,  or stay in
ryokan  and onsen  and have good food. He had a yellow DeSoto convertible
with a black top . The first thing after leaving our luggage at the  ryokan  Leo
always w anted to do, was to go to antique shops – Chinese pots, Japanese
pots, furniture… ’ And during the week they would meet up after work.
‘He’d sa y “Mee t me at the Shiseido restaurant for beef curry rice, or for
crabmeat croque tte.” Or we’d meet at the bar of the Imperial. Th ere were so
many parties at home. W e’d have whisky together late at night after
everyone had gone, with opera on the gramophone.’
Their life was Kodachrome –  I can see that yellow-and-bl ack car
glistening like a hornet on a dus ty road in the Japanese alps, the pinkness of
the croquette framed on white.
They ex plored Japan together , travelling to an inn that specialised in
river trout one weekend; to a town on the coast for an autumn  matsuri , a
jostling parade of red-and-gold festival floats. They went to exhibitions of
Japanese art at the museums in Ueno Park. And to the first travelling
exhibitions of Impressionism from European museums, where the queues
stretched from the entrance to the gates. They came out from seeing
Pissarro, and T okyo looked like Paris in the rain.
Iggie and Jir o on a boat in the Inland Sea, Japan, 1954
But mus ic was closest to the heart of their life together . Beet hoven’ s
Ninth Symphon y had become extremely popular during the war . The Ninth
– Daiku  as it was known  colloquially – became an entrenched part of New
Y ear , wi th huge choirs singing the ‘Ode to Joy’. Under the Occ upation, the
T okyo Symphony Orchestra had been partly sponsored by the authorities
with programmes selected from  requests by the troops. And now , in the
early 1950s, there were regional orchestras across Japan. Schoolchildren
with satchels on their backs clut ched violin cases. Foreign orchestras started
to v isit, and Jiro and Iggie would go to one concert after another: Rossini,
W agner and Brahms. They saw Rigoletto  t oge ther , and Ig gie recalled that it
was the first opera he had seen with his mother in their box  in V ienna
during the First W orld W ar , and that she had cried at the final curtain.
And so this is the fourth resting-place of the netsuke. It is a vitrine in a
sitting-room in post-war T okyo looking out across a bed of clipped
camellias, where  the netsuke are  washed late at night by waves o f Gounod’ s
Faust , played loud.
32. WHERE DID YOU GET THEM?
The arrival of the Americans meant that Japan had, once again, become a
country to plunder , a country f ull of attractive objects, pairs of Satsuma
vases, k imono robes, lacquer and gilt swords, folding screens with peonies,
chests with bronze handles. Ja panese stuf f was so cheap, so  abundant.
Newsweek ’ s fi rst report on  Occupied Japan on 24th September 1945 wa s
headlined ‘Y ank s Start Kimono Hunt, Learn What Geishas Doesn’ t’ ( sic ).
That blu nt and cryptic headline, joining souvenirs and girls, s ums up the
Occupation. The New Y ork T imes  later that year reported ‘A Sailor Goes on
a Sh opping Spree’: if you were  a GI there was very little else to buy , after
you had spent what you could on cigarettes, beer and girls.
A successful après-guerr e  opened a small money-exchange booth on
the pier at Y oko hama, converti ng dollars into yen for the first American
soldiers. He also bought and res old American cigarettes. But, crucially , the
third part of his  business was selling ‘cheap Japanese bric-a-b rac, such as
bronze Buddha images. Brass candleholders, and incense burners, which he
had salvaged from bombed-out areas. Being great novelties in those days,
these curio items sold like proverbial hotcakes.’
How did you know what to buy? All soldiers ‘had to suf fer an hour in
combat subjects [such] as Japanese flower arrangement, incense burning,
marriage, dress, tea ceremonies, and fishing with cormorants,’ John
LaCerda acidly commented in The Con quer or Comes to T ea: J apan under
MacArthur , p ublished in 1 946. For the m ore serious there were the new
guides to Japanese arts and craft, printed on grey paper so thin that it feels
like tiss ue. The Japan T ravel Bureau published its guides ‘to give to the
passing tourists and other foreig ners interested in Japan a basic  knowledge
of v arious phases of Japanese culture’. They included, amongst other
subjects: Floral Art of Japan , Hir oshige , Kimono (Japanese Dr ess) , T ea
Cult of Japan , Bonsai ( Miniatur e Potted T r ees) .  And, of course, Netsuke: A
Miniatur e Art of Japan.
From th e bric-a- brac salesmen on the pier at Y okohama to the m en with
a ha ndful of lacquers on a white cloth sitting outside a tem ple, it was
dif ficult not to e ncounter Japan for sale. Everything was old, or labelled as
old. Y ou  could buy an ashtray , a  lighter or tea towel with images of geisha,
Mount F uji, wis teria. Japan was a series of snapshots, of postcards coloured
like broc ade, cherry blossom as pink as candy-floss. Madame Butterfly and
Pinkerton, cliché jumbled up against cliché. But you could ju st as easily
buy an ‘exotic r emnant of the Age of the Daimyos’. As T ime  put it in the
article ‘Y en for Art’, writing about the Hauge brothers, who had amassed an
exceptional collection of Japanese art:
 
Of the countless GIs who spent a tour of duty in Japan, few failed to load up
on souvenirs. But only a handful of Americans realised what a collector ’ s
paradise was within their reach… The Hauges got of f to a flying start with
the whir lwind o f inflation that swept the Japanese yen from 15 all the way
to 360 to the dollar . At the sam e time the Hauges were reap ing a paper
harvest of yen, Japanese famili es, hit with postwar taxes, we re living an
‘onionskin’ existence, peeling of f long-treasured art works to stay afloat.
 
Onionskin, bamboo shoots. They were images of vulnerability ,
tenderness and tears. They were  also images of undressing. It paralleled the
stories s o avidly  told and retol d by Philippe Sichel and the Goncourts in
Paris during the first febrile rush of japonisme  of how you could buy
anything, how you could buy anyone.
Iggie might be e xpatriate, but he was still an Ephrussi. He too started to
collect. On his t rips with Jiro he  bought Chinese ceramics – a pair of T ang
Dynasty horses with arching backs, celadon-green dishes with swimming
fish, fift eenth-century blue-and-white porcelain. He bought Japanese golden
screens with crimson peonies, scrolls with misty landscapes, early Buddhist
sculpture. Y ou could buy a Ming Dynasty bowl for a carton of Lucky
Strikes, Iggie told me, guiltily . He showed it to me. It has a perfect high
ring, if you tap it gently . It has peonies painted in blue under a m ilky glaze.
I wonder who had to sell it.
It was during these years of the Occupation that netsuke became
‘collectables’. T he Japan T ravel Bureau guide on netsuke, published in
1951, records ‘valuable help g iven by Rear Admiral Benton W . Dekker ,
former c ommander of the US Fleet Activities at Y okosuka, Japan and a
most devoted connoisseur of Netsuke’. This guide, in print for thirty years,
gave its view of netsuke in the clearest way:
 
The Japanese are by nature clever with their fingers. This deftness may be
attributed to their inclination to small things, developed in them because
they live  in a s mall insular country , and are not continental i n character .
Their ha bit of eating their meals with chopsticks, which they learn to handle
cleverly from early childhood, may also be regarded as one o f the causes
that made them thus deft-handed. Such a special characteristic is
responsible at once for the merits and demerits of Japanese art. The people
lack an aptitude for producing  anything on a lar ge scale or deep and
substantial. But they display their nature in finishing their work with
delicate skill and scrupulous execution.
 
The way  that Japanese objects were talked of had not changed in the
eighty y ears sin ce Charles bought them in Paris. Netsuke wer e still to be
enjoyed for all those positive a ttributes given to precocious children, the
ability to finish, scrupulousness.
It is  a bitter thing to be compared to a child. It was made ev en more
painful w hen this was publicly e xpressed by General MacArthur . Sacked by
President T ruma n on the grounds of insubordination over the K orean W ar ,
the G eneral left T okyo for Haneda airport on 16th April 1951: ‘ escorted by
a ca valcade of military police m otorcyclists…Lining the route there were
American troops, the Japanese police and Japanese people. School children
were given time of f from classes to line the road; public servants in post
of fices, hospital s or administrations were given the opportunity to attend
also. The T okyo police estim ated that 230,000 persons had witnessed
MacArthur ’ s de parture. It was a quiet crowd,’ wrote the New Y ork T imes ,
‘which g ave littl e outward sign o f emotion…’ At the Senate hea rings on his
return, M acArthur compared the Japanese to a twelve-year - old boy in
comparison to a forty-five-year -old Anglo-Saxon adult: ‘Y ou can plant
basic co ncepts t here. They [are] close enough to origin to be elastic and
acceptable to new concepts.’
It fe lt lik e public , global humiliation for a country free after sev en years
of occupation. Since the war Japan had been substantially rebuilt, partly
through American subsidies, but substantially by their own entrepreneurial
skills. Sony , for instance, started as a radio repair shop in a bombed-out
department store in Nihonbashi  in 1945. It created one new p roduct after
another – electrically heated cushions in 1946, Japan’ s first tape recorder
the f ollowing year – by hiring y oung scientists and buying materials on the
black market.
If y ou walked along the Ginz a, the central shopping boulevard in
T okyo, in the summer of 1951 you would pass one well-stocked store after
another: Japan was making its way in the modern world. Y ou would also
pass T ak umi, a long thin shop with dark bowls and cups stacked  on shelves
alongside bolts of indigo clo th from folk-craft weavers. In 1950 the
Japanese government introduced the category of the National Living
T reasure, someone – usually an elderly man – whose skill in lacquer or
dying or pottery was rewarded with a pension and fame.
T aste had swung round towards the gestural, intuitive, inef fable.
Anything made in a remote vill age became ‘traditional’ and was marketed
as intrin sically Japanese. These  years saw the start of Japanese tourism,
with booklets published by the  Japanese Department of Railways: Some
Suggestions for Souvenir Seekers . ‘T ravel of any kind would not be
complete withou t some souvenirs to take home.’ Y ou should return with the
right o-miyage , or gif t. It could be a sweet- meat, a kind of biscuit or
dumpling specif ic to one village , a box of tea, a pickled fish. Or it could be
a handicraft, a sh eaf of paper , a tea-bowl from a village kiln, an embroidery .
But it must hav e its regional sp ecificity pulsing behind its paper -and-cord
wrapping, its calligraphic tag: th ere is a mapping of Japan, a g eography of
appropriate gifts . Not to bring an o-miyage  is an af front in some way to the
idea of travelling itself.
Netsuke now belonged to the a ge of the Meiji and the opening up of
Japan. In the hi erarchies of knowledge, netsuke were now rather looked
down on as over -skilled : they carried the slightly stale air of japonisme  with
them, of the marketing of Japan to the W est. They were just too deft.
No matter how many calligrap hies were shown – a single explosive
brushstroke of black by some m onk, a concentration of decades into four
seconds of control – show something small and ivory , ‘a group o f Kiyohimi
and a dragon circling the temple bell within which the monk Anchin hides’
and eve ryone m arvelled. Not at the idea, or the composition , but at the
possibility of concentrating for so long on such a small thing. How did
T anaka Minko carve the monk inside the bell through that tiny , tiny hole?
Netsuke were too popular with Americans.
Iggie wrote about his netsuke in an article published in Japanese in the
Nihon Keizai Shimbun , the  T ok yo equi valent of the W all Str eet Journal . He
described his memories of them as a child in V ienna and their escape from
the Pala is, unde r the noses of the Nazis in the pocket of a maid. And he
wrote of  them returning to Japan. Good fortune had brought them back to
Japan af ter three  generations in Europe. He had, he said, asked Mr Y uzuru
Okada of the T okyo National Museum in Ueno, the writer on netsuke, to
come and examine the collection. Poor Mr Okada, I think, trailing out to a
gaijin ’ s house  to smile over another collection of W esterner ’ s bric- a-brac
evening after evening. ‘He met me very reluctantly – I did not know why –
and he glanced a t about three hu ndred netsuke spread out on a table as if he
were sic k of seeing them…Mr Okada picked up one of my ne tsuke. Then
he began to carefully examine the second one with his magnifier . At last,
after he had exa mined the third one for a long time, he suddenly stood up
and asked me where I got them…’
The vitrine of netsuke in Iggie’ s house in Azabu, T okyo, 1961
These w ere grea t examples of Ja panese art. They might be currently out
of fa shion – in Okada’ s museum  in Ueno Park in T okyo’ s National Museum
of Japanese art, a visitor would find only a single vitrine of netsuke
amongst the chilly halls of ink-paintings – but here was real s culpture for
the hand.
Ninety y ears aft er they first left Y okohama, someone picks up a  netsuke
and knows who made it.
33. THE REAL JAP AN
By the early 1960s Iggie was a ‘long-term T okyo resident’. European and
American friend s came on three-year postings and were gone. Iggie had
seen of f the Occupation. He was still in T okyo.
He h ad a tutor for Japanese and now spoke it beautifully , with  fluency
and subtlety . Every foreigner wh o can stammer a few apologetic phrases in
Japanese is complimented on their extraordinary skills. Jozu desu ne? : My ,
but how  skilled you are! My own Japanese, wrenchingly clu msy , full of
strange longueurs and rushed ascents, has been praised enough for me to
know how this w orks. But I heard Iggie in deep conversation and know he
could speak Japanese well.
He l oved T okyo. He loved the  way the skyline changed, the rust-red
T okyo T ower bu ilt at the end of the 1950s to emulate the Eif fel T ower; the
new apartment blocks hard again st the smoky yakitori booths. H e identified
with the  city’ s capacity for reinvention. The chance to reinvent himself was
one that seemed godsent. There was a strange correlation between V ienna
in 1919 and T okyo in 1947, he said. If you haven’ t been so low , you don’ t
know how you can build somet hing, you can’ t measure what y ou’ve built.
Y ou will always think it is due to someone else.
How can you be ar to stay in this place? Iggie was asked repea tedly by
expatriates. Don’ t you get bored doing the same old things?
Iggie told me what qualified as  expatriate T okyo life, the eigh t brittle
hours held between your orders to the maid and cook after breakfast and the
first cocktail at half-past five. If you were a man of business in Japan, you
had your of fice and then you socialised. Sometimes there would be geisha
parties o f such length and tediousness and cost that Iggie cursed leaving
Léopoldville. Ev ery night, cleanly shaven, he had drinks with clients. The
first bar  was at the Imperial, d ark mahogany and velvet, whisky sours, a
pianist. Drinks at the American Club, the Press Club, International House.
Then, pe rhaps, a nother bar . D. J . Enright, a visiting English poe t, listed his
favourites: the Bar Renoir , Bar Rimbaud, La V ie en Rose, Sous les T oits de
T okyo and, best of all, La Peste.
If you had no work, you had th ose eight hours to fill. What could you
do? Go to Kikokuniya in the Ginza to see if they have any new W estern
novels and magazines or to Maruzen bookshop with its pre-war stock of
lives of clerics, which have been  on their shelves for thirty years? Or to one
of the cafés on the top floors of the department stores?
Y ou have visitors. But how man y times do you take visitors to see the
great Buddha at Kamakura, or to the shrines for the T okugawa Shoguns at
Nikko –  red lacquer and gold climbing up a hillside of c ryptomeria?
Outside the temples in Kyoto, or the shrine at Nikko, or the steps up to the
Buddha at Kamakura are the kio sks of souvenir -sellers, the prayer -hawkers,
the o-miyage -pushers. There are the ‘take your photograph’ merchants
under a red umb rella, by the lacquer bridge, next to the Golden Pavilion, by
the s ide of a simpering girl dressed in an ersatz costume with white make-
up and a comb in her hair .
How oft en can your bear kabuki? Or , worse, three hours of the Noh
drama? How often do you go to an onsen , t he hot-water s prings, before the
prospect of relaxing chest-high in a pool comes to be one of horror?
Y ou can go to the lectures at the  British Council by visiting poets, or to
an exhibition at the department stores of ceramics, or you can learn flower -
arranging – ikebana. T o be a woman in this expatriate environm ent is to be
made aware of your fragile status. Y ou are encouraged to learn what Enright
wrote w as one of the ‘humiliat ingly “simplified” art-crafty cults’ like the
tea-ceremony , newly resur gent in Japan.
Because this is what it was about: Getting to the Real Japan. ‘I must try
to se e so mething in the country that was whole and untouched,’ writes one
desperate traveller after a month of T okyo in 1955. Getting to th e whole and
untouched mean s getting out of T okyo: Japan starts where the sounds of the
city end. Ideally it means going  to a place where no W esterner has visited
before. This makes it increasingly competitive to find authentic
experiences. It is cultural one-upmanship, this sensitivity in comparison
with others. Do you write haiku ? Do brush-painting? Make pots? Meditate?
Do you drink green tea from choice?
Getting to the real Japan depends on your schedule. If you have a
fortnight, this would mean Ky oto and a day-trip to see some cormorant
fishermen, maybe a day-trip to a pottery village, a tea-ceremo ny with its
attendant longueurs. A month would mean a visit to Kyushu in the south of
the c ountry . A year and you could write a book. Dozens did. J apan – my ,
what an  odd country! A country in transition. V anishing traditions.
Enduring traditions. Essential verities. Seasons in. Myopia of the Japanese.
Love of detail of. Dexterity . Self-suf ficiency of. Childishness of.
Inscrutability of.
Elizabeth Gray V ining, the Ame rican tutor to the Crown Prince for four
years and author of W indows for the Cr own Prince , wrote in a sequel of the
‘many b ooks ab out Japan written by Americans who have lost their hearts
to their former foes’. There were travelogues by the English too: W illiam
Empson, Sacheverell Sitwell, B ernard Leach, W illiam Plomer . It’ s Better
W ith Y ou r Shoes  Off  – cartoo ns tellin g what it’ s reall y like to live in Japan –
The Japanese Ar e Like That , An I ntr oduction  to Japan , This Scor ching
Earth , A P otter in Japan , Four Gentlemen  of Japan . A gush of books
interchangeably called Japan Behind the Fan , Behind the Scr eens , Behind
the Mask , Bridge of the Br ocade Sash . Th ere is Hono r T racy’ s Kakemono:
A Sk etch Book o f Post-W ar Japan , with its dislike of ‘young men with their
stickily pomaded hair and girls with garish make-up circling the floor , an
expression of near imbecility on  their faces…’ Enright wryly re marked that
he harboured an ambition to belong to that small and select band of people
who have lived in Japan without writing a book about it, in his introduction
to his own book on the subject, The W orld of Dew .
W riting about Japan means that you have to show a visceral dislike of
(W estern) lipstic k smeared across a beautiful (oriental) cheek, the ways in
which modernis ation disfigures  the country . Or you try to ma ke it funny ,
like the special issue of Life  on Japan for 1 1th September 1964, with a
geisha in full g et-up launching  a bowling ball on the cover . The new
Americanised c ountry tastes like the flatness of pan , the doughy white
bread that had been made in Japan since the end of the ninetee nth century ,
and a sort of pro cessed cheese of incomparable soapiness, yellower than a
marigold. This you compare to the spikiness of Japanese pickles, radishes,
the bite of wasabi in a piece o f sushi. In doing so you are m irroring the
views o f travellers eighty years before. Y ou all share in Lafcadio Hearn’ s
lyrical falling lament.
And this  is where Iggie was di f ferent. He might open a black  lacquer
bento box, with its rice and p ickled plums and fish neatly a rranged on
vermilion for lunch. But it w ould be Chateaubriand with Jiro and his
Japanese friends in the evening at a restaurant near the Ginza Crossing
where the new neon signs flash ed T oshiba, Sony , Honda. And on to a film
by T eshigahara and then back home for a whisky , with the nets uke cabinet
open and Stan G etz on the gramophone. Iggie and Jiro’ s life was lived in
another kind of Real Japan.
After tw enty years of false sta rts and comparative hardship in Paris,
New Y ork, Hollywood and the army , Iggie had now lived in T okyo longer
than he had in V ienna: he was s tarting to belong. He had compe tence in the
world, he was making somethi ng of himself, earning enough to support
himself and his friends. He helped his siblings and his nephews and nieces.
By t he mid-1960s Rudolf was m arried with five young children. Gisela
was flou rishing in Mexico. And Elisabeth in T unbridge W ells, walking to
9.30 ma tins at the parish church on Sundays in her sensible c oat, seemed
completely English. Henk is retired and reads the Financial T imes ,
hopefully . Their two sons are do ing well. My father has been ordained as a
priest in the Church of England, has married a vicar ’ s daughter , a historian,
and has become  a university cha plain in Nottingham. They have four sons –
including me. My uncle Constan t Hendrik (Henry), a successful barrister in
London, has joined the Parliamentary Counsel Of fice and is married with
two sons. The Reverend V ictor de W aal and his brother Henry are
professional Eng lishmen, speaki ng English at home, continental only in the
slight roll to their Rs.
Iggie ha d turned himself into a businessman, becoming the kind  of man,
he said once, po ignantly , that his father would recognise. Partl y because I
don’ t un derstand money , I see h im in a similar way to V iktor , th e great man
of business hiding slightly behin d his desk, a book of poetry su rreptitiously
hidden amongst the ledgers, loo king forward to his release of the end of the
day . In fact, unlike his father , who had presided over a spectacu lar series of
downfalls, Iggie proved to be good with money . ‘Suf fice it to sa y ,’ he types
in a copy of a 1964 Private & Confidential letter to the General Manager of
Swiss B ank Corp, Zurich – used  as a bookmark in his copy of Our Man in
Havana  – ‘that I started  in Japan from scratch and have been able over the
years to build up  an or ganisation with a yearly turnover of over 100 million
yen. W e maintain two of fices in Japan, in T okyo and Osaka, employing
some 45  people and I am V ice President and Japan manager…’  A hundred
million yen was a fair amount.
Iggie be came a banker after all , a hundred years after his grandfather
Ignace o pened the bank in V ienna of f the Schottengasse. He became the
representative of Swiss Bank in T okyo – the ne plus ultra  o f banks, he
explained to me. He acquired a  bigger of fice – this one with a secretary
behind a  desk in the reception a rea, with an ikebana arrangement of a pine
branch a nd iris. From the sixth-floor windows he could look west across the
blocky new landscape of cranes  and aerials of T okyo, and east to the pines
of the Imperial Palace and dow n to the streams of yellow taxis below in
Ōtemachi.
He was growing  into himself, too. In 1964 he was fifty-eight, with a
firmly knotted tie under a dark-grey suit, a hand in a pocket as in his
V iennese graduation photograph. His hair was receding, but Iggie knew
enough about himself to avoid a comb-over .
Jiro, a handsom e thirty-eight, had a new career working for CBS
negotiating to bring American TV programmes into Japan. ‘And,’ said Jiro,
‘I w as re sponsible for bringing the V iennese concert for New Y ear to Japan
for NHK. No one wanted it! The wild reaction! Y ou know the adoration of
Japanese for V iennese music, for Strauss? They asked Iggie  in the taxi
“Where are you from?” He’d reply “W ien, Austria” and then they start la-
la-la-ing the “Blue Danube W altz”.’
In 1970 the couple bought some land on the Izu Peninsula, seventy
miles south of T okyo, enough space for a cottage. In a photograph there is a
veranda for evening drinks. Th e ground falls away in front of you and,
framed by bamboos, there is a glimpse of sea.
And they bought a plot for a gr ave in the grounds of the temple where
one of their closest friends had his family tomb. Iggie was here to stay .
And the n in 1972 they moved to T akanawa, to apartments in a new
building in a good location. ‘Higashi-Ginza, Shimbashi, Daimon, Mita’
sings th e voice on the subway , and then ‘Sengakuji’, and you alight and
walk up the hill to home, on this quiet street next to the walls of the palace
of P rince T akamatsu. T okyo can be very quiet. I once sat waiti ng for them
to come home, s itting on the low  green railing opposite, and in an hour only
two old ladies came past and a hopeful yellow taxi.
They were not lar ge apartme nts, but very convenient: they were
thinking ahead. Separate front d oors, but adjoining, with a doo r from one
dressing-room to another . Iggie put one mirrored wall in his hall and lined
the other with s quares of gold leaf. There was a little stool on which you
could sit to slip your shoes of f, and a tutelary Buddha from some long-
for gotten raid in Kyoto. Some of the V ienna pictures migrated to Jiro’ s side,
and some of Ji ro’ s Japanese porcelain ended up on Iggie’ s shelves. A
photograph of Emmy stood nex t to a photograph of Jiro’ s mother on the
little shrine. From Iggie’ s dres sing-room, with its library of j ackets, you
looked over the Prince’ s gardens. From the drawing-room with its vitrine
you could see all the way to T okyo Bay .
Iggie and Jiro went on holid ays together . V enice, Florence, Paris,
London, Honolulu. And in 1973 they went to V ienna. It was th e first time
Iggie had been back since 1936.
Iggie ta kes Jiro  to stand outsid e the Palais where he had been born.
They go  to the Bur gtheater , to the Sacher , to his father ’ s old café . And when
they return, Iggie makes two decisions. They are connected. The first is to
adopt Jiro as his son. Jiro becomes Jiro Ephrussi Sugiyama. The second is
to re voke his Am erican citizensh ip. I asked him about this return to V ienna,
and his return to becoming an  Austrian citizen, thinking of Elisabeth’ s
journey round the Ring from the station to find the broken lind ens outside
their childhood house. ‘I could n’ t bear Nixon’ was all he said, catching
Jiro’ s ey e, chang ing the subject, moving the conversation as far  away as he
could.
It makes  me wonder what belonging to a place means. Charles died a
Russian in Paris. V iktor called it wrong and was a Russian in V ienna for
fifty years, then Austrian, then a citizen of the Reich, and then stateless.
Elisabeth kept Dutch citizenship  in England for fifty years. And Iggie was
Austrian, then American, then an Austrian living in Japan.
Y ou assimilate, but you need somewhere else to go. Y ou keep your
passport to hand. Y ou keep something private.
34. ON POLISH
It must have been in the 1970s that Iggie pasted little numbe rs onto the
netsuke, drew up a list of what they all were and had them assessed. They
were surprisingly valuable. The tiger was the star .
This is finally when the netsuke carvers regain their names and start to
become people with families, craftsmen in a particular landscape. The
stories start to settle around them:
 
Early in  the nineteenth century there lived in Gifu a carver named
T omokazu, who excelled in making netsuke animal figures. One day he left
home lightly clad as if he were going to the public bath, and nothing was
heard of him fo r three or four days. His family and the neigh bours were
greatly concern ed about what had become of him, when s uddenly he
returned. He explained the reason for his disappearance, saying that he had
intended to carve a netsuke of a deer and had gone into the d epths of the
mountains, whe re he watched intently the way these animals l ived, eating
nothing during the whole time. He is said to have accomplished the
intended work, based on his observations in the mountains…It was not rare
that a month or even two months were spent in making a single netsuke…
 
When I go to my cabinet I find  four small tortoises climbing on each
other ’ s backs. I look up the num ber on Iggie’ s list and it is by T omokazu. It
is made from boxwood, the colour of a caffè macchiato . It is very small,
and has been carved so that when you roll it in your hands you feel the
slippery tortoise s struggling over one another , round and round and round.
As I hold it, I know that this man did look at tortoises.
Iggie ma de notes on the queries  by scholars and by a dealer or two who
came to  see the collection. Why should anyone think that signing a piece
simplifies matters? Signing i s the start of questions of Byzantine
complexity . Are  the strokes don e with authority or are they hesitant? How
many strokes have gone into a c haracter? Is it enclosed within a border? If
so, what is the shape of the cartouche? What about alternative readings of
the characters?  And, my favourite, a question of almost scholastic
profundity: what is the relationship between a great carver and a poor
signature?
I can’ t cope with this, so I look at the patination. And then I read up on
it:
 
T o O ccidentals it may seem tha t a dif ference in polish is only a matter of
formula and application. In poin t of fact, polish is a very impor tant process
in the creation o f a fine netsuke. It comprises a series of boilin gs, dryings
and rub bings with various ingredients and materials that are carefully
guarded secrets. A fine polish requires three or four days of laborious
patience and conscientious ca re. The thick, rich, brown po lish of the
younger T oyozaku, although fine, is not of such eclipsing excellence.
 
So I take out my tiger with the yellow-horn inlaid eyes by the younger
T oyokazu of the T amba school. This carver worked in fine, dense boxwood
and was  well known for the mob ility he achieved in his animals . Mine has a
striped t ail that is a whiplash up his back. I take it out for a day  or two, and
once, stu pidly , l eave it on my notes in the fifth-floor stacks (Biography K–
S) at the London Library while I go for cof fee. But he is still there when I
get back , my non-eclipsing tige r with his glowing eyes in his rich, brown
scowling face.
He is pure menace. He has seen of f the other readers.
C o d a
T OKYO, ODESSA, LONDON 2001–2009

35. JIRO
I am  back in T okyo, walking up from the under ground station past the
isotonic drink machines. It is September and I haven’ t been here for a
couple of years. The machines are new . Some things chang e slowly in
T okyo. T here are still the few raggedy wooden houses with their washing
pegged out next to the silvery condominiums. Mrs X at the sushi restaurant
is cleaning the steps.
I stay with Jiro, as I always do. He is in his early eighties, busy . He goes
to th e Opera, of course, and the theatre. And he has spent a few years going
to a pott ery clas s and making te a-bowls and small dishes for soy sauce. Jiro
has left Iggie’ s apartment unchanged since he died fifteen yea rs ago. The
pens are still in their holder and the blotter is still central on the desk. This
is where I’m staying.
I’ve brought a t ape-recorder and  we fiddle with it for a while and then
give up, watch the news and h ave a drink and some toast and pâté. I am
here for three days to ask him more about his life with Iggie, and check that
I have not remembered anything incorrectly in the story of the netsuke. I
want to make sure that I have the story of Iggie and Jiro’ s first meeting
correct, the name of the street w here they had their first house together . It is
one of those conversations that needs to happen, but I’m worried about its
formality .
I’m jet-lagged and awake at three-thirty in the morning. I make myself
cof fee. I  run my hands along Iggie’ s bookcases, the old children’ s books
from V ienna, complete runs of Len Deighton next to Proust, trying to find
something to read. I take down  some old copies of Ar chitectural Digest ,
which I love fo r their glamorous adverts for Chryslers and Chivas Regal
whisky , and I f ind sandwiched between June and July 1966 a n envelope
containing very old documents,  of ficial-looking, in Russian. I walk round
and round. I’m not sure I can cope with any more surprising envelopes.
I l ook up at the p ictures salvage d from the Palais, which used to hang in
V iktor ’ s study at the end of the  corridor , and at the gold screen with the
irises on it that Iggie bought in Kyoto in the 1950s. I pick up an old Chinese
bowl with deeply carved petals. The incisions hold the gre en glaze. I
suppose I’ve known it for thirty years now and it still feels good.
This whole room has been part of my life for so long that I can’ t watch
it, distance myself from it. I can’ t inventory it, as I did Charles’ s rooms in
the rue de Mon ceau and the avenue d’Iéna, or Emmy’ s dressing-room in
V ienna.
I fall asleep at dawn.
Jiro mak es good breakfasts. W e have excellent cof fee and pawpaw and
tiny pains au chocolat  from one of the Ginza bakeries. And then we take a
deep breath and he starts to tell me for the first time about the day the war
ended, how on 1 5th August 1945 he was recuperating from a slight case of
pleurisy and was bored. He had come up to T okyo to see a frie nd and they
were going home on the afternoon train to Izu. ‘It was not easy to get train
tickets, and we were chatting on the train when we saw wom en wearing
very col ourful clothes. And we couldn’ t believe it. W e hadn’ t seen colour
for y ears and years. And we heard the news that a few hours earlier there
had been the declaration of surrender .’
W e talk through the journeys I’ve been on in search of the history of the
netsuke, all the v agabonding. W e look at the photographs I’ve taken in Paris
and V ienna and I show him a cl ipping from last week’ s newspaper . A pink
and gold Faber gé egg that open s to reveal a diamond-studded cockerel –
commissioned by Iggie’ s great-aunt Béatrice Ephrussi-Rothschild – has just
become the most expensive Rus sian object ever auctioned. And because we
are in Iggie’ s o ld apartment, Jiro opens up the vitrine once again and
reaches in to pick up a netsuke.
And the n he suggests that we go out tonight. There is a new re staurant
he has heard good things of, and we could see a film.
36. AN ASTROLABE, A MENZULA, A GLOBE
It is November and I need to go to Odessa. It is nearly two years since I
began this journey and I’ve been everywhere else but the city where the
Ephrussi family  started. I want to see the Black Sea and imagine the grain
warehouses on the edge of the s eaport. And perhaps, if I stand in the house
where Charles and my grea t-grandfather V iktor were bo rn, I will
understand. I am not sure what  I will understand. Why they left? What it
means to leave? I think I’m looking for a beginning.
I me et Thomas, my youngest br other , and the tallest, who has travelled
from Moldova by taxi. He is an expert on conflict in the Caucasus. It is a
journey that has taken him five hours. Thomas, who is writing on Odessa
and spea ks Russian, is blasé abo ut borders. He has been held up, laughs that
it’ s always a pr oblem whether  to bribe or not. I worry about visas: he
doesn’ t. W e haven’ t been on a t rip together for twenty-five years, since we
were stu dents an d went of f arou nd the Greek islands. He speaks  Greek, too.
He was pretty competent then, I remember suddenly . Anatoly , the
Moldovan taxi driver , sets of f.
W e bum p along the outskirts of ravaged apartment blocks and d ecaying
factories, overta ken by huge black 4x4s with tinted windows and by old
Fiats, until we meet the wide avenues of old Odessa. No one to ld me, I tell
Thomas petulantly , that it was so beautiful, that there were catalpa trees
alongside the pavements, that th ere were courtyards glimpsed through open
doors, shallow oak steps, that there were balconies. Some of Odessa is
being restored, plasterwork repaired and stucco repainted, while other
buildings sink in Piranesian squalor with looping cables, sagging roofs,
gates of f their hinges and missing capitals to the pillars.
W e com e to a fu ll stop outside t he Hotel Londonskaya, a Belle Époque
palazzo of gilt a nd marble on t he Primorsky Boulevard. Quee n is playing
softly in  the foyer . The Bouleva rd is a great promenade, a run of classical
buildings washed in yellows and pale blues. It stretches an either side of the
Potemkin Steps,  made famous in Eisenstein’ s film The Battleship Potemkin .
There are 192 steps with ten l andings, designed so that when you look
down you see only landings, and when you look up you see only steps.
Climb th ese step s slowly . When you reach the top, avoid the predatory
hawkers of Soviet navy hats, the begging sailor with the poem round his
neck, and the man dressed as Peter the Great who wants you to pay for a
photograph with  him. T o the front is the statue of the Duc de Richelieu, the
early nineteenth -century governor of the region brought in from France to
plan the  city , in his toga. W alk past him and on through the curved arcs of
golden building s, two perfect parentheses, and you reach Catherine the
Great surrounded by her favourites. For fifty years there was a Soviet statue
here, bu t now Catherine is bein g restored to her old position, courtesy of a
local oligarch. Granite setts are being laid around her feet.
T urn right at the  top of the steps and the promenade runs betw een two
avenues of chestnut trees and dusty flowerbeds until the pun ctum of the
Governor ’ s Palace, the site of famous parties. It is severe and Doric.
Each vi ew is calibrated. There are landmarks to walk between: the
Pushkin statue commemorating  his stay here, a cannon captured from the
British d uring the Crimean W ar . This is where the evening passeggiata
would take place, ‘the twilight walking to and fro, gossiping and even…
liberal a mounts of flirting’. Higher up is the Opera House modelled on
V ienna’ s, where Jewish and Greek factions supporting this season’ s new
Italian s ingers would take their name – the ‘Montechellisti’, ‘the Carraristi’
– and fight. This is not a city around a cathedral or a fortress. It is a Hellenic
city of merchants and poets, and this is its bour geois agora.
In a junk shop in an arcade I buy some Soviet medals for my kids and a
couple o f nineteenth-century po stcards. In one it is high summer , perhaps
July , late in the century . It is the middle of the day , as the shadows of the
chestnut trees are short. The pro menade was ‘cool even at noon  in the heat
of mids ummer ’, said an Odessan poet. A woman with a parasol moves
down the promenade away from  the Pushkin statue, while a nanny pushes
an e normous black perambulator . Y ou can just see the dome of the funicular
railway that carries people up a nd down to the port. Beyond that there is a
line of the masts of ships in the bay .
Postcar d of the pr omenade in Odessa in 1880. The bank and Ephrussi
mansion ar e the second and thir d buildings on the left
T urn left at the top of the steps and you look all the way down to the
Stock Ex change, a Corinthian villa in which to conduct your business. It is
now the  Hôtel de V ille and a b anner welcomes a Belgian delegation. It is
early No vember and so mild that we walk down the street in our shirt-
sleeves. W e pass some mansion s, then the Hôtel, and three buildings down
is the Ephrussi bank, with the family house next door . This is where Jules
and Ignace and Charles were b orn. It is where V iktor was born. W e go
round the back.
It is a mess. The stucco is com ing of f in great gouts, the balconies are
shedding, there is a bit of slippa ge amongst the putti. When I come up close
I see it has been refaced too, replastered, and those are certainly not original
windows. But right at the top is  a single balcony in which the double E of
the family hangs on.
I hesitate. Thomas, who is good at this, fearless, walks thro ugh the
broken g ates un der the arch into  the yard behind the Ephrussi house. Here
are the stable b locks with their floors of dark stone. It is ballast, he says
over his shoulder , lava from Sic ily brought in on the grain ships. Grain out.
Lava ba ck. A dozen men, suddenly silent, drinking tea, a Citroën 2CV up
on blocks. There is a chained A lsatian barking. The yard is full of dust. It
has three skips full of timber and plaster and broken stone. He finds the
foreman in a shiny leather jack et. Y es, you can go in – you’re  lucky , it is
just being renovated, new everything, beautifully done, a real success, on
schedule, a quality job. W e have just put laboratories into the ba sement, fire
doors and a sprinkler system. It is the of fices next. W e had to get rid of all
of the old house, it was shot, h opeless. Y ou should have seen it a month
ago!
I should  have. I am too late. W hat can I touch here in this strip ped-out
hulk? It  has no ceilings, only s teel girders and electric cabling. It has no
floors, only concrete screed. The walls have just been plastered, the
windows have been reglazed. Some ironwork is up for partitions. They have
taken out all the doors, except for one in oak, destined fo r the skips
tomorrow . The only thing left is the volume, the scale of th ese rooms,
sixteen feet high.
There is nothing here.
Thomas and the shiny man ar e racing ahead, talking Russian. ‘This
house w as the headquarters of th e steamship company since the Revolution.
Before that? God knows! Now?  The headquarters of the Mari ne Hygiene
Inspection Of fice. That’ s why we’ve put in the laboratories.’ They are fast. I
have to keep moving.
W e are almost out the door and into the dusty yard when I double back.
I am wrong. I am back up the staircase and I put my hand on the cast-iron
balustrade, each column toppe d with a blackened ear of wheat of the
Efrussi, the wheat from the gra nary of the black soil of the U kraine that
made th em rich . And while my  brother calls up, I go and stan d next to a
window and look out across the promenade through the doubl e avenue of
chestnut trees, the dusty paths and the benches to the Black Sea.
The Efrussi boys are still here.
Some tr aces are  fugitive. The E frussi live in the stories of Isaac Babel,
the J ewish chronicler of downto wn life, the gangs of the slums. An Efrussi
bribes h is way into the gymnasium ahead of an abler , poorer st udent. They
are in the Y iddish tales of Shol em Aleichem. A poor man from the shtetl
treks to Odessa to beg for help from Efrussi the banker . And the banker
refuses. There is a Y iddish saying, lebn vi Got in Odes  – ‘to live like God in
Odessa’ – and the Efrussi live like gods on their Zionstrasse.
Some traces are more concrete. After one of the pogroms the brothers
founded an Efrussi orphanage . There is the Efrussi School for Jewish
children, endow ed by Ignace in honour of his father , the patriarch, and
supported over thirty years by new endowments from Charles an d Jules and
V iktor . It is still there on the edge of a dusty park with feral dogs and
ripped-up benches, two low buildings slung together alongsi de the tram
line. In 1892 the school reports the receipt of 1,200 roubles don ated by the
Efrussi b rothers. The school authorities have bought from St Petersbur g an
astrolabe, a menzula, a globe, a steel knife for cutting glass, a skeleton and
a demountable model of an eye. In an Odessan bookshop they have spent
533 roubles and 64 kopeks and  bought 280 volumes by Bee cher Stowe,
Swift, T olstoy , Cowper , Thacke ray and Scott. W ith the remain der there is
money to purchase coats, blous es and trousers for twenty-five poor Jewish
boys, so that they can read Ivanhoe  or V anity Fair  without shivering,
covered up from the Odessan dust.
The dust in Pari s on the rue Monceau, the dust in V ienna as th ey build
the Ringstrasse : nothing compares to this dust. ‘The dust lies like a
universal shroud  of some two or three inches thick,’ writes Shirley Brooks
in The Russians of the South  i n 1854 . ‘The slightest breeze flings it over the
town in clouds, the lightest footstep sends it flying high in dense heaps.
When I tell you that hundreds of the carriages driven at high speed…are
perpetually racing about, and that the sea breezes are as perpetually rushing
through the streets, the statemen t that Odessa lives in a cloud is no figure of
speech.’ It was a city on the make: ‘a stirring, business-look about the
streets and the stores; fast walkers; a familiar new  look about the houses and
everything, yes,  and a driving and smothering dust…’ according to Mark
T wain. It makes sense to me, suddenly , that the Efrussi children grow up
with dust.
Thomas and I arrange to meet Sasha, a small dapper academic in his
seventies. On the corner he bumps into an old friend, a p rofessor of
comparative lite rature, so we al l stroll up to the school together , T om and
Sasha talking in Russian and the professor and I talking in English about the
International Sh akespearian Institute. When we get to the school the
professor peels of f and the thre e of us sit in the park café drinking sweet
cof fee, g lared a t by the three prostitutes at the bar who periodically juke-
box us. I tell Sasha why we’ve come, that I’m writing a book about – I
stumble to a ha lt. I no longer know if this book is about my  family , or
memory , or myself, or is still a book about small Japanese things.
He tells me po litely that Gorky collected netsuke. W e drink more
cof fee. I have brought the envelo pe of documents that I found in Iggie’ s flat
in T okyo  betwee n the old copies of Ar chitectural Digest . Sas ha is appal led
that I’ve  brought the originals, and not copies, but as I watch him he is like
a pianist, playing with the dif ferent papers.
There ar e record s of the fearsom e Ignace, the builder of the Palais, as
Consul in Odessa for the Sw edish and Norwegian crown, an imperial
notification from the T sar that he is allowed to wear a Bessarabian medal,
papers f rom the Rabbinate. This  is the old paper , Sasha says, th ey changed
this in 1870; that is the stamp, that is the fee. Here is the signature of the
governor , always so emphatic – look, it has almost gone through the paper .
Look at the address of this one, the corner of X and Y! It is very Odessan.
This is a clerk’ s copy , poor writing.
As Sasha handles the desiccated records and they flicker into life, I look
at the envelope for the first tim e. It is addressed in V iktor ’ s handwriting,
sent out from Kövecses to Elis abeth in September 1938. This bundle of
documents meant something to  V iktor and to Iggie. It was the family
archive. I place them carefully back.
On the way back to the hotel w e duck into a synagogue. The Odessan
Jews are  so worldly , it was said,  that they stubbed out their cigarettes on its
walls. There is a circle of hell put aside just for them. It is busy in here
today . T here is a school run by y oung men from T el A viv in progress. They
are restoring part of the building, and one of the students comes over to
greet us in Engl ish. W e look in , not wanting to disturb them, and there up
on the left neat to the front, is the yellow armchair . It is a seder chair , the
chair for the elect, the special chair set apart.
Charles’ s yellow armchair was invisible in plain sight. It was so obvious
that it disappear ed when placed among the Degas and the Moreaus and the
cabinet of netsuke in his Parisian salon. It is a pun, a Jewish joke.
As I stand in front of the museum with its statue of a wrestling
Laocoön, the one that Charles drew for V iktor , I realise how wrong I’ve
been. I thought the boys left Od essa to get their education in V ienna and in
Paris. I thought that Charles went of f on his Grand T our in order to broaden
his horizons, to get away from the provinces and learn about the Classics.
But this whole city is a classic al world balancing above the port. Here, a
hundred yards from their house on the boulevard, was a museum that held
rooms a nd room s of antiquities, the Greek artefacts that were dug up as the
town became a city , doubling in size every decade. Of course Odessa had
scholars and collectors. Just because Odessa was a dusty ci ty , with its
stevedores and sailors, stokers, fishermen, divers, smugglers, adventurers,
swindlers, and their grandfather Joachim, the great chancer in his Palais, did
not mean that it was not full of writers and artists too.
Does it start he re on the edge  of the sea? Perhaps that up-and-of f
entrepreneurial spirit is Odess an; their vagabonding after old books or
Dürer or adventures in love or the next good grain deal. Odessa  is certainly
a g ood place to ship out from. Y ou can turn east or you can turn west. It is
wry , avid, polyglot.
It is a go od plac e to change your name. ‘Jewish names are unple asant to
the ear ’:  this is where their gran dmother Balbina became Belle, and where
their grandfather Chaim became Joachim, and then Charles Joachim. This is
where Eizak became Ignace an d where Leib became Léon. A nd Efrussi
became Ephrussi. This is where the memory of Berdichev , the shtetl in the
eastern U kraine on the edge of Poland where Chaim came from,  was walled
up behind the pale-yellow plaster of their first Palais on the promenade.
This is where they became the Ephrussi from Odessa.
This is a good place to put some thing in your pocket and start a journey .
I wa nt to go to see what the sky looks like in Berdichev , but I have to go
home. From the chestnut trees o utside the house I look out for a conker to
put in my pocke t. I walk the whole promenade twice, but I am a month too
late with  this as well. They hav e gone. I hope some children have picked
them up.
37. YELLOW/GOLD/RED
As I fly home from Odessa I f eel exhausted by the whole year . I correct
myself. It is not a single year , it has become close to two years of looking at
the scribbles in the mar gins of books, the letters used as bookmarks, the
photographs of nineteenth-centu ry cousins, the Odessan patents of this and
that, the  envelop es at the backs of drawers with their few sad ae rogrammes.
T wo years of tracing routes across cities, an old map in one hand, lost.
My fing ers are tacky from old papers and from dust. My fathe r keeps
finding things. How can he k eep finding things in his tiny flat in his
courtyard of retired cler gymen?  He has just found a diary in  unreadable
German from the 1870s that I need to get translated. A week goes by in an
archive and all I have is a list of unread newspapers, a note to look up some
correspondence, a question mark about Berlin. My studio is fu ll of novels
and boo ks on japonisme , and  I miss my children and I haven’ t made any
porcelain for months and months. I’m anxious about what I’ll make when I
finally sit down at my wheel with a lump of clay .
A few days in Odessa and now there are more questions than before.
Where d id Gorky buy his netsuke? What was the library like i n Odessa in
the 1870s? Berdichev was destroyed in the war , but perhaps I should go
there too and see what it looks like. Conrad came from Berdichev: perhaps I
should read Conrad. Did he write about dust?
My tiger  netsuke  comes from T a mba, a village in the mountains  west of
Kyoto. I  remember an endless b us journey thirty years ago to visit an old
potter on  a dusty street straggli ng up a hillside. Perhaps I should trace my
tiger home. There must be a cultural history of dust.
My note book is  made up of lists of lists. Y ellow /  Gold / Red /  Y ellow
armchair / Y ellow cover Gazette  / Y ellow Palais / Golden lacquer box /
T itian g old Lou ise’ s hair / Ren oir: La Bohémienne  / V ermeer ’ s V iew of
Delft.
My competent brother is hom e already . In Prague airport, where I
change planes and have three hours to kill, I sit with my notebooks and a
bottle of  beer , and then another , and worry about Berdichev . I remember
that Cha rles, tha t graceful dancer , was called le Polonais , the Pole, both by
his b rother Ignace and by the da ndy Robert de Montesquiou, a great friend
of P roust’ s. And that Painter , the early biographer of Proust, picked this up
and made Charles barbarous and uncouth. I thought he had simply got it
wrong. Perhaps,  I think over my beer , he was making a point about where
you star t from: Poland, not Russia. I realise that in all my enthusiasm about
tactile responses to Odessa I have mislaid its reputation as a city of
pogroms, a city you might wish to leave behind.
And I have the s lightly clammy feeling of biography , the sense o f living
on the edges of other people’ s lives without their permission. Let it go. Let
it lie. Stop looking and stop pi cking things up, the voice says  insistently .
Just go home and leave these stories be.
But leav ing be is hard. I rememb er the hesitancies when talking to Iggie
in o ld age; hes itancies that trembled into silences, silences that marked
places o f loss. I remember Ch arles in his final illness, and the death of
Swann and the opening of his  heart like a vitrine, his taking out one
memory after another . ‘Even when one is no longer attached to things, it’ s
still som ething to have been at tached to them; because it was  always for
reasons which other people didn ’ t grasp…’ There are the places in memory
you do not wish  to go with others. In the 1960s, my grandmothe r Elisabeth,
so a ssiduous in her letter -writing, such an advocate for the letter (‘write
again, w rite mo re fully’), burnt the hundreds of letters and notes she had
received from her poetic grandmother Evelina.
Not ‘W ho would be interested?’ But ‘Don’ t come near this.  This is
private.’
In very old age she would not t alk of her mother at all. She would talk
about po litics an d French poetry . She did not mention Emmy until she was
surprised by a p hotograph fallin g out of her prayer book. My fa ther picked
it up  and she, matter -of-factly , told him that it was one of her mother ’ s
lovers and started to talk abou t the dif ficulty of those love-af fairs, how
compromised she felt by them. And then silence again. There is something
about that burning of all those letters that gives me pause: why should
everything be made clear and be brought into the light? Why k eep things,
archive your intimacies? Why n ot let thirty years of shared conversation go
spiralling in ash up into the air of T unbridge W ells? Just because you have
it does not mean  you have to pass it on. Losing things can som etimes gain
you a space in w hich to live. I don’ t miss V ienna, Elisabeth wou ld say , with
a lightness in her voice. It was claustrophobic. It was very dark.
She was over ninety when she mentioned that she had received
rabbinical instruction as a child: ‘I asked my father for permission. He was
surprised.’ She was matter -of-fact, as if I already knew .
When sh e died two years later my father , the cler gyman in the  Church
of England, born in Amsterdam with a childhood everywhere in Europe,
stood in his Benedictine-black, rabbinical-black cassock and recited the
Kaddish for his mother in the parish church near her nursing home.
The pro blem is that I am in the wrong century to burn things. I am the
wrong generatio n to let it go. I think of a library carefully sorted  into boxes.
I t hink of all th ose careful burnings by others, the systematic erasing of
stories, the separations between people and their possessions, and then of
people f rom their families and families from their neighbourhoods. And
then from their country .
I thi nk o f someone checking a list to make sure that these people were
still aliv e and resident in V ienna, before stamping ‘Sara’ or ‘Israel’ in red
over the record of their birth. I th ink, of course, of all the listings of families
in the manifests, for deportations.
If ot hers can be so careful over things that are so important, the n I must
be careful over these objects and their stories. I must get it right, go back
and check it again, walk it again.
‘Don’ t you think those netsuke should stay in Japan?’ said a stern
neighbour of mine in London. A nd I find I am shaking as I answer , because
this matters.
I t ell her that there are plenty of  netsuke in the world, sitting in velvet-
lined tr ays in dealers’ cabinets of f Bond Street or Madison A venue,
Keizersgracht or the Ginza. Then I get a bit side-tracked onto the  Silk Road,
and then  onto Alexander the Great’ s coins still being in circulation in the
Hindu K ush in the nineteenth century . I tell her about travelling with my
partner S ue in Ethiopia, and find ing an old Chinese jar covered  in dust in a
market town and trying to work out how it had got there.
No, I answer . O bjects have always been carried, sold, bartered, stolen,
retrieved and lost. People have always given gifts. It is how you tell their
stories that matters.
It is the counterpart of the ques tion that I am often asked: ‘Don’ t you
hate to see things leave your studio?’ W ell, no, I don’ t hate it. I make my
living from letting things go. Y ou just hope, if you make things as I do, that
they can make their way in the world and have some longevity .
It is  not just things that carry s tories with them. Stories are a  kind of
thing, too. Stories and objects sh are something, a patina. I thoug ht I had this
clear , two years ago before I started, but I am no longer sure how this
works. Perhaps patina is a process of rubbing back so that the essential is
revealed, the way that a striated stone tumbled in a river feels  irreducible,
the way that this  netsuke of a fox has become little more than a  memory of
a nose and a tail. But it also see ms additive, in the way that a piece of oak
furniture gains over years and y ears of polishing, and the way the leaves of
my medlar shine.
Y ou take an object from your pocket and put it down in front of you and
you start. Y ou begin to tell a story .
When I hold th em I find myse lf looking for the wear , the fine cracks
that run alongside the grain of some of the ivories. It is not just that I want
the s plit in these wrestlers – a tangle of hopelessly thrashing iv ory limbs –
to ha ve come fr om being been d ropped onto Charles’ s golden carpet of the
winds by  someone famous (a po et, a painter , Proust) in a moment of grand
fin-de-siècle  excitem ent. Or that the deeply ingrained dust lodged under the
wings of a cicada resting on a walnut shell comes from being hidden in a
V iennese mattress. It probably doesn’ t.
The collection’ s latest resting-place is in London. The V ictoria and
Albert M useum is getting rid of some of its old vitrines to make way for
new displays. I buy one.
Because my work as a potter is seen as minimalist – rows of pale
celadon blue-grey porcelain vessels – it is assumed that my wife and our
three ch ildren live in some tem ple to minimalism, with a concrete floor
perhaps, or a wall of glass, some Danish furniture. W e don’ t. W e live in an
Edwardian hous e in a pleasant London street with plane trees out the front,
and a hall that c ontained – this morning – a cello and a French  horn, some
wellington boot s, a wooden for t that the boys have outgrown and that has
been on its way to a charity shop for three months, a heap o f coats and
shoes, a nd Ella,  our aged, loved gun-dog – beyond the hall it gets messy .
But I want our three kids to have the chance to get to know the netsuke as
those children did a hundred years ago.
So, with great ef fort, we haul in this decommissioned vitrine. It takes
four of us and a lot of swearing. It is seven feet high on its mahogany base
and is made of bronze. It has three glass shelves. It is only as it is being
fixed to the wall that I remembe r my own childhood collections. I collected
bones, a mouse skin, shells, a tiger ’ s claw , the sloughed scales  of a snake,
clay pip es and oyster shells, and  V ictorian pennies from the archaeological
dig that my elder brother John and I started one summer in Lincoln, forty
years ag o, mark ing out the gro und with string into a grid before getting
bored. My father was Chancellor of the Cathedral and we lived opposite its
great Go thic eas t window in the  Chancery , a medieval house w ith a spiral
staircase and a c hapel at the ver y end of a long corridor . An archdeacon in
the Clos e passe d on his collect ion of fossils dug up during an Edwardian
childhood in Norfolk, some still marked with the day and place they were
found. W hen I was seven the ca thedral library was getting rid o f mahogany
cases, and so half my room was taken over by a vitrine – my first – in
which I would a rrange and rearrange my objects, turn the key and open up
the case on req uest. It was my  W underkammer , my  world of things, my
secret history of touch.
This late st vitrine I think will be a good place for the netsuke. I t is next
to th e piano, and unlocked so that the children can open the d oor if they
wish to.
I pu t some of the netsuke out on display – the wolf, the medlar , the hare
with amber eyes, a dozen mor e – and when I next look they  have been
moved a round. A  rat, curled up asleep, has been pushed to the front. I open
the glass door and pick it up. I slip it into my pocket, put the dog on the lead
and leave for work. I have pots to make.
The netsuke begin again.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This boo k has been long in its gestation. I first told this story in 2005 and
thank you to the  three people, M ichael Goldfarb, Joe Earle and Christopher
Benfey , who told me to stop talking and start writing.
Firstly , I want to  thank my brother Thomas for his great encoura gement,
his prac tical hel p and his compa nionship. My uncle and aunt Constant and
Julia de W aal have been very supportive throughout. Thank you to all those
who ha ve helped with research and translation, in particular Geor gina
W ilson, Hannah James, T om Otter , Susannah Otter , Chantal Riekel and
Aurogeeta Das. Dr Jo Catling of the University of East Anglia has been
invaluable for her work on the Rilke/Ephrussi papers and Mark Hinton of
Christie’ s was a great help in elucidating signatures on the netsuke. Carys
Davis, my studio manager , has kept the world at bay , and been a
tremendous interlocutor day by day .
I wo uld like to thank Giselle de Bogarde Scantlebury , the late  Marie-
Louise von Motesiczky , Francis Spuf ford, Jenny T urner , Madeleine
Bessborough, Anthony Sinclair , Brian Dillon, James Harding, L ydia Syson,
Mark Jones, A. S. Byatt, Charle s Saumerez-Smith, Ruth Saunders, Amanda
Renshaw , T im Barringer , Jorunn V eiteber g, Rosie Thomas, V ikram Seth and
Joram t en Brink. I am particu larly grateful to Martina Mar getts, Philip
W atson and Fiona MacCarthy , all of whom have kept faith with this book.
Thank y ou to the staf f at the London Library , the National Art Library
at t he V ictoria and Albert M useum, the British Library , Cambridge
University Library , Courtauld Institute, Goethe Institute, Musée d’Orsay ,
Louvre, Bibliot hèque Nationa le, National Library T okyo, Israelitische
Kultusgemeinde, and the Adler Society of V ienna. In V ienna, I  would like
to thank  Sophie  Lillie for all her pioneering work on restitutio n, to Anna
Staudacher and W olf-Erich Eckstein at the Israelitische Kultusgemeinde, to
Geor g Gaugusch and Christopher W entworth-Stanley fo r help on
genealogies, and thanks go to Martin Drschka of Casinos Austria for his
welcome to the Palais Ephruss i. In Odessa, Mark Naidorf, A nna Misyuk
and Alexander (Sasha) Rozenbo im guided me through some of  the history
of the Efrussi.
Felicity Bryan has been the m ost wonderful agent and encourager . I
want to record my gratitude to h er and her colleagues at the Felicity Bryan
Agency , and to Zoe Pagnamenta, and all the staf f at Andrew  Nurnber g
Associates. I’d also like to thank Juliet Brooke and Kate Bland at Chatto.
Jonathan Galassi at Farrar , Straus and Giroux has been a marvellous
advocate from the start.
I have been overwhelmed by the care, dedication and imagination
which my two editors have taken. Clara Farmer at Chatto wrote to me
asking if the boo k existed. She a nd Courtney Hodell at FSG have made this
book happen and I am deeply indebted to them both.
Above all I w ant to record my love and gratitude to m y late
grandmother Elisabeth and my late great-uncle Iggie, to my mother Esther
de W aal, to my father V ictor de W aal and to Jiro Sugiyama.
I could not have written this bo ok without the sustaining generosity of
my wife Sue Chandler . It is for our children Ben, Matthew and Anna.
Farrar , Straus and Giroux
 18 W est 18th Street, New Y ork 1001 1
Copyright © 2010 by Edmund de W aal
 All rights reserved
 Originally published in 2010 by Chatto & W indus, Great Britain,
 as The Har e with Amber Eyes: A Hidden Inheritance
 Published in the United States by Farrar , Straus and Giroux
Grateful acknow ledgment is made for permission to reprint passages from
In Sear ch of Lost T ime  by Marcel Proust, translated by C. K. Scott
Moncrief f and T erence Kilmart in, revised by D. J. Enright, copyright ©
1981 by Chatto & W indus and Random House, Inc. Revisions to the
translation copyright © 1992 by D. J. Enright. Used by permission of
Modern Library , a division of Random House, Inc., and by permission of
the Random House Group, Ltd.
Grateful acknowledgment is ma de for permission to reprint the following
images: Le pont de l’Eur ope  by Gustave Caillebotte, © M usée du Petit
Palais, Geneva; Une botte d’aspèr ges  by Édo uard M anet, © Rheinisches
Bildarchiv , Cologne; Schottentor , V ienna, 1885, © Öst erreichische
Nationalbibliothek; Palais Ephrussi frontal view , plan from the Allgemeine
Bauzeitung, © Österreichische Nationalbibliothek; V ienna Anschluss, 1938,
© Österreichische Nationalbibliothek.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
De W aal, Edmund.
The hare with amber eyes: a family’ s century of art and loss /
Edmund de W aal.—1st American ed.
p. cm.
“Originally published in 2010 by Chatto & W indus, Great Britain, as
The Hare with Amber Eyes: A Hidden Inheritance.”
ISBN: 978-0-374-10597-6
1. Ephr ussi fam ily . 2. Jewish bankers—Europe—Biography . 3.
Jewish businesspeople—Europe—Biography . 4. Art—Collectors and
collecting—Europe—Biography . 5. Netsukes—Private collect ions—
England—London. 6. De W aal, Edmund—T ravel—Europe. I. T itle.
HG1552.E64D49 2010
 909'.0492400922—dc22
 [B]
2010025539
www .fsgbooks.com

