The Road
By Corma c McCarth y
This book is dedicated  to JOHN FRA NCIS MCC ARTHY 
When  he woke in the  wood s in the dark and  the cold  of the night  he'd reach  out to touch  the child 
sleeping  beside  him.  Nights dark  beyond darkness and the da ys more  gray  each  one than  what had gone 
before.  Like  the onset  of some cold glauco ma dimm ing away the world. His hand ro se and fell  softly 
with each precious  breath.  He pu shed away the plastic  tarpaulin  and raised  himself  in the  stinking robes 
and blankets and  looked toward the  east for any  light  but there  was none. In the drea m from  which he'd 
wakened  he had wandered  in a cave  where the  child  led him  by the hand.  Their  light  play ing over the 
wet flow stone  walls. Like  pilgrims  in a fable swallowed  up and lost among  the inward  parts of s ome 
granitic  beast. Deep stone  flues where the  water dripped  and sang. Tolling  in the silence  the minut es of 
the earth  and the  hour s and the  days of it  and the y ears without cease.  Until  they  stood in  a great  stone 
room  where lay a black and  ancient  lake.  And on the far shore a  creature  that raised its  dripping mou th 
from  the rimston e pool and  stared into  the light  with  eyes dead white  and sightless  as the eggs of 
spiders. It  swung its head  low over the  water as if to  take the  scent  of w hat it could  not see.  Crouching 
there  pale  and naked  and translucent,  its alabaster  bones cast up in  shadow on the  rocks behind it.  Its 
bowels, its  beating  heart.  The brain  that pulsed in a dull  glass bell.  It swung its head from  side to side 
and then gave  out a low moan  and turned  and lurched  away  and loped  soundlessl y into the  dark.
With  the first gra y light  he rose and left  the bo y sleeping  and walked  out to  the road and 
squatted  and studied  the country  to the  south. Barren,  silent, godless. He thought  the month  was 
October  but he wasn't sure. He hadnt kept  a calendar  for y ears. They  were mov ing south. There'd be  no 
surviving  another winter  here.
When  it was light  enough to  use the binoculars  he glassed the  valle y below. Ever ything 
paling  away into the murk.  The soft ash blowing  in loose swirls over the  blacktop.  He studied  what he 
could  see. The  segments  of road down there  among  the dead  trees. Looking  for any thing of color. Any 
move ment. Any trace  of standing smoke.  He lowered  the glasses and pulled  down the  cotton  mask 
from  his face and  wiped his nose on the back  of his wrist and then  glassed the countr y again.  Then he 
just sat there  holding the  binoculars  and watching  the ashen  daylight congeal  over the  land. He knew 
only that the child  was his warrant. He said:  If he is not the  word of God God never spoke.
When  he got back  the bo y was still  asleep.  He pulled  the blue  plastic  tarp off of him  and 
folded  it and carried  it out to the  grocery  cart and packed  it and cam e back  with their  plates  and some 
cornm eal cakes in a  plastic  bag and a  plastic  bottle  of syrup.  He s pread  the smal l tarp they  used for a 
table  on the  ground and laid  ever ything out and he took  the pistol  from  his belt  and laid  it on the cloth 
and then he ju st sat watching  the bo y sleep.  He'd pulled  away his m ask in the  night and  it was buried 
somewhere  in the  blankets. He watched  the boy and he looked  out through the  trees  toward the road. 
This was not  a safe place.  They could be seen  from  the road no w it was day . The boy turned in the 
blankets.  Then  he opened his e yes. Hi, Papa, he said.
I'm right  here.
I know.
An hour later  they were on the road.  He pu shed the cart  and both  he and the  boy carried 
knapsacks. In the  knapsacks were essential  things.  In case the y had to abandon  the cart  and mak e a run 
for it.  Clamp ed to the  handle  of the cart  was a chrome  motorc ycle mirror  that he used to  watch the  road 
behind  them.  He s hifted  the pack higher  on his shoulders and looked  out over the  wasted countr y. The 
road was emp ty. Below in  the littl e valle y the still gray  serpentine  of a river.  Motionless and  precise. 
Along the  shore a burden of dead  reeds. Are yo u okay ? he said. The bo y nodded.  Then the y set out 
along  the blacktop  in the  gun-meta l light,  shuffling through  the ash, each  the other' s world entire.
They cros sed the river  by an old concrete  bridge and  a few mil es on they  came upon a 
roadside  gas station.  They  stood in  the road and  studied it.  I think  we should check  it out, the  man  said. 
Take  a look.  The weeds the y forded fell  to dust about  them.  They  crossed the  broken asphalt  apron and 
found the  tank for the  pumps.  The cap was gone and the  man  dropped  to his elbows to smel l the pipe 
but the odor of gas was only  a rumor,  faint  and stale.  He stood and looked over  the building.  The 
pumps  standing  with their  hoses oddly  still in place.  The window s intact.  The door to  the service  bay 
was open and he  went in. A standing m etal toolbox  against one  wall. He went through  the drawers but 
there  was nothing there  that he could  use. Good half-inch  drive sockets. A ratchet.  He stood looking 
around  the garage.  A meta l barrel  full of trash. He went into  the office.  Dust and ash every where. The 
boy stood in  the door. A met al desk, a  cashregister.  Some old auto motiv e manua ls, swollen  and sodden. 
The linoleum  was stained  and curling  from  the leaking  roof. He crossed to the  desk and stood there.  
Then  he picked  up the  phone and dialed  the number  of his father's house in  that long ago. The  boy 
watched  him.  What  are y ou doing? he said.
A quarter  mile down the road  he stopped and looked  back. We're  not thinking,  he said.  We 
have  to go back.  He pu shed the  cart off the road  and tilted  it over where  it could  not be seen  and they 
left their  packs and  went back to  the station.  In the  service ba y he dragged out  the steel  trashdrum  and 
tipped  it over and pawed  out all  the quart  plastic  oilbottl es. Then the y sat in the  floor decanting  them  of 
their dregs one b y one,  leaving  the bottles  to stand upside down draining  into a  pan until  at the  end the y 
had almost  a half quart  of motor  oil. He screwed down the plastic  cap and wiped  the bottle  off with  a 
rag and hefted  it in his hand. Oil for their  little slutla mp to light  the long  gray  dusks, the  long gra y 
dawns. You can read  me a stor y, the boy said. Cant  you, Papa ? Yes, he said. I can.
On the  far side of the  river valle y the road passed through a  stark black  burn. Charred and 
limbless  trunks of trees  stretching  away  on ever y side. A sh moving  over the  road and the  sagging hands 
of blind  wire strung from  the blackened  lightpol es whining  thinl y in the  wind. A burned house in a  
clearing  and bey ond that a reach  of meadow- lands stark and gra y and a raw red mudbank  where a 
roadworks lay  abandoned.  Farther  along were  billboards advertising  motels.  Every thing as it once  had 
been  save faded and  weathered.  At the top  of the hill  they stood in the  cold and  the wind, getting  their 
breath.  He looked  at the  boy. I'm all right, the  boy said. The  man  put his hand on his shoulder and  
nodded  toward the open  country  below the m. He got  the binoculars  out of the  cart and stood in the  road 
and glassed the plain  down there  where the shape  of a cit y stood in the  gray ness like a  charcoal 
drawing  sketched  across the  waste. Nothing to  see. No smoke.  Can I see ? the  boy said. Yes. O f course 
you can.  The bo y leaned  on the  cart and adju sted the wheel.  What  do yo u see? the  man  said.  Nothing. 
He lowered  the glasses. It's raining.  Yes, the  man  said.  I kno w.
They left the cart  in a gully  covered  with  the tarp  and made  their  way  up the slope through  
the dark poles of the  standing  trees to where  he'd seen  a running ledge  of rock and the y sat under  the 
rock overhang and watched  the gray  sheets of rain  blow acros s the valle y. It was ver y cold.  They sat 
huddled  together  wrapped each  in a blanket  over their  coats and  after a  while the rain stopped  and there 
was j ust the  dripping in  the woods.
When  it had  cleared  they went down to the cart  and pulled awa y the tarp  and got their 
blankets  and the  things the y would need for the  night.  They  went back  up the  hill and made  their  camp 
in the dr y dirt under the  rocks and the m an sat with  his arms  around the  boy trying to warm  him. 
Wrapped  in the  blankets,  watching  the nam eless  dark com e to enshroud the m. The gray  shape of the 
city vanished  in the  night's on set like an apparition  and he lit  the little  lamp and set it  back out of the 
wind. Then  they  walked  out to  the road and  he took the  boy's hand and  they  went to  the top  of the hill 
where the  road crested  and where the y could  see out over the  darkening  country  to the south, standing  
there  in the  wind, wrapped in  their blankets,  watching  for an y sign of a  fire or a la mp. There  was 
nothing.  The lamp  in the rocks on the  side of the  hill was littl e more  than a  mote  of light  and after  a 
while  they  walked  back. Ever ything too wet to  make  a fire. The y ate their  poor meal  cold and  lay down 
in their  bedding with the  lamp  between  them.  He'd brought the  boy's book but  the bo y was too tired  for 
reading.  Can we leave  the lamp  on till  I'm asleep? he said.  Yes. Of course we can.
He was a long ti me going to sleep.  After a while  he turned  and looked  at the  man.  His face 
in the smal l light  streaked  with black  from  the rain like some  old world thespian.  Can I ask y ou 
someth ing? he  said.
Yes. Of cour se.
Are we going to  die?
Somet ime. Not now.
And we 're still going south.
Yes.
So we'll be warm.
Yes.
Okay .
Okay  what?
Nothing.  Just oka y.
Go to sleep.
Okay .
I'm going  to blow out the  lamp.  Is that  okay?
Yes. That's oka y.
And then  later  in the  darknes s: Can I ask yo u something?
Yes. Of cour se you can.
What  would y ou do if I died?
If you died  I would want to die  too.
So you could  be with me?  Yes. S o I could  be with  you. Okay.
He la y listening  to the  water drip  in the  woods. Bedrock,  this. The cold  and the  silence.  The 
ashes of the  late world carried  on the  bleak and  tempora l winds to and fro in  the void.  Carried forth  and 
scattered  and carried  forth again.  Ever ything uncoupled  from  its shoring. Un supported  in the  ashen air. 
Sustained  by a breath,  tremb ling and brief. If onl y my heart  were stone.
He woke before  dawn and watched  the gra y day break. Slow and half  opaque. He rose 
while  the bo y slept  and pulled  on his shoes and wrapped in  his blanket  he walked out  through the  trees. 
He descended  into a gry ke in the  stone and there  he crouched coughing  and he coughed  for a long ti me. 
Then  he ju st knelt  in the ashes. He raised  his face to  the paling  day. Are y ou there? he  whispered.  Will  I 
see y ou at the last? Have  you a neck b y which  to throttle  you? Have yo u a heart? Damn  you eternall y 
have  you a soul ? Oh God, he whispered. Oh G od.
They passed through the  city at noon of the  day following.  He kept the  pistol to  hand on the 
folded  tarp on top  of the cart.  He kept  the bo y close  to his side. The  city was most ly burned. No sign of  
life. Cars in the  street  caked  with ash, every thing covered  with ash and dust. Fos sil tracks  in the dried 
sludge.  A corpse in  a doorway  dried to  leather.  Grima cing at the day. He pulled  the bo y closer.  Just 
remember that the things  you put into  your head are  there forever,  he said. You migh t want to  think 
about  that.
You forget  some things, dont y ou?
Yes. You forget what y ou want  to reme mber and you remem ber what y ou want  to forget.
There  was a lake  a mi le from  his uncle's farm  where he  and his uncle  used to go in the  fall 
for firewood.  He sat in the  back of the  rowboat  trailing  his hand in the  cold wake while  his uncle  bent 
to the oars. The  old man's  feet in their  black  kid shoes braced against  the uprights. His straw hat. His  
cob pipe in his teeth  and a thin  drool swinging from  the pipebowl.  He turned to take  a sight on the far 
shore, cradling  the oarhandles,  taking  the pipe  from  his mouth  to wipe his chin  with the  back of his 
hand.  The shore was lined  with birchtrees  that stood bone pale  against  the dark  of the evergreens 
beyond. The edge  of the lake  a riprap  of twisted stumps,  gray and weathered,  the windfall trees  of a 
hurricane  years past. The trees  themse lves had long  been sawed for firewood and carried  away. His 
uncle  turned  the boat  and shipped the  oars and the y drifted  over the sand y shallows until  the transom 
grated  in the  sand. A dead perch  lolling  belly up in the  clear  water. Yellow  leaves. The y left their  shoes 
on the  warm  painted  boards and dragged  the boat up onto the  beach  and set out  the anchor  at the  end of 
its rope. A lardcan  poured with concrete  with an e yebolt in the center.  They walked along  the shore 
while  his uncle  studied the  treestum ps, puffing at  his pipe, a m anila  rope coiled  over  his s houlder.  He 
picked  one out  and the y turned it  over, using the  roots for leverage,  until  they got it  half floating  in the 
water.  Trousers rolled  to the  knee but still  they got wet.  They  tied the rope to a cleat  at the  rear of the 
boat and rowed back  acros s the lake,  jerking  the stump  slowly behind the m. By then  it was alread y 
evening.  Just the slow periodic  rack  and shuffle of the  oarlocks. The  lake  dark glass and windowlights  
coming on along  the shore. A radio  somewhere.  Neither  of them  had spoken a word. This was the  
perfect  day of his childhood.  This the da y to shape the  days upon.
They bore on south in the  days and weeks to follow.  Solitar y and dogged. A raw hill  
countr y. Aluminu m house s. At ti mes they could  see stretches of the  interstate  highway  below the m 
through  the bare  stands of secondgro wth timb er. Cold and  growing  colder. Just be yond the high gap  in 
the mounta ins they  stood and  looked out  over the great  gulf to the south where  the countr y as far as 
they could see  was burned awa y, the blackened  shapes of rock  standing out  of the shoals of ash and  
billows  of ash rising up and blowing downcountr y through the  waste. The track  of the  dull sun moving 
unseen be yond the murk.
They were da ys fording that  cauteriz ed terrain.  The boy had found some  crayons and 
painted  his face mask  with  fangs and he trudged  on uncompla ining.  One of the front wheels  of the cart 
had gone w onky. What  to do about it? Nothing. Where  all was burnt to ash before  them  no fires were to 
be had and the  nights were long and  dark and cold  beyond anything they'd yet encountered.  Cold to 
crack  the stones. To take  your life. He held the  boy shivering  against  him and counted  each  frail  breath 
in the blackness.
He woke to the  sound of distant  thunder and sat  up. The faint  light  all about,  quivering  and 
sourceless, refracted  in the  rain of drifting  soot. He pulled  the tarp about  them  and he la y awake a long 
time listening.  If they  got wet there'd be  no fires to dr y by. If the y got wet the y would probabl y die.
The blackness he  woke to  on those nights was sightless and i mpenetr able.  A blackness  to 
hurt your ears with listening.  Often  he had to get  up. No s ound but  the wind in  the bare  and blackened 
trees.  He ro se and stood tottering  in that cold autistic  dark with his arms  outheld  for balance  while the 
vestibular  calcul ations  in his s kull cranked  out their  reckonings.  An old  chronicle.  To seek  out the 
upright.  No fall  but preceded  by a declinat ion. He took great  marching  steps into  the nothingness, 
counting  them against  his return.  Eyes closed, arms  oaring. Upright to  what? Someth ing nam eless  in 
the night,  lode or ma trix. To which he and the  stars were com mon satellit e. Like  the great pendulu m in 
its rotunda scribing  through the  long da y move ments of the  universe  of w hich you may say it know s 
nothing  and y et know it must.
It took two day s to cross that  ashen scabland.  The road be yond ran along  the crest  of a ridge 
where the  barren  woodland  fell away  on every  side.  It's snowing, the bo y said.  He looked at  the sk y. A 
single  gray  flake  sifting  down. He caught  it in his hand and  watched  it expire  there  like the last  host of 
Christendo m.
They pushed on together  with the  tarp pulled  over  them.  The wet gra y flakes twisting  and 
falling  out of nothing.  Gray slush b y the roadside. Black  water  running from  under the  sodden drifts of 
ash. No more  balefires  on the distant  ridges. He thought  the bloodcults  must  have all  consumed  one 
another.  No one traveled  this road. No road-agents, no m arauders.  After a  while they came  to a 
roadside  garage  and they  stood within  the open door and looked  out at  the gra y sleet  gusting  down out 
of the  high countr y.
They collected  some  old boxes and  built  a fire in  the floor  and he found some  tools  and 
emptied out the  cart and sat working on the  wheel.  He pulled  the bolt and bored  out the  collet  with a 
hand  drill  and resleeved  it with  a section  of pipe he'd cut  to length  with a  hacksaw. Then he  bolted  it all 
back  together  and stood the  cart upright and  wheeled  it around the  floor. It ran  fairl y true. The  boy sat 
watching  ever ything.
In the  morning  they  went on. Desolate  countr y. A boar- hide nailed  to a barndoor. Ratt y. 
Wisp  of a tail.  Inside the  barn three  bodies hanging  from  the rafters, dried  and dusty  among  the wan 
slats of light.  There could  be someth ing here,  the bo y said. There  could  be some  corn  or something. 
Let's go, the  man  said.
Mostly  he worried  about their  shoes. That  and food. Alway s food. In an old batboard  
smokehouse  they found a ham  gambre led up in  a high corner.  It looked  like something  fetched  from  a 
tomb,  so dried and drawn. He cut  into it with  his knife. Deep red  and salty  meat inside. Rich  and good. 
They fried it  that night  over their  fire, thick  slices  of it,  and put the  slices to  simm er with  a tin  of beans. 
Later  he woke in the  dark and he thought  that he'd heard bulldru ms beating  somewhere  in the low dark 
hills.  Then  the wind shifted  and there  was just the silence.
In drea ms his pale  bride ca me to him out of a green and  leafy  canop y. Her nipples 
pipecla yed and her rib  bones painted  white. She wore a  dres s of gauze  and her dark  hair was carried  up 
in combs  of ivory , combs  of shell.  Her smile,  her downturned e yes. In the morning  it was sno wing 
again.  Beads of smal l gray ice strung along  the light- wires overhead.
He mistrust ed all of that.  He said the  right drea ms for a man  in peril  were dreams  of peril 
and all else  was the call  of languor  and of death.  He slept litt le and he slept poorl y. He dreamt  of 
walking  in a flowering  wood w here birds flew before  them  he and the  child  and the sk y was aching 
blue but he was learning  how to wake hi mself  from  just such siren worlds. Ly ing there  in the dark with 
the uncanny  taste  of a peach  from  some phantom  orchard fading  in his mouth.  He thought if  he lived 
long enough the world at  last would all be lost. Like  the dying world the  newly blind inhabit,  all of it 
slowly  fading  from  memory.
From  daydreams on the  road there  was no waking.  He plodded on. He could  remem ber 
everything of her  save her scent.  Seated in  a theatre  with  her beside  him leaning  forward listening  to 
the music.  Gold scrollwork  and sconces and the  tall colu mnar  folds of the  drapes at  either  side of the 
stage.  She held his hand  in her lap  and he could  feel the tops of her  stockings through the  thin stuff of 
her summer dress. F reeze  this frame.  Now call  down yo ur dark and y our cold  and be damn ed.
He fashioned  sweeps from  two old brooms  he'd found and wired the m to the  cart to clear 
the limbs  from  the road  in front of the  wheels and he  put the  boy in the basket  and stood on the  rear rail 
like a dogmusher  and the y set off do wn the  hills,  guiding the  cart on the curves  with their  bodies in the 
mann er of bobsledders. It  was the first that  he'd seen the  boy smile  in a long ti me.
At the  crest of the  hill was a curve and  a pullout  in the  road. An old trail  that led off through 
the wood s. The y walked out  and sat on a bench  and looked  out over the  valle y where the  land rolled 
away into the gritt y fog. A  lake  down there.  Cold and gra y and heavy  in the scavenged  bowl of the 
countr yside.
What  is that,  Papa?
It's a dam.
What's it  for?
It made  the lake.  Before the y built  the dam  that was j ust a river  down there.  The dam  used 
the water that  ran through it  to turn big  fans called  turbines that  would generate  electric ity.
To make  lights.
Yes. To mak e lights.
Can we go down there  and see it?
I think  it's too far.
Will the dam  be there  for a long ti me?
I think  so. It' s mad e out of concrete.  It will  probably  be there for hundreds of y ears. 
Thousands, even.
Do yo u think  there could  be fish in  the lake?
No. There's nothing  in the  lake.
In that  long  ago s omewhere  very near  this place  he'd watched  a falcon  fall down the long 
blue wall of the  mounta in and break with the  keel  of its breastbone  the m idmost from  a flight  of cranes 
and take it  to the  river  below all  gangly  and wrecked  and trailing  its loose and  blow sy plum age in the 
still autu mn air.
The grainy  air. The taste of it  never  left your mouth.  They stood in the  rain like  farm 
animals.  Then  they went on, holding  the tarp  over them  in the  dull drizzle.  Their  feet were wet and cold  
and their shoes were being  ruined. On the  hillsides  old crops dead and  flattened.  The barren ridgeline 
trees  raw and black  in the  rain.
And the  dreams  so rich in  color. How else would death  call you? Waking  in the  cold  dawn 
it all turned to  ash instantl y. Like  certain  ancient  frescoes entombed  for centuries  suddenly  exposed to 
the day.
The weather  lifted  and the  cold and  they  cam e at last into  the broad lowland river  valle y, 
the pieced  farml and still visible,  ever ything dead  to the  root along  the barren  bottoml ands.  They 
trucked  on along  the blacktop.  Tall clapboard  houses. Machineroll ed metal roof s. A log barn in  a field 
with an advertisem ent in faded  ten-foot  letters  across the roofslope. See  Rock Cit y.
The roadside hedges  were gone to rows of black and  twisted bramb les. No sign of life.  He 
left the boy standing in  the road  holding the  pistol while  he cli mbed  an old set  of limeston e steps and 
walked  down the  porch of the  farmhouse  shading  his ey es and peering  in the  windo ws. He let  himself 
in through the  kitchen.  Trash in the  floor, old  newsprint.  China in  a breakfront,  cups hanging from  their 
hooks. He went down the hallwa y and stood in  the door to  the parlor.  There  was an antique  pumporgan 
in the corner.  A television  set. Cheap  stuffed furniture  together  with an  old handmade  cherry wood 
chifforobe.  He cli mbed  the stairs and  walked through the  bedrooms.  Ever ything covered with  ash. A 
child's room  with a stuffed  dog on the windowsill  looking out  at the  garden. He went through  the 
closets.  He stripped back  the beds and  came  away  with two good woolen blankets  and went  back down 
the stairs. In the  pantry  were three  jars of homecanned  toma toes. He blew the  dust from  the lids and 
studied  them.  Someone  before  him had not trusted  them  and in the  end neither  did he and he walked 
out with the  blankets over  his s houlder  and the y set off along  the road again.
On the  outskirts of the cit y they cam e to a superm arket.  A few old  cars in the  trashstrewn 
parking  lot. They  left the cart in  the lot  and walked  the litter ed aisles.  In the produce  section  in the 
botto m of the  bins they  found a  few ancient  runner beans and  what looked  to have once  been apricots, 
long dried to  wrinkled  effigies  of themse lves. The boy followed behind.  They  pushed out  through the 
rear door. In the alle yway behind  the store a few shopping carts,  all badl y rusted. The y went back 
through  the store again  looking  for another  cart but there  were none. B y the door were two softdrink  
machines  that had been tilted  over into  the floor and  opened with  a pry bar. Coins ever ywhere in the 
ash. He sat and  ran his hand around in  the works of the gutted  mach ines and in  the second  one it closed 
over a cold me tal cylinder. He withdrew his hand slowl y and sat looking  at a Coca  Cola.
What  is it,  Papa ?
It's a treat.  For y ou.
What  is it?
Here. Sit  down.
He slipped  the bo y's knapsack straps loose and set  the pack  on the floor  behind him  and he 
put his thumbnai l under the  alum inum  clip on the top of the  can and opened it.  He leaned  his nose to 
the slight  fizz com ing from  the can  and then  handed it  to the  boy. Go ahead,  he said.
The boy took the  can. It's bubbly , he said.
Go ahead.
He looked  at his father  and then  tilted  the can  and drank. He sat there  thinking  about  it. It's 
really good, he  said.
Yes. It is.
You have some,  Papa.
I want  you to drink it.
You have some.
He took  the can  and sipped it  and handed  it back.  You drink  it, he  said. Let's ju st sit here.
It's because  I wont ever get  to drink another  one, isnt  it?
Ever's a long  time.
Okay , the boy said.
By dusk of the  day following the y were at  the cit y. The long concrete  sweeps of the 
interstat e exchanges  like the ruins of a vast  funhou se against the  distant  murk.  He carried  the revolver 
in his belt  at the  front and wore his parka  unzipped.  The mu mmied dead ever ywhere.  The flesh  cloven 
along  the bones, the  ligam ents dried  to tug  and taut  as wires. S hriveled  and drawn like  latterda y 
bogfolk,  their  faces of boiled  sheeting,  the y ellowed palings  of their  teeth.  They  were  discalced  to a 
man like pilgrims  of some com mon order for all  their  shoes were long since  stolen.
They went on. He kept  constant watch  behind  him in the mirror.  The onl y thing that  moved 
in the streets  was the blowing ash. The y cros sed the high concrete  bridge over  the river.  A dock  below. 
Smal l pleasureboats  half sunken in the  gray  water. Tall  stacks downriver dim  in the  soot.
The day following  some few mil es south of the cit y at a bend in  the road  and half lost  in the 
dead  brambles  they  came upon an  old frame  house with chimn eys and gables  and a stone wall.  The 
man stopped. Then  he pushed the cart  up the  drive.
What  is this place,  Papa ?
It's the house where  I gre w up.
The boy stood looking  at it.  The peeling  wooden clapboards  were largel y gone from  the 
lower  walls for firewood leaving  the stud s and  the insulation  expo sed. The rotted  screening  from  the 
back  porch la y on the concrete  terrace.
Are we going in?
Why not?
I'm scared.
Dont y ou want  to see where I used to live?
No.
It'll be oka y.
There  could  be somebod y here.
I dont  think so.
But suppose there  is?
He stood looking  up at the  gable  to his old  room.  He looked at  the boy. Do you want to 
wait here?
No. You alway s say that.
I'm sorry .
I know. But y ou do.
They slipped out  of their  backpacks and  left them  on the  terrace  and kicked their  way 
through  the trash on the  porch and  pushed into  the kitchen.  The bo y held  on to his hand.  All much  as 
he'd reme mbered it. The  rooms  empt y. In the  small  room  off the diningroo m there  was a bare  iron cot, 
a meta l foldingtable.  The same  castiron  coalgrate  in the smal l fireplace.  The pine paneling  was gone 
from  the walls leaving  just the  furring strips. He stood there.  He felt with  his thumb  in the painted 
wood of the  mantl e the pinholes from  tacks that  had held  stockings fort y years ago. This is where we  
used to  have Christmas  when I was a bo y. He turned  and looked  out at  the waste of the  yard. A tangle 
of dead  lilac.  The shape of a hedge.  On cold  winter  nights when the electr icity was out in a  storm  we 
would sit  at the  fire here,  me and my sisters, doing our homework.  The bo y watched  him.  Watched 
shapes clai ming  him he could not  see. We should go, Papa,  he said. Yes, the man  said. But  he didnt.
They walked through  the diningroo m where the  firebrick  in the hearth  was a s yellow as the 
day it was laid  because his mo ther could  not bear  to see it  blackened.  The floor buckled  from  the 
rainwater.  In the  livingroom  the bones of a small  anim al dism embered  and placed  in a pile.  Possibly  a 
cat. A glass tumbler  by the door. The bo y gripped  his hand. The y went up the stairs  and turned and 
went  down the  hallwa y. Small  cones of damp  plaster  standing  in the  floor. The  wooden  lathes of the 
ceiling  exposed. He stood in the  door way to his room.  A small  space under  the eaves.  This is where I 
used to  sleep. M y cot was against  this wall.  In the nights  in their  thousands to dream  the drea ms of a 
child's i magin ings,  worlds rich  or fearful  such as might  offer themse lves but never  the one  to be. He 
pushed open the  closet  door half expecting  to find  his childhood things.  Raw cold da ylight fell through 
from  the roof. Gray  as his heart.
We should  go, Papa. Can we go?
Yes. We can  go.
I'm scared.
I know. I'm  sorry .
I'm reall y scared.
It's all  right. We  shouldnt have  come.
Three  nights later  in the  foothills  of the eastern  mounta ins he woke in the  darkness to hear 
someth ing com ing. He la y with his hands at either  side of him.  The ground was trembl ing. It was 
coming toward the m.
Papa? The bo y said.  Papa ?
Shh. It's okay .
What  is it,  Papa ?
It neared, growing louder.  Ever ything trembling.  Then it  passed beneath  them  like an 
underground  train and  drew away  into the  night  and was gone. The bo y clung  to him  crying, his head 
buried  against  his chest. Shh. It's all right.
I'm so scared.
I know. It's all right.  It's gone.
What  was it, Papa?
It was an earthquake.  It's gone  now. We're  all right. Shh.
In those  first ye ars the roads w ere peopled  with refugees shrouded up in  their clothing. 
Wearing  masks  and goggles, sitting  in their  rags by  the side of the road  like ruined aviators.  Their 
barrows heaped  with shoddy . Towing wagons or carts. Their  eyes bright  in their  skulls. Creedless shells  
of men  tottering  down the  causeway s like migrants  in a feverland.  The frailt y of ever ything revealed  at 
last. Old and troubling  issues resolved into  nothingness and night.  The last instance  of a thing takes  the 
class with  it. Turns out  the light  and is gone. Look around y ou. Ever  is a long  time.  But the  boy knew 
what  he knew. That  ever is no ti me at all.
He sat b y a gray  window in the  gray  light  in an abandoned  house in the  late afternoon  and 
read old newspapers while the  boy slept.  The curious news. The  quaint  concerns. At eight  the pri mrose 
closes. He watched  the boy sleeping.  Can yo u do it? When the  time comes?  Can y ou?
They squatted  in the  road and ate  cold  rice and  cold beans that  they'd cooked  days ago. 
Alread y beginning  to fermen t. No place  to mak e a fire  that would not be seen.  They  slept  huddled 
together  in the rank  quilts in  the dark and  the cold.  He held the  boy close to  him.  So thin.  My heart, he 
said. My heart.  But he  knew that if  he were a good father  still it might  well  be as s he had said. That  the 
boy was all  that stood between hi m and death.
Late in the y ear. He hardly  knew the  month.  He thought  they had enough food to  get 
through  the mount ains but there  was no way  to tell.  The pass at the  watershed was five thousand  feet 
and it was going to be  very  cold.  He said  that every thing depended  on reaching  the coast,  yet waking  in 
the night  he knew that  all of this wa s empty and no s ubstance  to it.  There  was a good chance  they 
would die  in the  mounta ins and that  would be that.
They passed through the  ruins of a resort town and took  the road  south.  Burnt forests for 
miles along  the slopes and  snow sooner than he  would have thought.  No tracks  in the  road, nothing 
living  anywhere.  The fireblacken ed boulders like  the shapes of bears on the  starkly  wooded slopes. He  
stood on a  stone bridge where  the waters slurried  into a pool and turned  slowly  in a gray  foam.  Where 
once  he'd watched trout  sway ing in the  current,  tracking  their  perfect  shado ws on the  stones beneath. 
They went on, the  boy trudging in  his track.  Leaning  into the  cart,  winding slowly  upward through the  
switchbacks.  There  were fires still  burning high  in the  mountains  and at night  they could see the  light 
from  them  deep orange  in the soot-fall.  It was getting  colder but  they  had campfires  all night and left 
them burning  behind the m when the y set out again  in the  morning.  He'd wrapped their  feet in sacking 
tied with  cord and so far the  snow wa s onl y a few inches deep  but he  knew that  if it got  much  deeper 
they would have to  leave  the cart.  Alread y it was hard going  and he stopped often  to rest. Slogging  to 
the edge of the  road with  his back to the  child  where he stood bent  with his hands on his knees,  
coughing.  He raised up and  stood with weeping e yes. On the  gray  snow a fine mist  of blood.
They camped  against  a boulder  and he made  a shelter  of poles with  the tarp.  He got a fire 
going  and they  set about dragging  up a great  brushpile  of w ood to  see them  through the  night. The y'd 
piled  a mat of dead  hemlo ck boughs over the  snow and the y sat wrapped in their  blankets  watching  the 
fire and drinking  the last  of the  cocoa scavenged  weeks before. It  was snowing again,  soft flakes 
drifting  down out of the  blackness. He dozed  in the  wonderful  warmth.  The boy's shadow cros sed over 
him. Carry ing an armload  of wood. He w atched  him stoke the  flames.  God's o wn firedrake.  The spark s 
rushed upward and died  in the  starless dark. Not all  dying words are true  and this  blessing is no less 
real for being  shorn of its  ground.
He woke toward the  morning  with the  fire down to coals  and walked out  to the  road. 
Ever ything was alight.  As if the  lost sun were returning  at last.  The snow orange and  quivering. A 
forest  fire was making  its way  along the  tinder- box ridges above  them,  flaring  and s himmering against 
the overcast  like the northern  lights. Cold  as it was he stood there  a long  time.  The color  of it  moved 
someth ing in him long  forgotten. Make  a list.  Recite  a litan y. Remem ber.
It was colder.  Nothing moved  in that  high  world. A rich smell  of w oodsmoke  hung over the 
road.  He pushed the  cart on through the  snow. A few miles  each da y. He'd no notion  how far  the 
summ it migh t be. They  ate sparely  and they  were hungr y all the time. He stood looking  out over the 
countr y. A river far below.  How far had the y come?
In his drea m she was sick and he cared  for her. The  dream  bore the  look of sacrifice  but he 
thought  differentl y. He did  not take  care  of her and she died  alone somewhere  in the  dark and there  is 
no other  dream  nor other waking  world and there  is no other tale  to tell.
On this road  there are  no godspoke men.  They are gone  and I am  left and  they  have  taken 
with them  the world. Query : How does the never  to be differ  from  what never  was?
Dark of the  invisible  moon.  The nights now only  slightl y less black.  By day the banished 
sun circles  the earth like  a grieving  mother  with  a lamp.
People  sitting  on the sidewalk  in the  dawn half i mmolate and smoking  in their  clothes.  Like 
failed  sectarian  suicides.  Others would com e to help  them.  Within  a year there  were fires on the  ridges 
and deranged chanting.  The screams  of the  murdered.  By day the dead imp aled on s pikes  along the 
road.  What had  they  done? He thought that  in the histor y of the  world it  might  even be that  there  was 
more  punishment  than cri me but he took sma ll comfor t from  it.
The air grew thin  and he  thought the  summit could not  be far. Perhaps tomorrow.  
Tomorrow  came  and went. It  didnt snow again but  the snow in the  road wa s six inches  deep and 
pushing the  cart up those grades was exhausting  work. He thought  they  would have  to leave  it. How 
much  could the y carry? He stood and looked  out over the  barren slopes. The  ash fell  on the sno w till  it 
was all  but black.
At ever y curve it  looked  as though  the pass la y just ahead  and then one  evening  he stopped 
and looked all  about  and he recognized  it. He unsnapped the  throat  of his parka and lowered  the hood 
and stood listening.  The wind in  the dead  black  stands of hemlock.  The emp ty parking  lot at  the 
overlook.  The bo y stood beside  him.  Where he'd stood once  with his own father  in a winter  long ago. 
What  is it,  Papa ? the  boy said. It's the gap.  This is it.
In the  morning  they  pressed on. It was very  cold.  Toward the  afternoon it  began  to sno w 
again  and the y made  camp  early  and crouched under  the leanto  of the  tarp and watched  the snow fall in 
the fire. B y morn ing there  was s everal  inches  of new s now on the  ground but the  snow had stopped and  
it was s o quiet  they could all  but hear their  hearts. He piled  wood on the  coals and fanned  the fire  to life 
and trudged out through  the drifts  to dig out  the cart.  He sorted through  the cans and  went back and 
they sat b y the fire and  ate the  last of their crackers  and a  tin of sausage. In a  pocket of his knapsack  
he'd found a last  half packet  of cocoa and  he fixed it  for the  boy and then  poured his o wn cup  with hot 
water  and sat blowing  at the  rim.
You promised  not to do that,  the boy said.
What?
You know w hat, Papa.
He poured the  hot water  back into  the pan and took the  boy's cup and poured some  of the 
cocoa  into his o wn and  then handed  it back.
I have  to watch  you all the ti me, the boy said.
I know.
If you break  little  promises  you'll break  big ones. That's what y ou said.
I know. But I wont.
They slogged all  day down the  southfacing  slope  of the watershed.  In the deeper  drifts the 
cart wouldnt push at  all and he had to  drag it  behind him  with one hand  while he broke trail.  Any where 
but in the  mountains  they migh t have  found s omething  to use for a sled. An old me tal sign or a sheet of 
roofingtin.  The wrappings on their  feet had s oaked  through and  they  were cold  and wet all  day. He 
leaned  on the  cart to get  his breath  while the boy waited.  There was a sharp crack  from  somewhere  on 
the mounta in. Then  another.  It's just a tree falling,  he said. It's okay . The boy was looking  at the dead 
roadside  trees. It's okay , the man  said.  All the trees  in the  world are going  to fall  sooner or later.  But not 
on us.
How do yo u know?
I just know.
Still they cam e to trees  across the road  where they  were forced  to unload  the cart  and carry 
everything over  the trunks and  then repack  it all on the  far side.  The bo y found to ys he'd forgot he  had. 
He kept  out a y ellow truck  and they  went  on with it  sitting  on top of the  tarp.
They camped  in a bench of land  on the far side  of a frozen roadside  creek.  The wind had 
blown the  ash from  the ice and the ice  was black  and the creek  looked  like a path  of ba salt winding 
through  the woods. They  collect ed firewood from  the north  side of the slope  where it was not so wet, 
pushing over  whole trees and  dragging the m into camp.  They  got the  fire going and spread their  tarp 
and hung their wet  clothes  on poles to steam  and stink  and they  sat wrapped  in the  quilts naked  while 
the man  held  the boy's feet against  his stomach  to warm  them.
He woke whimper ing in the  night  and the m an held  him.  Shh, he said.  Shh. It's okay .
I had  a bad dream.
I know.
Should I tell  you what it was?
If you want  to.
I had  this penguin that  you wound up and it  would waddle and  flap its  flippers. And we 
were in  that house that we used to  live in and it  came  around the  corner but  nobody  had wound it up 
and it was reall y scary .
Okay .
It was a lot  scarier  in the  dream.
I know. Dreams  can be reall y scary .
Why did I have that  scary drea m?
I dont  know. But  it's okay  now. I'm  going  to put some  wood on the  fire. You go to sleep.
The boy didnt  answer. Then  he said:  The winder  wasnt turning.
It took four more  days to come  down out  of the snow and even then  there  were patches  of 
snow in certain  bends of the  road and the  road was black  and wet from  the up-countr y runoff even 
beyond that. The y cam e out along  the rim of a deep gorge and  far do wn in  the darkness a river.  They 
stood listening.
High rock  bluffs on the far side  of the can yon with thin  black  trees clinging  to the 
escarp ment.  The sound of the river  faded.  Then it  returned.  A cold  wind blowing up from  the countr y 
below.  They  were all  day reaching  the river.
They left the cart  in a parking area  and walked  out through  the wood s. A low thunder 
coming from  the river.  It was a waterfall  dropping  off a high shelf of rock  and falling  eight y feet 
through  a gray  shroud of mist  into the pool below. The y could sme ll the water and  they  could  feel the 
cold coming  off of it. A bench  of wet river gravel.  He stood and watched  the boy. Wow, the bo y said. 
He couldnt  take  his ey es off it.
He squatted  and scooped up a  handful of stones and sme lled them  and let  them  fall 
clattering.  Polished  round and smooth  as marb les or lozenges  of stone veined  and striped.  Black 
disclets  and bits  of polished quartz  all bright  from  the mist  off the  river. The  boy walked  out and 
squatted  and laved  up the  dark water.
The waterfall  fell into the pool  almost  at its  center.  A gray curd circled.  They stood side b y 
side calling  to each  other  over the  din.
Is it cold ?
Yes. It' s freezing.
Do yo u want to  go in ?
I dont  know.
Sure y ou do.
Is it okay ?
Come  on.
He unzipped  his parka  and let  it fall  to the gravel  and the  boy stood up and the y undres sed 
and walked  out into  the water. Gho stly pale  and shivering.  The bo y so thin  it stopped  his heart. He dove  
headlong  and ca me up gasping  and turned  and stood, beating  his arms.
Is it over m y head? the  boy called.
No. Come  on.
He turned  and swam  out to  the falls  and let  the water beat  upon him.  The bo y was standing 
in the pool  to his waist, holding  his s houlders  and hopping up and  down. The  man  went  back and got 
him. He held hi m and floated  him about,  the bo y gasping  and chopping at  the water. You 're doing 
good, the  man  said.  You're doing  good.
They dres sed shivering  and then cli mbed  the trail  to the upper  river. The y walked out  along 
the rocks to where the  river seem ed to end in space  and he held  the bo y while  he ventured  out to  the 
last ledge  of rock. The  river went sucking  over the ri m and fell  straight  down into  the pool below.  The 
entire  river.  He clung  to the m an's arm.
It's reall y far, he  said.
It's prett y far.
Would  you die if  you fell?
You'd get hurt. It's a long  way .
It's reall y scary .
They walked out  through the  woods. The  light  was failing.  They followed  the flats  along 
the upper river  among  huge  dead trees.  A rich southern  wood that  once held  may-apple  and pipsissewa. 
Ginseng. The  raw dead li mbs of the rhododendron  twisted and  knotted and  black.  He stopped. 
Someth ing in the mul ch and ash. He stooped and  cleared  it away . A small  colon y of them,  shrunken, 
dried  and wrinkled.  He picked one  and held  it up and sniffed  it. He bit  a piece  from  the edge  and 
chewed.
What  is it,  Papa ?
Morels. It's morels.
What's more ls?
They're a kind of mushroo m.
Can you eat the m?
Yes. Take  a bite.
Are the y good ?
Take  a bite.
The boy smell ed the mushroom  and bit  into it and stood chewing.  He looked at  his father. 
These  are prett y good, he said.
They pulled  the more ls from  the ground, small  alien- looking  things that  he piled  in the 
hood of the  boy's parka.  They  hiked  back out  to the  road and down to where the y'd left the cart and 
they made  camp  by the river  pool at  the falls  and washed the earth  and ash from  the more ls and put 
them to soak in  a pan of water.  By the ti me he had the  fire going  it was dark and he  sliced a  handful of 
the mushrooms  on a log for their  dinner  and scooped the m into the frying pan along  with the  fat pork 
from  a can of beans  and set them  in the  coals to  simm er. The bo y watched  him.  This is a good place  
Papa,  he said.
They ate the littl e mushroo ms together  with  the beans and  drank tea  and had tinned  pears 
for their  desert.  He banked the  fire against  the seam  of rock where  he'd built  it and he  strung the tarp 
behind  them  to reflect  the heat  and the y sat warm  in their  refuge while  he told  the bo y stories. Old 
stories  of courage and  justice  as he reme mbered them  until  the boy was asleep in  his blankets  and then 
he stoked the fire  and la y down warm  and full  and listened  to the  low thunder  of the falls  beyond them 
in that dark and threadbare  wood.
He walked  out in the  morning  and took the  river path  down strea m. The boy was right that  it 
was a good place  and he  wanted to  check for an y sign of other visitors. He found nothing.  He stood 
watching  the river where it  swung loping  into a pool and  curled and  eddied.  He dropped  a white  stone 
into the water but it  vanished  as suddenl y as if it  had been eaten.  He'd stood at  such a  river once  and 
watched  the flash of trout  deep in a  pool, invisible  to see in the  teacolored  water  except  as they  turned 
on their  sides to feed.  Reflecting  back the  sun deep  in the  darkness like  a flash of knives in  a cave.
We cant  stay, he said. It's getting  colder  ever y day. And the  waterfall  is an  attraction.  It was 
for us and it  will be for others and we dont  know who they  will be and  we cant hear  them  coming.  It's 
not safe.
We could sta y one more  day.
It's not safe.
Well  maybe we could  find some  other  place  on the  river.
We have to  keep moving.  We have  to keep  heading south.
Doesnt the  river go south?
No. It doesnt.
Can I see it on the  map?
Yes. Let  me get it.
The tattered  oilcomp any roadmap  had once  been taped  together  but now it was just sorted 
into leaves  and numbered  with cra yon in the  corners for their  assemb ly.
He sorted through  the li mp pages  and s pread  out those  that answered  to their  location.
We cros s a bridge here.  It looks to be  about eight  miles or so. This is the  river. Going east. 
We follow the  road here along  the eastern slope  of the mount ains. These  are our roads, the  black lines 
on the  map.  The state  roads.
Why are the y the state  roads ?
Because  they used to  belong to  the states.  What  used to be called  the states.
But there's not an y more  states?
No.
What  happened  to the m?
I dont  know exactl y. That's a good question.
But the roads are  still there.
Yes. For a while.
How long a while?
I dont  know. Ma ybe quite  a while. There's nothing  to uproot  them  so the y should  be oka y 
for a while.
But there wont be  any cars or trucks on the m.
No.
Okay .
Are y ou read y?
The boy nodded. He wiped his nose on his sleeve  and shouldered  up his small  pack and the 
man folded awa y the map  sections and  rose and  the bo y followed  him out through the  gray  palings  of 
the trees to  the road.
When  the bridge  cam e in sight  below them  there  was a tractor- trailer  jackknifed  sideway s 
across it  and wedged into  the buckled  iron railings.  It wa s raining  again  and the y stood there  with the 
rain pattering  softl y on the tarp.  Peering out  from  under the  blue  gloom  beneath  the plastic.
Can we get  around it? the  boy said.
I dont  think so. We can  probabl y get under it.  We may have  to unload  the cart.
The bridge spanned  the river  above a  rapids. They  could  hear the  noise of it  as they  came 
around  the curve  in the  road. A  wind was coming  down the gorge and  they  pulled  the corners of the 
tarp about the m and pushed the cart  out onto  the bridge.  They  could  see the  river through  the ironwork. 
Below  the rapids was a railroad  bridge  laid on lim estone  piers.  The stones of the  piers were stained 
well above the  river  from  the high  water and  the bend of the  river  was choked  with great  windro ws of 
black  limbs and brush and the  trunks of trees.
The truck had  been there  for y ears, the tires flat  and crumpled  under the  rims.  The front  of 
the tractor  was j ammed against  the railing  of the bridge  and the  trailer  had sheared  forward off the top  
plate  and jammed up against  the back of the  cab. The  rear of the  trailer  had swung out and  buckled the 
rail on the  other side  of the bridge  and it  hung several feet  out over the river  gorge. He pushed the  cart 
up under  the trailer  but the  handle wouldnt  clear.  They 'd have to  slide it  under sidewa ys. He left  it 
sitting  in the rain  with the  tarp over  it and the y duckwalked  under the  trailer  and he  left the bo y 
crouched  there  in the  dry while he climb ed up on the  gastank step and  wiped the  water from  the glass 
and peered inside  the cab.  He stepped back  down and reached  up and opened  the door and then  clim bed 
in and pulled  the door shut behind  him.  He s at looking around.  An old  doghou se sleeper behind  the 
seats. Papers in  the floor.  The glovebox  was open  but it  was emp ty. He cli mbed  back between  the seats. 
There  was a raw damp  mattress  on the  bunk and a smal l refrigerator  with the  door standing open. A  
fold- down table.  Old m agazin es in the  floor. He went through  the pl ywood lockers  overhead but  they 
were e mpty. There  were drawers under the  bunk and he  pulled the m out and looked  through the trash. 
He cli mbed  forward  into the  cab again  and sat  in the  driver' s seat  and looked  out down the river  
through  the slow trickle  of water  on the glass. The  thin drum  of rain  on the me tal roof and the slow 
darkness falling  over  every thing.
They slept that  night  in the  truck  and in the  morning  the rain had stopped and the y unloaded 
the cart and passed every thing under the  truck to  the other  side and reloaded  it. Down the  bridge  a 
hundred  feet or so were the  blackened  rema ins of tires  that had  been burned there.  He stood looking  at 
the trailer.  What  do y ou think  is in there? he  said.
I dont  know.
We're  not the  first ones here. So probabl y nothing.
There's no wa y to get in.
He put  his ear to the  side of the  trailer  and whacked  the sheetmetal with the flat  of his hand. 
It sounds empt y, he said. You can  probably  get in from  the roof. Somebod y would have  cut a  hole in 
the side of it  by now.
What  would the y cut it  with?
They'd find something.
He took  off his parka and laid  it across the top  of the cart  and cli mbed  on to the  fender of 
the tractor  and on to  the hood and cla mber ed up over the  windscreen to  the roof of the  cab. He stood 
and turned and looked  down at the  river. Wet  metal underfoot. He looked  down at  the boy. The bo y 
looked  worried. He turned  and reached  and got a  grip on the  front of the  trailer  and slowly  pulled 
himse lf up. It  was all  he could  do and there  was a lot less of hi m to pull.  He got one  leg up over the 
edge  and hung there  resting. Then  he pulled  himse lf up and rolled  over  and sat up.
There  was a sky light about a third  of the  way  down the  roof and he mad e his wa y to it in a 
walking  crouch. The  cover was gone and  the inside  of the trailer  smelled  of wet pl ywood and that  sour 
smel l he'd come  to know. He had a mag azine  in his hip  pocket and  he took it  out and  tore some  pages 
from  it and  wadded  them  and got out  his lighter  and lit  the papers and dropped the m into the darkness. 
A faint  whoo shing.  He wafted  away  the smoke  and looked  down into  the trailer.  The small  fire burning 
in the floor  seemed a long way  down. He shielded  the glare  of it with  his hand and when he did  he 
could  see almost  to the  rear of the  box. Human  bodies. Sprawled  in ever y attitude.  Dried  and shrunken 
in their  rotted clothes.  The small  wad of burning paper  drew down to a  wisp of fla me and then died  out 
leaving  a faint  pattern  for j ust a mo ment in the  incandescence  like the shape  of a flower, a  molten  rose. 
Then  all was dark  again.
They camped  that night  in the woods on a ridge  overlooking  the broad pied mont  plain 
where it  stretched  away to the south. He built  a cookfire  against  a rock  and they  ate the last of the 
more ls and a can  of spinach. In the  night  a storm  broke in  the moun tains  above  them  and cam e 
cannonading  downcountr y cracking  and booming  and the stark  gray  world appeared  again  and again 
out of the night  in the  shrouded  flare  of the lightning.  The boy clung  to him.  It all  passed on. A  brief 
rattle  of hail  and then  the slow cold rain.
When  he woke again  it was still  dark but  the rain  had stopped. A smok y light  out there  in 
the valle y. He rose and walked  out along  the ridge.  A haze  of fire  that stretched  for miles.  He s quatted 
and watched  it. He could sme ll the smoke.  He wet his finger  and held  it to the wind. When  he rose and 
turned  to go back  the tarp  was lit from  within where  the bo y had wakened.  Sited  there in  the darkness 
the frail  blue shape  of it looked  like the pitch  of some  last venture  at the  edge  of the world. Someth ing 
all but unaccountable.  And so it was.
All the da y following  they traveled  through the  drifting  haze  of w oodsmoke.  In the draws 
the smoke  com ing off the  ground like  mist  and the  thin black  trees burning on the  slopes like  stands of 
heathen  candles.  Late  in the da y they cam e to a place  where the fire had crossed the  road and the 
macadam was still  warm and further  on it began  to soften underfoot.  The hot black  mastic  sucking at 
their shoes and stretching  in thin bands as the y stepped. The y stopped. We'll  have to  wait, he said.
They backtracked  and camped  in the  actual  road and  when they  went on in  the morning  the 
macadam had cooled.  Bye and bye they  came to a set of tracks  cooked into  the tar. The y just suddenly 
appeared.  He squatted  and studied  them.  Someone  had come  out of the woods in the  night and 
continued  down the  melt ed roadwa y.
Who  is it? said  the bo y.
I dont  know. Who  is any body?
They came  upon him  shuffling  along  the road before  them,  dragging one  leg slightl y and 
stopping  from  time to time  to stand stooped  and uncertain  before  setting  out again.
What  should we do, Papa?
We're  all right. Let's ju st follow and watch.
Take  a look,  the bo y said.
Yes. Take  a look.
They followed hi m a good wa ys but at  his pace  they  were losing  the da y and finall y he ju st 
sat in the road  and did not  get up again.  The boy hung on to his father's coat.  No one s poke.  He wa s as 
burntlooking  as the  country , his clothing  scorched and black.  One of his e yes was burnt shut and his  
hair was but  a nitt y wig of ash upon his blackened  skull.  As they passed he  looked down. A s if he'd 
done  something  wrong. His s hoes were  bound up with wire and coated  with  roadtar  and he sat there  in 
silence,  bent  over in  his rag s. The  boy kept  looking back.  Papa ? he whispered.  What  is w rong with  the 
man?
He's been  struck b y lightning.
Cant  we help hi m? Papa?
No. We cant  help  him.
The boy kept pulling  at his coat.  Papa ? he said.
Stop it.
Cant  we help hi m Papa?
No. We cant  help  him.  There's nothing to  be done for him.
They went on. The  boy was crying. He kept looking  back.  When the y got to the  bottom  of 
the hill the m an stopped and  looked at  him and looked back  up the road.  The burned man  had fallen 
over and at that  distance  you couldnt  even  tell what it  was. I 'm sorry, he said.  But we have nothing  to 
give him.  We have  no w ay to help hi m. I'm sorry  for w hat happened  to him  but we cant  fix it.  You 
know that,  dont y ou? The boy stood looking  down. He nodded  his head. Then  they  went on and  he 
didnt  look back  again.
At evening  a dull  sulphur light  from  the fires. The  standing water  in the  roadside ditches 
black  with the  runoff. The  mountains  shrouded awa y. They  crossed a river  by a concrete  bridge  where 
skeins of ash and slurr y moved  slowly  in the  current.  Charred bits  of w ood. In the  end the y stopped and 
turned  back and  camped  under the  bridge.
He'd carried  his billfold  about  till it wore a cornershaped  hole in  his trouser s. Then  one da y 
he sat by the roadside  and took it  out and  went through the  contents.  Some mone y, credit  cards. His 
driver's license.  A picture  of his wife. He spread ever ything out on the blacktop.  Like  gaming  cards.  He 
pitched  the sweatblackened  piece  of leather  into the woods and sat holding  the photograph.  Then  he 
laid it down in the road  also and then  he stood and the y went on.
In the  morning  he lay  looking  up at  the cla y nests that  swallows had  built  in the  corners 
under  the bridge.  He looked at  the bo y but the bo y had turned awa y and lay staring  out at  the river.
There's nothing  we could  have done.
He didnt  answer.
He's going  to die.  We cant  share what we have  or we 'll die too.
I know.
So when are y ou going  to talk  to me  again?
I'm talking  now.
Are y ou sure ?
Yes.
Okay .
Okay .
They stood on the far  shore of a river and  called  to hi m. Tattered  gods slouching in their  
rags across the  waste. Trekking  the dried  floor of a m ineral  sea where it  lay cracked  and broken like  a 
fallen  plate.  Paths of feral fire  in the  coagulate  sand s. The  figures faded  in the distance.  He woke and 
lay in the  dark.
The clocks stopped  at 1:17.  A long  shear of light  and then  a series of low concussions. He  
got up and went to the  window. What  is it? she said.  He didnt answer. He went into  the bathroo m and 
threw  the lightswitch  but the power was alread y gone. A dull rose glow in  the windowglass. He  
dropped  to one knee  and raised the  lever  to stop the  tub and then  turned on both  taps as far as the y 
would go. She was standing in  the doorwa y in her nightwear,  clutching  the jamb,  cradling  her bell y in 
one hand. What  is it? s he said.  What  is happening?
I dont  know.
Why are y ou taking  a bath?
I'm not.
Once in  those earl y years he'd wakened in  a barren wood and la y listening  to flocks  of 
migr atory birds overhead in  that bitter  dark. Their  half muted  crankings  miles above where  they  circled 
the earth  as sen selessl y as insects trooping  the ri m of a bowl. He wished the m godspeed till  they  were 
gone.  He never  heard the m again.
He'd a deck  of cards he found in a  bureau drawer in  a hou se and the  cards were worn and  
spindled  and the  two of clubs was missing  but still  they play ed sometimes by firelight  wrapped  in their 
blankets.  He tried  to rem ember the rules  of childhood ga mes. Old Maid. Some  version of Whist. He 
was sure he had the m mostl y wrong and he made  up new games  and gave them  made  up names. 
Abnormal  Fescue or Catbarf.  Someti mes the child  would ask him  questions about  the world that for 
him was not even a  mem ory. He thought  hard how to answer. There  is no past. What  would y ou like? 
But he stopped mak ing things up because  those things  were not true  either  and the  telling  mad e him 
feel bad. The  child  had his own fantasies.  How things would be in  the south. Other  children.  He tried  to 
keep  a rein  on this but his heart  was not in it.  Whose would be?
No lists of things  to be done. The  day providentia l to itself.  The hour. There  is no later. 
This is later.  All things of grace  and beaut y such that  one holds the m to one's heart  have a  comm on 
provenance  in pain. Their  birth  in grief  and ashes. So, he w hispered  to the  sleeping  boy. I have y ou.
He thought  about the  picture  in the road and  he thought  that he  should  have tried  to keep 
her in their  lives in  some way  but he didnt  know ho w. He woke coughing  and walked  out so as not to 
wake the  child.  Following a  stone wall in  the dark,  wrapped  in his blanket,  kneeling  in the ashes like  a 
penitent.  He coughed till  he could taste  the blood and he  said her name  aloud.  He thought  perhaps he'd 
said it in his sleep. When  he got back  the bo y was awake. I'm  sorry , he said.
It's okay .
Go to sleep.
I wish I was with m y mom.
He didnt  answer. He sat beside the  small  figure wrapped  in the  quilts and blankets.  After  a 
while  he said:  You me an you wish that  you were dead.
Yes.
You musnt  say that.
But I do.
Dont sa y it. It's a bad thing  to say .
I cant  help  it.
I know. But y ou have  to.
How do I do it?
I dont  know.
We're  survivors he  told her across the  flam e of the  lamp.
Survivors?  she said.
Yes.
What  in God' s nam e are you talking  about? We're not survivors. We're the  walking  dead in 
a horror film.
I'm begging  you.
I dont  care. I dont  care if  you cry. It doesnt  mean  anything to me.
Please.
Stop it.
I am begging y ou. I'll do any thing.
Such as what? I s hould  have done it  a long  time  ago. When  there  were three  bullets in  the 
gun instead  of two. I was stupid. We've been  over all  of this. I didnt  bring m yself to this.  I wa s brought. 
And now I 'm done. I thought about  not even  telling  you. That  would probabl y have been  best. You 
have  two bullets  and then  what? You cant  protect  us. You say  you would die  for u s but  what good is 
that? I'd take  him with me  if it werent  for yo u. You kno w I would. It's the right  thing  to do.
You're talking  craz y.
No, I'm  speaking the  truth.  Sooner  or later  they  will catch  us and the y will kill  us. The y will 
rape me. They'll rape  him.  They are going  to rape  us and  kill us and eat  us and y ou wont face  it. You'd 
rather  wait  for it to  happen. But  I cant. I cant.  She sat there  smoking  a slender length  of dried  grapevine 
as if it were some  rare cheroot.  Holding it  with a  certain  elegance,  her other hand  acros s her  knees 
where she'd drawn them  up. She watched  him across the  small  flame.  We used to talk  about  death,  she 
said. We dont an y more.  Why is that?
I dont  know.
It's because  it's here.  There's nothing  left to talk  about.
I wouldnt  leave  you.
I dont  care. It's mean ingless.  You can think  of me  as a faithless slut  if you like.  I've taken  a 
new lover.  He can give  me what  you cannot.
Death  is not a lover.
Oh ye s he is.
Please  dont do this.
I'm sorry .
I cant  do it  alone.
Then  dont. I cant  help  you. They  say that women  drea m of danger  to those in  their care  and 
men of danger to  themselv es. But I dont drea m at all. You sa y you cant? Then  dont do it.  That's all. 
Because  I am  done with m y own whorish heart  and I have been  for a long ti me. You talk  about  taking  a 
stand  but there  is no stand to take.  My heart  was ripped  out of me  the night  he was born s o dont  ask for 
sorrow no w. There  is none. Ma ybe you'll be good at  this. I doubt it,  but who know s. The  one thing  I 
can tell you is that  you wont survive for y ourself.  I know because  I would never have  come  this far. A 
person who had no one would be  well advised  to cobble  together  some  passable  ghost. Breathe  it into 
being  and coax  it along  with words of love. Offer it  each phanto m crumb  and shield  it from  harm  with 
your body. As for me  my only  hope is for eternal  nothingness and I hope it  with all  my heart.
He didnt  answer.
You have no argu ment  because there  is none.
Will you tell him goodb ye?
No. I will  not.
Just wait  till morning.  Please.
I have  to go.
She had  alread y stood up.
For the  love of God, woman.  What  am I to tell  him?
I cant  help  you.
Where  are you going to go?  You cant  even see.
I dont  have to.
He stood up. I'm  begging  you, he said. No. I will  not. I cannot.
She was gone and the  coldness of it  was her  final  gift. She would do it  with a flake  of 
obsidian.  He'd taught  her himself.  Sharper  than steel.  The edge an ato m thick.  And she wa s right.  There 
was no argumen t. The hundred nights the y'd sat up arguing the  pros and  cons of self destruction  with 
the earnestness of philosophers chained  to a madhouse  wall. In the  morning  the boy said nothing  at all 
and when the y were packed  and read y to set out  upon the road he  turned and  looked back  at their 
campsite  and he said:  She's gone isn't she ? And he said:  Yes, she is.
Alway s so deliberate,  hardly  surprised b y the most  outlandish  advents. A creation  perfectl y 
evolved  to m eet its own end. They  sat at the  window and ate  in their  robes by  candlelight  a midn ight 
supper and watched  distant  cities  burn. A few nights later  she gave  birth in  their  bed by  the light  of a 
drycell lamp. Gloves me ant for dishwashing. The  improbab le appearance  of the  small  crown of the 
head.  Streaked  with blood and  lank black  hair.  The rank me coniu m. Her cries me ant nothing  to hi m. 
Beyond the window j ust the  gathering  cold, the  fires on the  horizon. He held  aloft  the scrawn y red body 
so raw and naked  and cut the  cord with  kitchen  shears  and wrapped his son in a towel.
Did y ou have  any friends?
Yes. I did.
Lots of them?
Yes.
Do yo u reme mber them?
Yes. I reme mber them.
What  happened  to the m?
They died.
All of them?
Yes. All of the m.
Do yo u miss  them?
Yes. I do.
Where  are we going?
We're  going south.
Okay .
They were all  day on the  long black  road, stopping  in the afternoon  to eat sparingl y from 
their meager supplies.  The bo y took his truck  from  the pack and  shaped  roads in the  ash with a stick. 
The truck tooled  along  slowly . He made  truck noises. The  day seemed  almost  warm  and the y slept in 
the leaves  with their  packs under their  heads.
Someth ing woke him.  He turned on his side  and lay  listening.  He raised his head  slowly, 
the pistol  in his hand. He looked  down at  the bo y and when he looked back  toward the  road the  first of 
them were alread y coming  into view. God, he whispered. He reached  and shook the  boy, keeping  his 
eyes on the  road. The y came  shuffling through  the ash casting  their  hooded heads from  side to side. 
Some  of them  wearing  canister  masks.  One in a  biohazard  suit. Stained  and filth y. Slouching  along 
with clubs in their  hands, lengths  of pipe. Coughing.  Then he heard  on the road  behind the m what 
sounded like  a diesel  truck.  Quick,  he whispered. Quick.  He s hoved  the pistol  in his belt  and grabbed 
the boy by the hand  and he dragged  the cart  through the  trees  and tilted  it over where it  would not so 
easily be seen.  The bo y was frozen with  fear. He pulled  him to him.  It's all right,  he said. We  have to 
run. Dont look  back. Come  on.
He slung their  knapsacks over his shoulder  and the y tore through the  crumbl ing bracken. 
The boy was terrified.  Run, he whispered. Run. He looked  back. The  truck  had rumbled  into view.  Men 
standing  in the  bed looking  out. The  boy fell and he pulled  him up. It' s all right,  he said. Come  on.
He could  see a break  through the  trees that  he thought  was a ditch  or a cut  and they  came 
out through the  weeds into  an old  roadway . Plates of cracked  macadam showing  through the  drifts of 
ash. He pulled  the boy down and  they  crouched  under the  bank listening,  gasping for breath.  They 
could  hear the  diesel  engine  out on the  road, running on God kno ws what. When  he raised  up to look he 
could  just see the  top of the  truck mov ing along  the road.  Men standing  in the  stakebed,  some of them 
holding  rifles.  The truck  passed on and the black  diesel  smoke  coiled  through  the woods. The motor  
sounded rop y. Missing and puttering.  Then  it quit.
He sank down and put his hand  on top of his head. God, he said.  They  could  hear the  thing 
rattle  and flap  to a halt.  Then  just the  silence.  He had the pistol  in his hand,  he couldnt  even rem ember 
taking  it from  his belt.  They could hear  the men  talking.  Hear the m unlatch  and raise the  hood. He sat 
with his arm  around the  boy. Shh, he said. Shh. After a  while they heard the  truck begin  to roll. 
Lumb ering  and creaking  like a ship. The y'd have  no other wa y to start it  save to push it  and they 
couldnt  get it fast  enough to start  on that  slope. After a  few minutes  it coughed  and bucked and  stopped 
again.  He raised  his head to look  and coming  through the  weeds twenty  feet away  was one of their 
number  unbuckling  his belt.  They  both  froze.
He cocked  the pistol and held  it on the man  and the  man  stood with  one hand out at  his 
side, the dirt y crumpled  paintm ask that he wore sucking in  and out.
Just keep co ming.
He looked  at the  road.
Dont look  back there.  Look at  me. If you call out yo u're dead.
He ca me forward, holding  his belt  by one hand. The  holes in it  marked  the progre ss of his 
emaciation and the leather  at one  side had a lacquered  look to it  where he  was used to stropping  the 
blade  of his knife.  He stepped down into the  roadcut  and he looked  at the gun and he  looked at  the bo y. 
Eyes collared  in cups of grim e and deepl y sunk. Like  an anim al inside a skull  looking out  the e yeholes. 
He wore a beard  that had been  cut square across the  bottom  with shears and he had  a tattoo  of a bird  on 
his neck  done b y someone  with an illfor med notion of their  appearance.  He wa s lean,  wiry, rachitic. 
Dressed in a pair  of filth y blue  coveralls  and a black  billcap  with  the logo  of some vanished enterprise  
embro idered  across the front of it.
Where  are you going ?
I was going to  take a  crap.
Where  are you going with the  truck.
I dont  know.
What  do y ou mean  you dont know ? Take  the mask  off.
He pulled  the mask  off over his head  and stood holding  it.
I mean I dont know, he said.
You dont know where y ou're  going?
No.
What's the  truck  running on.
Diesel  fuel.
How much  do y ou have.
There's three  fifty-five gallon  drums  in the bed.
Do yo u have a mmunition for those  guns?
He looked  back toward  the road.
I told  you not to  look back there.
Yeah. We  got am munition.
Where  did y ou get it?
Found it.
That's a  lie. What are  you eating.
Whatever  we can find.
Whatever  you can find.
Yeah. He looked  at the bo y. You w ont shoot,  he said.
That's what  you think.
You aint  got but  two s hells.  May be just one.  And the y'll hear  the shot.
Yes they  will.  But y ou wont.
How do yo u figure that?
Because  the bullet  travels  faster than  sound. It  will be  in yo ur brain  before y ou can hear it. 
To hear it  you will need  a frontal  lobe  and things with  names  like colliculus  and tempora l gyrus and 
you wont have  them  anymore. They 'll just be soup.
Are y ou a doctor?
I'm not anything.
We got a man  hurt. It'd be worth y our while.
Do I look like  an imbeci le to yo u?
I dont  know what  you look like.
Why are y ou looking  at him?
I can  look where I want  to.
No yo u cant.  If yo u look at  him again  I'll shoot y ou.
The boy was sitting  with  both hands on top of his head  and looking  out between  his 
forear ms.
I'll bet that  boy is hungr y. Why dont  you all just come  on to the  truck ? Get  something  to 
eat. Aint no need  to be  such a  hard-ass.
You dont have  anything to eat.  Let's go.
Go where ?
Let's go.
I aint  goin  nowheres.
You're not ?
No. I aint.
You think  I wont kill you but yo u're wrong. But  what I'd rather do is take  you up this  road a 
mile or so and then  turn y ou loose.  That's all  the head  start we need.  You wont find  us. You wont even 
know which wa y we went.
You know w hat I think?
What  do y ou think.
I think  you're chickenshit.
He let  go of the  belt and it  fell in  the roadwa y with the gear  hanging  from  it. A canteen.  An 
old canvas arm y pouch. A leather  sheath for a  knife. When  he looked  up the roadrat  was holding the 
knife  in his hand. He'd only  taken  two steps but he  was almost  between  him and the child.
What  do y ou think  you're going to do with  that?
He didnt  answer. He wa s a big  man  but he was very  quick. He dove  and grabbed the  boy 
and rolled and  came  up holding hi m against  his chest with  the knife  at his throat. The  man  had alread y 
dropped  to the ground and  he swung with  him and leveled  the pistol and fired  from  a two-handed 
position  balanced  on both  knees at a  distance  of six feet.  The man  fell back instantl y and lay with  blood 
bubbling  from  the hole in  his forehead.  The bo y was ly ing in his lap with  no expres sion on his face  at 
all. He shoved the  pistol in  his belt  and slung the knapsack  over his shoulder and  picked up the  boy and 
turned  him around and lifted  him over his head  and set him  on his shoulders and set off up the  old 
roadwa y at a dead  run, holding the  boy's knees, the  boy clutching  his forehead, covered  with gore  and 
mute as a stone.
They came  to an  old iron bridge  in the  woods where the  vanished road  had cros sed an all 
but vanished stream.  He wa s starting  to cough and he'd hardl y breath to  do it with.  He dropped down 
out of the roadwa y and into the  wood s. He turned  and stood gasping, tr ying to listen.  He heard  nothing. 
He staggered  on another  half m ile or so and  finall y dropped to his knees  and put the  boy down in  the 
ashes and leaves.  He wiped the  blood from  his face and  held him.  It's oka y, he said. It's okay .
In the  long cold  evening  with the  darknes s dropping  down he  heard the m only once.  He 
held the bo y close.  There  was a cough in his throat  that never  left. The  boy so frail  and thin  through his 
coat,  shivering  like a dog. The footsteps  in the  leaves stopped.  Then the y moved  on. The y neither  spoke 
nor called  to each  other, the  more  sinister for that.  With  the final onset  of dark the  iron cold locked 
down and the  boy by now was shuddering violentl y. No moon  rose bey ond the murk  and there  was 
nowhere to  go. They  had a single blanket  in the  pack and he  got it  out and covered  the bo y with  it and 
he unzipped his parka  and held  the bo y against  him.  They  lay there  for a long ti me but the y were 
freezing  and finall y he sat up. We've  got to move,  he said. We  cant  just lie  here.  He looked  around but 
there  was nothing to  see. He s poke  into a  blackness without  depth or dim ension.
He held  the bo y's hand as they  stumb led through  the woods. The other  hand he held  out 
before  him.  He could  see no wor se with his e yes shut. The  boy was wrapped  in the blanket  and he told 
him not to  drop it because  they would never find it  again.  He wanted to  be carried  but the  man  told him 
that he had  to keep  moving.  They stumbled  and fell  through the  woods the  night long  and long before 
dawn the  boy fell and would not get  up again.  He w rapped  him in his o wn parka  and wrapped hi m in 
the blanket  and sat  holding him,  rocking back  and forth.  A single  round left  in the  revolver. You will  
not face the  truth.  You will  not.
In the  grudging light  that passed for day  he put  the bo y in the leaves  and sat  study ing the 
woods. When it  was a bit lighter  he ro se and walked out  and cut  a perim eter about their  siwash camp 
looking  for sign but other  than their  own faint  track  through the  ash he sa w nothing.  He went back  and 
gathered  the boy up. We have  to go, he  said. The bo y sat slumped,  his face  blank.  The filth  dried  in his 
hair and his face  streaked  with it.  Talk  to me,  he said, but he  would not.
They moved  on east  through the  standing dead  trees. The y passed an old fra me house and 
crossed a dirt  road. A cleared  plot of ground perhaps once  a truckgarden.  Stopping from  time  to time to 
listen.  The unseen sun cast no shadow. They  came upon the  road unexpectedl y and he stopped  the bo y 
with one hand and the y crouched  in the  roadside ditch  like lepers and  listened.  No wind. D ead silence. 
After  a while he rose and walked out  into the  road. He looked  back at  the bo y. Come  on, he said. The 
boy came out and the  man  pointed  out the  tracks in  the ash where the  truck  had gone. The  boy stood 
wrapped in  the blanket  looking down at the  road.
He'd no way  to know if the y'd got the truck  running again.  No w ay to know how long the y 
migh t be willing  to lie  in ambush.  He thumb ed the pack down off his shoulder and sat  and opened it. 
We need to  eat, he  said. Are yo u hungry ?
The boy shook his head.
No. Of course not. He took out  the plastic  bottle  of water and unscrewed  the cap  and held it 
out and the bo y took  it and  stood drinking. He lowered  the bottle  and got his breath  and he  sat in the 
road and cros sed his legs and drank again.  Then  he handed  the bottle  back  and the  man  drank  and 
screwed the  cap back  on and rum maged through  the pack.  They  ate a can  of white  beans, pas sing it 
between  them,  and he threw  the emp ty tin into the wood s. Then  they set out down the road  again.
The truck people  had camped  in the  road itself.  They 'd built  a fire  there  and charred  billets 
of wood la y stuck in the  melt ed tar together  with ash and bones. He squatted  and held  his hand over the 
tar. A faint warm th coming  off of it.  He stood and looked down the  road. Then he  took the  boy with 
him into the woods. I w ant you to wait  here, he said.  I wont be far awa y. I'll be able  to hear  you if yo u 
call.
Take  me with y ou, the boy said. He looked as if  he wa s going  to cr y.
No. I want y ou to wait here.
Please,  Papa.
Stop it.  I want y ou to do w hat I say . Take  the gun.
I dont  want the gun.
I didnt  ask yo u if you wanted  it. Take  it.
He walked  out through the  wood s to where they 'd left the cart.  It was still  lying there  but it 
had been plundered.  The few things  they  hadnt  taken  scattered  in the  leaves.  Some books and toy s 
belonging  to the bo y. His old shoes and some  rags of clothing.  He righted  the cart and put the  boy's 
things  in it and wheeled  it out  to the  road. Then he  went back. There  was nothing there.  Dried  blood 
dark in the leaves.  The boy's knapsack was gone. Coming  back he  found the bones and the  skin piled 
together  with  rocks over them.  A pool of guts. He pu shed at the  bones with the  toe of his shoe. The y 
looked  to have  been boiled.  No pieces  of clothing.  Dark wa s com ing on again  and it  was alread y very 
cold and he turned  and went out  to where he'd left  the boy and knelt  and put his arms  around him  and 
held him.
They pushed the cart  through  the wood s as far  as the old road  and left  it there and  headed 
south along  the road  hurry ing against  the dark.  The bo y was stumbling  he was s o tired  and the man 
picked  him up and sw ung hi m onto his shoulders and  they  went on. B y the time they got to the  bridge 
there  was scarcel y light  at all.  He put the  boy down and the y felt their  way down the  embankm ent. 
Under the  bridge he  got out his lighter  and lit  it and  swept  the ground with  the flickering  light.  Sand 
and gravel washed up from  the creek.  He set down the knapsack  and put awa y the lighter  and took hold 
of the  boy by the shoulders. He could  just mak e him out in the  darkness. I want y ou to wait  here, he 
said. I'm going  for w ood. We  have to  have a  fire.
I'm scared.
I know. But I'll  just be a litt le ways and I'll be  able to  hear y ou so if y ou get scared y ou call 
me and I'll com e right  away .
I'm reall y scared.
The sooner I go the sooner I'll  be back and  we'll have a fire  and then  you wont be scared 
anymore. Dont lie  down. If yo u lie down y ou'll fall asleep  and then  if I call  you you wont answer and  I 
wont be  able to  find y ou. Do yo u understand ?
The boy didnt  answer. He was close to  losing his temp er with  him and then  he realized  that 
he was shaking his head  in the  dark. Okay , he said. Oka y.
He scramb led up the  bank and into  the woods, holding  his hands out in front  of him.  There 
was wood every wher e, dead  limbs  and branches scattered  over  the ground. He shuffled along  kicking 
them into a pile  and when he had  an armful  he stooped and  gathered  them  up and called  the boy and the 
boy answered and  talked  him back  to the  bridge. The y sat in  the darkness while  he shaved sticks into  a 
pile with  his knife and broke  up the smal l branches  with his hands. He took the  lighter  from  his pocket 
and struck the wheel  with his thumb.  He u sed gasoline  in the lighter  and it  burned with a frail  blue 
flame and he bent  and set the  tinder  alight  and watched  the fire  clim b upward through the  wicker  of 
limbs.  He piled  on more  wood and bent  and blew gentl y at the base  of the littl e blaze  and arranged  the 
wood with his hands, shaping the  fire just so.
He mad e two more  trips into  the woods, dragging arm loads  of brush and limbs  to the bridge 
and pushing  them  over  the side.  He could  see the  glow of the fire  from  some  distance  but he didnt  think 
it could  be seen from  the other road.  Below the  bridge he could  make  out a dark  pool of standing  water 
among  the rocks. A rim  of shelving  ice. He stood on the  bridge and shoved the  last pile of wood over,  
his breath  white  in the  glow of the firelight.
He sat in  the sand and  inventoried  the contents of the  knapsack. The  binoculars.  A half pint 
bottle  of ga soline  almost  full.  The bottle  of water. A pair  of pliers. Two spoon s. He set  every thing out 
in a row. There were  five smal l tins of food and  he chose a can  of sau sages  and one of corn and  he 
opened  these with  the littl e army can opener  and set the m at the edge  of the fire  and the y sat watching 
the labels  char and curl.  When  the corn began  to stea m he took  the cans from  the fire  with the  pliers 
and they  sat bent  over the m with their  spoons, eating  slowly . The bo y was nodding with  sleep.
When  they 'd eaten  he took  the bo y out on the gravelbar  below the  bridge  and he pushed 
away the thin shore ice with  a stick  and they  knelt  there  while  he washed the bo y's face and  his hair. 
The water was so cold the  boy was crying. They moved  down the gravel  to find fresh water and  he 
washed his hair  again  as well  as he could  and finall y stopped  because the  boy was moan ing with  the 
cold of it.  He dried  him with the  blanket,  kneeling  there  in the  glow of the light  with  the shadow of the 
bridge's understructure  broken across the  palisade  of treetrunks  beyond the creek. This  is m y child,  he 
said. I wash a dead  man's  brains out of his hair.  That  is m y job. Then  he wrapped hi m in the  blanket 
and carried  him to the fire.
The boy sat tottering.  The man  watched  him that he not  topple  into the  flam es. He kicked 
holes  in the sand for the  boy's hips and shoulders where  he w ould sleep and  he sat holding  him while 
he tousled his hair  before the  fire to  dry it. All  of this like  some  ancient  anointing.  So be it.  Evoke the 
forms.  Where  you've  nothing  else construct  ceremon ies out of the air  and breathe  upon them.
He woke in the  night  with the  cold and rose and  broke up more  wood for the  fire. The 
shapes of the  small  tree-li mbs burning incandescen t orange  in the coals.  He blew the  flames  to life  and 
piled  on the  wood and  sat with his legs  crossed, leaning  against the  stone pier  of the bridge.  Heavy 
limestone  blocks laid  up without  mortar.  Overhead  the ironwork bro wn with  rust, the ham mered rivets, 
the wooden sleepers and crossplanks. The  sand w here he sat was warm  to the touch  but the  night 
beyond the fire  was sharp with  the cold.  He got up and dragged  fresh w ood in  under the bridge.  He 
stood listening.  The bo y didnt  stir. He sat beside  him and stroked his pale  and tangled  hair.  Golden 
chalice,  good to house a god. Please  dont tell  me how the stor y ends. When  he looked  out again  at the 
darkness be yond the bridge  it was s nowing.
All the wood they  had to burn was small  wood and the  fire was good for no more  than an 
hour or perhaps a  bit more.  He dragged the  rest of the  brush in  under the  bridge and broke  it up, 
standing  on the li mbs and cracking  them to length.  He thought the  noise would wake the  boy but it 
didnt.  The wet wood hissed in  the fla mes, the snow continued  to fall. In the  morning  they  would see if 
there  were tracks  in the  road or not. This  was the first human  being other  than the  boy that he'd s poken 
to in more  than a y ear. My brother at  last. The  reptilian  calculat ions in those cold  and shifting  eyes. The 
gray and rotting  teeth.  Clagg y with human  flesh.  Who has made  of the world a  lie ever y word. When he 
woke again  the snow had stopped and  the grain y dawn wa s shaping  out the  naked woodlands bey ond 
the bridge, the  trees  black against  the snow. He was ly ing curled  up with his hands between  his knees 
and he sat up and got  the fire  going and he  set a can  of beets in the  embers.  The bo y lay huddled on the 
ground watching  him.
The new s now la y in skifts all  through the  wood s, along  the li mbs and cupped  in the  leaves, 
all of it  alread y gray  with  ash. The y hiked  out to where the y'd left the cart  and he put  the knapsack  in 
and pushed it  out to  the road.  No tracks.  They  stood listening  in the  utter silence.  Then the y set out 
along  the road  through the  gray  slush, the bo y at his side with his hands in  his pockets.
They trudged all  day, the bo y in silence.  By afternoon the  slush had mel ted off the  road and 
by evening  it was dry. They didnt  stop. H ow man y miles?  Ten, twelve.  They used to pla y quoits in the 
road with four big steel  washers they 'd found in a hardware  store but these  were gone with  every thing 
else. That  night the y camp ed in a ravine and  built  a fire  against a  small  stone bluff and ate  their  last tin 
of food. He'd put it  by because it  was the bo y's favorite,  pork and beans. The y watched it  bubble  slowly 
in the coals  and he retrieved  the tin  with the  pliers and  they  ate in silence.  He rinsed  the emp ty tin with 
water  and gave  it to the child  to drink  and that  was that.  I should have  been more  careful,  he said.
The boy didnt  answer.
You have to  talk to me.
Okay .
You wanted to  know what  the bad  guys looked  like.  Now y ou know. It ma y happen again. 
My job is to  take care  of you. I was appointed  to do that  by God. I will  kill anyone who touches y ou. 
Do yo u understand?
Yes.
He sat there  cowled  in the  blanket.  After a while  he looked  up. A re we still  the good gu ys? 
he said.
Yes. We're still  the good guy s.
And we alway s will be.
Yes. We alwa ys will be.
Okay .
In the  morning  they  cam e up out  of the ravine  and took  to the road  again.  He'd carved  the 
boy a flute from  a piece  of roadside  cane and  he took it  from  his coat  and gave  it to him.  The boy took 
it wordlessly . After a while  he fell  back  and after  a while  the man  could hear  him playing. A formless 
music  for the age  to com e. Or perhaps the  last music  on earth  called  up from  out of the ashes of its ruin.  
The man  turned  and looked  back at  him.  He w as lost in  concentration.  The man  thought  he seemed 
some  sad and  solitar y changeling  child  announcing  the arrival  of a traveling  spectacle  in shire and 
village  who does not  know that  behind  him the pla yers have all  been  carried  off by  wolves.
He sat crosslegged  in the  leaves  at the  crest of a ridge  and glassed the  valle y below the m 
with the binoculars.  The still poured shape of a river.  The dark  brick stacks of a  mill. Slate  roofs. A n 
old wooden  watertower  bound with  iron hoops. N o smoke,  no movem ent of life.  He lowered the 
glasses and sat  watching.
What  do y ou see? the bo y said.
Nothing.
He handed  the binoculars  across. The  boy slung the strap over  his neck and put  them  to his 
eyes and adjusted  the wheel.  Every thing about the m so still.
I see smoke,  he said.
Where.
Past those  buildings.
What  buildings?
The boy handed the  glasses back and  he refocused the m. The palest  wisp. Yes, he said. I 
see it.
What  should we do, Papa?
I think  we should take  a look. We  just have  to be careful.  If it's a co mmune they 'll have 
barricades.  But it ma y just be refugees.
Like us.
Yes. Like  us.
What  if it's the  bad gu ys?
We'll  have  to take  a risk. We need  to find  something  to eat.
They left the cart  in the wood s and  cros sed a railroad  track  and cam e down a steep  bank 
through  dead black  ivy. He carried  the pistol  in his hand. Sta y close,  he said. He did.  They  moved 
through  the streets  like sapper s. One block  at a tim e. A faint  smell  of w oodsmoke  on the  air. They 
waited  in a store and watched  the street but  nothing moved.  They went through the  trash and rubble. 
Cabinet  drawers pulled  out into the  floor, paper  and bloated  cardboard  boxes. They  found nothing.  All 
the stores were rifled  years ago, the  glass mostl y gone  from  the windo ws. Inside it  was all but too dark 
to see. They  climbed  the ribbed  steel  stairs of an escalator,  the bo y holding  on to his hand.  A few dusty 
suits hanging  on a rack.  They  looked  for s hoes but  there  were none. The y shuffled  through the  trash but 
there  was nothing there  of an y use to  them.  When the y came  back he  slipped the  suitcoats  from  their 
hangers and  shook the m out and folded the m across his arm.  Let's go, he said.
He thought  there  had to be  something  overlooked  but there wasnt. The y kicked  through the 
trash  in the aisles  of a foodmark et. Old packaging  and papers and the  eternal  ash. He scoured the  
shelves looking  for vita mins.  He opened  the door of a  walk-in cooler  but the  sour rank smell  of the 
dead  washed out of the  darknes s and  he quickl y closed it  again.  They  stood in  the street.  He looked  at 
the gray  sky. Faint plu me of their  breath.  The boy was exhausted.  He took him  by the hand. We have  to 
look some more,  he said. We have  to keep  looking.
The house s at the edge of the  town offered littl e more.  They  climbed  the back  steps into a 
kitchen  and began to  go through the cabinets.  The cabinet  door s all standing  open. A can of 
bakingpowder.  He stood there  looking at  it. The y went through  the drawers of a sideboard  in the 
diningroo m. They walked into  the livingroom.  Scrolls of fallen  wallpaper  lying in the floor like  ancient 
docum ents. He left  the boy sitting  on the stairs holding  the coats while  he went up.
Ever ything smelled  of damp  and rot. In the first  bedroom  a dried corpse with  the covers 
about  its neck.  Remnants  of rotted hair  on the  pillow. He took  hold of the lower  hem  of the  blanket  and 
towed  it off the  bed and shook it  out and folded  it under  his arm.  He went through  the bureaus  and the 
closets.  A sum mer dress on a wire hanger.  Nothing.  He went back  down the  stairs. It was getting  dark. 
He took  the bo y by the hand and the y went out the  front door to  the street.
At the  top of the  hill he turned  and studied the  town. Darkness coming  fast.  Darknes s and 
cold.  He put two of the  coats over the  boy's shoulders, swallowing hi m up parka  and all.
I'm reall y hungr y, Papa.
I know.
Will we be able  to find our stuff?
Yes. I know w here it is.
What  if somebod y finds it?
They wont find it.
I hope  they  dont.
They wont. Come  on.
What  was that?
I didnt  hear an ything.
Listen.
I dont  hear an ything.
They listened.  Then  in the  distance  he heard a  dog bark. He turned and  looked toward the 
darkening  town. It's a dog, he said.
A dog ?
Yes.
Where  did it  come  from?
I dont  know.
We're  not going to  kill it, are  we Papa ?
No. We're not  going to kill  it.
He looked  down at  the boy. Shivering  in his coats. He bent  over and kissed him  on his 
gritty brow. We wont hurt  the dog, he  said. I promise.
They slept in  a parked  car beneath  an overpass with  the suitcoats  and the  blanket  piled  over 
them. In the  darkness and the silence  he could see  bits of light  that appeared  random  on the  night  grid. 
The higher floors of the  buildings  were all  dark. You 'd have  to carr y up water. You could be  smoked 
out. What were  they  eating?  God knows. They  sat wrapped  in the  coats looking  out the  windo w. Who 
are they , Papa? I dont know.
He woke in the  night  and la y listening.  He couldnt  remem ber where he was. The  thought 
made him smile.  Where are  we? he said.
What  is it,  Papa ?
Nothing.  We're okay . Go to sleep.
We're  going to be  okay , arent  we Papa ?
Yes. We are.
And nothing  bad is going to  happen to us.
That's right.
Because  we're carry ing the fire.
Yes. Because  we're carr ying the fire.
In the  morning  a cold rain  was falling.  It gusted over  the car  even under the  overpass and it 
danced  in the  road be yond. They sat and  watched  through  the water  on the glass. B y the time it had 
slacked  a good part  of the da y was gone.  They  left the coats and the  blanket  in the  floor of the  back seat 
and went up the road  to search through  more  of the  house s. Woodsmoke  on the  damp  air. They  never 
heard  the dog again.
They found some  utensils  and a few pieces  of clothing.  A sweatshirt.  Some  plastic  they 
could  use for a tarp.  He w as sure the y were being watched  but he  saw no one.  In a pantry  they cam e 
upon part  of a sack of cornm eal that rats had been  at in  the long ago.  He sifted the  meal  through a 
section  of window screen  and collec ted a small  handful of dried  turds and the y built  a fire on the 
concrete  porch of the house and  made  cakes  of the m eal and cooked the m over  a piece  of tin.  Then the y 
ate them slowly  one b y one.  He wrapped  the few rema ining  in a paper  and put the m in the knapsack.
The boy was sitting  on the  steps when he saw s omething  move  at the rear  of the house 
across the  road. A face was looking  at him.  A boy , about his age,  wrapped  in an out- sized wool coat 
with the sleeves  turned back.  He stood up. He ran across the road and  up the drive.  No one there.  He 
looked  toward the  house and then he  ran to the  bottom  of the y ard through the  dead weeds to a  still 
black  creek.  Come  back,  he called.  I wont hurt yo u. He wa s standing  there  crying when his father  came 
sprinting  across the road  and seized  him by the arm.
What  are you doing ? he hissed. What  are you doing ?
There's a  little  boy, Papa. There's a littl e boy.
There's no litt le boy. What  are you doing ?
Yes there  is. I sa w him.
I told  you to sta y put. Didnt I tell  you? Now we've got to go. Com e on.
I just wanted to see  him,  Papa.  I just wanted to  see him.
The man  took  him by the arm and they  went  back up through  the y ard. The boy would not 
stop cr ying and he would not  stop looking back.  Come  on, the  man  said. We've got  to go.
I want  to see him,  Papa.
There's no one  to see. Do yo u want to die? Is that  what you want?
I dont  care, the  boy said, sobbing. I dont  care.
The man  stopped.  He stopped and squatted  and held  him.  I'm sorry, he said.  Dont say that. 
You musnt  say that.
They made  their  way  back through the  wet streets  to the  viaduct  and collect ed the coats and 
the blanket  from  the car and  went on to the  railwa y embank ment where  they  climbed  up and crossed 
the tracks into  the woods and got  the cart  and headed  out to  the highwa y.
What  if that  little boy doesnt  have an ybody to take care  of him?  he said.  What if  he doesnt 
have  a papa?
There  are people there.  They were ju st hiding.
He pushed the  cart out into  the road and  stood there. He could  see the  tracks of the  truck 
through  the wet ash, faint  and washed out,  but there.  He thought that  he could smel l them. The boy was 
pulling  at his coat.  Papa, he said.
What?
I'm afraid  for that  little  boy.
I know. But he'll  be all  right.
We should  go get hi m, Papa. We  could get  him and take  him with  us. We  could take  him 
and we could  take  the dog. The  dog could  catch  something  to eat.
We cant.
And I'd give that  little  boy half of m y food.
Stop it.  We cant.
He was cry ing again.  What  about  the littl e boy? he sobbed.  What about  the little  boy?
At a crossroads the y sat in the  dusk and  he spread out the  pieces  of the map  in the  road and 
studied  them.  He put his finger  down. This  is us, he said. Right here.  The boy wouldnt  look. He sat 
studying the twisted  matr ix of routes in  red and black  with his finger  at the  junction  where he  thought 
that they might  be. As  if he'd s ee their  small  selves  crouching  there. We  could go back,  the boy said 
softly. It's not  so far. It's not too  late.
They made  a dry  camp  in a woodlot  not far from  the road. The y could  find no sheltered 
place  to make  a fire that  would not  be seen so they  mad e none. The y ate each  of them  two of the 
cornm eal cakes and the y slept  together  huddled on the  ground in the  coats and  blankets. He held  the 
child  and after  a while the child  stopped shivering and  after  a while he slept.
The dog that  he reme mbers followed  us for two da ys. I tried  to coax it  to come  but it  would 
not. I made  a noose of wire to catch  it. There  were three  cartridges  in the  pistol. None to  spare.  She 
walked  away  down the road. The  boy looked  after her  and then  he looked at  me and then he  looked at 
the dog and he began  to cr y and to beg for the  dog's life  and I promised  I would not hurt  the dog. A 
trellis  of a dog with the  hide stretched  over  it. The  next da y it was gone. That  is the  dog he reme mbers. 
He doesnt re mem ber any little boys.
He'd put a handful  of dried  raisins in a cloth  in his pocket and  at noon the y sat in the  dead 
grass by  the side  of the road  and ate  them.  The bo y looked  at him.  That's all  there  is, isnt it? he said.
Yes.
Are we going to  die now?
No.
What  are we going to do?
We're  going to drink  some water. Then  we're going to keep  going down the road.
Okay .
In the  evening  they  tramped  out across a field  trying to find a place  where  their  fire would 
not be seen. Dragging the  cart behind the m over the  ground. So little  of promise  in that country . 
Tomorrow  they  would find  something  to eat. Night overtook  them  on a  mudd y road. The y cros sed into 
a field and  plodded on toward  a distant  stand of trees sk ylighted stark  and black  against  the last  of the 
visible  world. B y the time they got there  it was dark of night.  He held the  boy's hand  and kicked  up 
limbs and brush and got a  fire going.  The wood wa s damp but he  shaved  the dead  bark off with his 
knife  and he stacked  brush and sticks all  about  to dr y in the  heat.  Then he  spread  the sheet  of plastic  on 
the ground and got the  coats  and blankets  from  the cart and  he took off their  damp  and mudd y shoes 
and they  sat there  in silence  with their  hands out-held  to the  flames.  He tried  to think of someth ing to 
say but he could not.  He'd had this  feeling  before, be yond the numbness  and the  dull despair. The  world 
shrinking  down about  a raw core  of par sible  entiti es. The na mes of things slowly  following  those things 
into oblivion.  Colors. The  names  of birds. Things to  eat. Finall y the names  of things one believed  to be 
true. More fragile  than  he w ould have thought.  How much  was gone  alread y? The sacred idio m shorn 
of its  referents and  so of its  realit y. Drawing down like  something  trying to preserve  heat.  In tim e to 
wink out  forever.
They slept through  the night  in their  exhaustion  and in  the morning  the fire was dead and 
black  on the  ground. He pulled  on his mudd y shoe s and  went to gather  wood, blowing on his cupped  
hands. So cold.  It could be  Novemb er. It could be later.  He got  a fire  going and walked  out to the  edge 
of the  woodlot and stood looking  over the  countr yside. The dead  fields. A barn in  the distance.
They hiked out  along the  dirt road and along  a hill  where a house had  once stood. It had 
burned  long ago. The  rusted shape of a furnace  standing  in the  black water  of the  cellar.  Sheets of 
charred  metal roofing crumpl ed in the  fields  where the wind had  blown it. In the  barn the y scavenged a 
few handfuls of some  grain he  did not recognize  out of the dust y floor  of a met al hopper and stood 
eating  it dust and all.  Then  they  set out across the fields  toward the  road.
They followed a  stone wall  past the rem ains of an orchard.  The trees in their  ordered  rows 
gnarled  and black  and the  fallen  limbs thick  on the ground. He stopped  and looked across the  fields. 
Wind  in the  east. The  soft ash moving  in the furrows. Stopping. Moving again.  He'd seen  it all  before. 
Shapes of dried  blood in the  stubble  gras s and gra y coils of viscera  where the  slain had  been field-
dressed and hauled  away. The wall  beyond held a  frieze  of human  heads, all  faced  alike,  dried  and 
caved  with their  taut grins and shrunken e yes. They  wore gold rings in  their  leather  ears and in  the wind 
their sparse and ratt y hair twisted about  on their  skulls. The teeth  in their  sockets like  dental  molds,  the 
crude  tattoos  etched  in some  homebr ewed  woad faded  in the beggared  sunlight.  Spiders, s words, 
targets.  A dragon. Runic  slogans, creeds misspell ed. Old scars with old  motifs  stitched  along  their 
borders. The  heads not truncheoned  shapeless had  been fla yed of their  skins and the raw skulls painted  
and signed across the forehead  in a scrawl  and one white  bone skull had  the plate  sutures etched 
carefull y in ink like  a blueprint  for as semb ly. He looked  back at  the bo y. Standing  by the cart in the 
wind. He looked  at the  dry grass w here it moved  and at  the dark  and twisted trees  in their  rows. A  few 
shreds of clothing  blown against  the wall, ever ything gray in the ash. He walked  along the  wall  passing 
the masks  in a last  review and  through a stile  and on to  where the boy was waiting.  He put his arm 
around  his s houlder.  Okay, he said. Let's go.
He'd come  to see a message  in each  such late  history , a message  and a warning,  and so this 
tableau  of the slain  and the  devoured did  prove to be. He woke in  the morning  and turned  over in the 
blanket  and looked back  down the  road through  the trees  the wa y they'd com e in time  to see the 
marchers  appear  four abreast.  Dressed in clothing  of every  description,  all wearing  red scarves at  their 
necks. Red  or orange, as close  to red as the y could find.  He put his hand on the  boy's head. Shh, he 
said.
What  is it,  Papa ?
People  on the road.  Keep yo ur face  down. Dont look.
No smoke  from  the dead  fire. Nothing  to be seen of the  cart.  He wallowed into  the ground 
and lay watching  across his forearm.  An arm y in tennis  shoes, tra mping.  Carry ing three- foot lengths  of 
pipe with leather  wrappings.  Lany ards at the wrist. Some  of the pipes were  threaded  through with 
lengths  of chain  fitted  at their ends with  every  mann er of bludgeon.  They  clanked  past,  marching  with a 
sway ing gait like wind-up to ys. Bearded,  their  breath  smoking  through their  masks.  Shh, he said. Shh. 
The phalanx  following carried  spears or lances  tasseled  with ribbons, the  long blades  hamm ered out of 
trucksprings  in some  crude  forge up-country . The boy lay with his face  in his arms,  terrified.  They 
passed two hundred feet  away, the ground shuddering lightl y. Tramping.  Behind the m came wagons 
drawn b y slaves in  harness and piled  with goods of war and after  that the women,  perhaps  a dozen in 
number,  some  of the m pregnant,  and lastl y a supplem entar y consort of catam ites illcloth ed against  the 
cold and fitted  in dogcollars  and yo ked each  to each.  All passed on. The y lay listening.
Are the y gone, Papa?
Yes, they 're gone.
Did y ou see the m?
Yes.
Were  they the bad gu ys?
Yes, they  were  the bad gu ys.
There's a  lot of the m, those bad  guys.
Yes there  are. But  they 're gone.
They stood and brushed themse lves off, listening  to the silence  in the distance.
Where  are they  going, Papa?
I dont  know. The y're on the move.  It's not  a good sign.
Why isnt it  a good sign ?
It just isnt. We  need to  get the  map  and take a  look.
They pulled  the cart  from  the brush with which the y'd covered it  and he raised  it up and 
piled  the blankets  in and the  coats and  they  pushed on out to  the road  and stood looking where  the last 
of that  ragged  horde seemed  to hang like  an afteri mage in the disturbed  air.
In the  afternoon  it started  to snow again.  They  stood watching  the pale  gray  flakes sift 
down out of the  sullen murk.  They  trudged  on. A frail  slush forming  over the  dark surface of the  road. 
The boy kept falling  behind and  he stopped and waited  for him.  Stay  with m e, he said.
You walk too  fast.
I'll go slo wer.
They went on.
You're not talking  again.
I'm talking.
You want to  stop ?
I alwa ys want  to stop.
We have to  be more  careful.  I have to be  more  careful.
I know.
We'll  stop. Okay ?
Okay .
We just have  to find a  place.
Okay .
The falling  snow curtained  them  about. There  was no way  to see an ything at either  side of 
the road. He was coughing again  and the  boy was shivering,  the two of them  side by  side under the 
sheet  of plastic,  pushing the  grocery  cart through the  snow. Finall y he stopped.  The bo y was s haking 
uncontrollab ly.
We have to  stop, he said.
It's reall y cold.
I know.
Where  are we?
Where  are we?
Yes.
I dont  know.
If we were going  to die  would you tell me?
I dont  know. We're  not going to  die.
They left the cart  overturned  in a field  of sedge  and he took  the coats  and the blankets 
wrapped in  the plastic  tarp and the y set out.  Hold on to m y coat,  he said.  Dont let go. The y crossed 
through  the sedge to  a fence  and clim bed through,  holding down the  wire for each  other with  their 
hands. The  wire was cold and it  creaked  in the  staples.  It wa s darkening  fast.  They  went on. What  they 
came to was a cedar wood, the  trees dead  and black  but still  full enough to hold  the sno w. Beneath  each 
one a precious circle  of dark earth  and cedar  duff.
They settled  under a  tree and  piled  the blankets  and coats  on the ground and  he w rapped  the 
boy in one of the blankets  and set to raking  up the dead  needles  in a pile.  He kicked  a cleared  place  in 
the snow out  where the fire  wouldnt set the  tree alight  and he  carried  wood from  the other  trees, 
breaking  off the  limbs  and shaking  away  the snow. When he  struck the  lighter  to the  rich tinder  the fire 
crackled  instantl y and he knew that  it would not last  long. He looked  at the  boy. I've got to go for more  
wood, he said. I'll  be in the  neighborhood. Oka y?
Where's the  neighborhood?
It just means  I wont be  far.
Okay .
The snow by now wa s half  a foot  on the ground. He floundered  out through  the trees 
pulling  up the  fallen  branches where  they  stuck out  of the snow and by  the time  he had an  armload  and 
made his wa y back  to the lire  it had burned  down to  a nest of quaking  embers.  He threw the  branches 
on the  lire and set out  again. Hard to  stay ahead.  The woods were getting  dark and  the firelight  did not 
reach  far. If he  hurried he onl y grew faint.  When he looked  behind hi m the boy was trudging  through 
snow half wa y to his knees  gathering  limbs  and piling  them  in his arms.
The snow fell  nor did it  cease  to fall.  He woke all  night and  got up and coaxed  the fire to 
life again.  He'd unfolded the  tarp and  propped one end of it  up beneath  the tree to  try and reflect  back 
the heat  from  the fire. He looked  at the  boy's face  sleeping  in the  orange light.  The sunken  cheeks 
streaked  with black.  He fought back  the rage. Useless. H e didnt  think  the bo y could  travel  much  more. 
Even  if it stopped sno wing  the road  would be all  but imp assable.  The snow whispered down in the  
stillness  and the  sparks rose and di mmed and died  in the eternal  blackness.
He was half asleep  when he heard  a crashing  in the woods. Then another.  He sat up. The 
fire was down to scattered  flames  among  the embers.  He listened.  The long dr y crack  of shearing  limbs. 
Then  another  crash. He reached  and shook the bo y. Wake  up, he said.  We have  to go.
He rubbed the  sleep  from  his ey es with the  backs of his hands. What  is it? he said. What  is 
it, Papa ?
Come  on. We have  to move.
What  is it?
It's the trees.  They're falling  down.
The boy sat up and looked  about  wildly .
It's all  right, the  man  said. Come  on. We  need to  hurry .
He scooped up the  bedding  and he folded  it and  wrapped  the tarp  around it.  He looked up. 
The snow drifted  into his ey es. The fire was little  more  than  coals and  it gave  no light  and the  wood 
was nearl y gone and the  trees were falling  all about the m in the  blackness. The  boy clung  to him.  They 
moved  away  and he  tried to  find a clear  space  in the  darkness but finall y he put  down the  tarp and they 
just sat and pulled  the blankets over  them  and he held  the bo y against  him.  The whump  of the  falling 
trees  and the  low boom  of the  loads of s now exploding  on the  ground set the woods to shuddering. He  
held the bo y and told hi m it would be all  right  and that  it would stop soon and after  a while  it did. The 
dull bedlam  dying in the distance.  And again,  solitar y and far awa y. Then nothing.  There,  he said. I 
think  that's it.  He dug a tunnel  under one of the  fallen  trees,  scooping away  the snow with his arms,  his 
frozen  hands clawed inside  his sleeves. The y dragged  in their  bedding and  the tarp  and after  a while 
they slept again  for all  the bitter  cold.
When  day broke he  pushed his wa y out of their  den, the tarp  heav y with sno w. He stood 
and looked about.  It had stopped  snowing and the  cedar  trees la y about in  hillocks  of snow and broken 
limbs and a few standing  trunks that  stood stripped and  burntlooking  in that  gray ing landscape.  He 
trudged  out through  the drifts leaving  the bo y to sleep under the  tree like some hibernating  animal. The 
snow wa s almost  to his knees.  In the field  the dead sedge was drifted  nearl y out of sight and  the snow 
stood in  razor kerfs atop  the fencewires  and the  silence  was breathless.  He stood leaning  on a post 
coughing.  He'd litt le idea  where the  cart was and  he thought that  he was getting  stupid  and that  his head 
wasnt working right.  Concentrate,  he said. You have to  think. When  he turned  to go back the  boy was 
calling  him.
We have to  go, he said. We  cant sta y here.
The boy stared bleakl y at the  gray  drifts.
Come  on.
They made  their  way  out to the  fence.
Where  are we going? the  boy said.
We have to  find the  cart.
He ju st stood there, his hands in  the armp its of his parka.
Come  on, the m an said. You have to  come  on.
He waded out  across the drifted  fields.  The snow lay  deep  and gray . Alread y there was a 
fresh fall  of ash on it.  He struggled on a few more  feet and then  turned and looked  back.  The bo y had 
fallen.  He dropped  the arm load of blankets  and the  tarp and went back  and picked  him up. He was 
alread y shivering.  He picked  him up and  held him.  I'm sorry, he said. I'm  sorry .
They were a long  time  finding  the cart.  He pulled  it upright  out of the  drifts and  dug out the 
knapsack  and shook it out  and opened it  and stuffed  in one of the  blankets.  He put  the pack  and the 
other  blankets  and the  coats in the  basket and  picked  up the bo y and set  him on top  and unlaced  his 
shoes and pulled  them  off. Then  he got out his knife  and set  about cutting  up one  of the coats  and 
wrapping  the bo y's feet.  He used the  entire  coat  and then he  cut big  squares of plastic  out of the  tarp 
and gathered  them  up from  underneath  and wrapped and  tied them  at the boy's ankles with  the lining 
from  the coatsleeves.  He stood back.  The bo y looked  down. N ow y ou, Papa, he  said. He w rapped  one 
of the  coats around  the bo y and then  he sat  on the tarp  in the  snow and wrapped his own feet.  He stood 
and warmed his hands inside  his parka and then  packed  their  shoes into  the knapsack  along with  the 
binoculars  and the  boy's truck.  He s hook out  the tarp  and folded  it and  tied it with  the other  blankets  on 
top of the pack  and shouldered it  up and then  took a  last look through  the basket  but that  was it. Let's 
go, he  said. The bo y took  one last  look back at  the cart and  then followed  him out to the  road.
It was harder  going even  than he would have  gues sed. In an hour the y'd made  perhaps a 
mile. He stopped  and looked  back at  the bo y. The boy stopped and waited.
You think  we're going  to die,  dont yo u?
I dont  know.
We're  not going to  die.
Okay .
But you dont believe  me.
I dont  know.
Why do yo u think we're going to  die?
I dont  know.
Stop sa ying I dont know.
Okay .
Why do yo u think we're going to  die?
We dont have  anything to eat.
We'll  find someth ing.
Okay .
How long do yo u think  people can  go without  food ?
I dont  know.
But how long  do yo u think?
Maybe a few day s.
And then  what? You fall  over dead?
Yes.
Well  you dont.  It takes  a long ti me. We have water.  That's the  most  impor tant thing. You 
dont last ver y long  without water.
Okay .
But you dont believe  me.
I dont  know.
He studied  him.  Standing  there  with his hands in  the pockets  of the outsized  pinstriped 
suitcoat.
Do yo u think  I lie to yo u?
No.
But you think I migh t lie to you about d ying.
Yes.
Okay . I migh t. But we're not  dying.
Okay .
He studied  the sk y. There  were da ys when the ashen  overcast thinned  and now the  standing 
trees  along the  road mad e the faintest  of shadows over the  snow. The y went on. The  boy wasnt doing 
well.  He stopped and checked  his feet  and retied  the plastic.  When  the snow started  to mel t it was going 
to be hard to keep  their  feet dry. They  stopped  often to rest.  He'd no strength  to carr y the child.  They 
sat on the pack  and ate  handfuls of the  dirty  snow. By  afternoon it  was beginning  to mel t. They passed 
a burned hou se, just the  brick chi mney standing  in the  yard. They were on the road  all day, such day  as 
there  was. S uch few hour s. The y might  have covered  three  miles.
He thought  the road  would be so bad that  no one would be on it  but he  was wrong. They 
camped  almost  in the road itself  and built  a great  fire, dragging  dead li mbs out of the  snow and  piling 
them on the  flames  to hiss and steam.  There  was no help  for it. The  few blankets  they  had would not 
keep  them  warm.  He tried  to sta y awake.  He w ould jerk upright  out of his sleep  and slap about  him 
looking  for the  pistol. The  boy was so thin.  He watched hi m while  he slept. Taut  face  and hollow  eyes. 
A strange beaut y. He got  up and dragged more  wood onto the fire.
They walked out  to the  road and stood. There  were tracks  in the  snow. A w agon. Some  sort 
of wheeled  vehicle.  Some thing  with  rubber tires  by the narrow tread marks.  Boot- prints between  the 
wheels. Someon e had passed in the  dark going  south.  In the earl y dawn at  latest.  Running the  road in 
the night.  He stood thinking  about  that.  He walked the  tracks carefull y. They 'd passed within  fifty  feet 
of the  fire and  had not even  slowed to look. He stood looking  back up the  road. The  boy watched  him.
We need to  get out  of the road.
Why, Papa ?
Someone's  com ing.
Is it bad guy s?
Yes. I 'm afraid  so.
They could be  good guy s. Couldnt  they?
He didnt  answer. He looked at  the sk y out of old  habit  but there  was nothing  to see.
What  are we going to do, Papa?
Let's go.
Can we go back  to the  fire?
No. Come  on. We probabl y dont have mu ch time.
I'm reall y hungr y.
I know.
What  are we going to do?
We have to  hole up. Get off the  road.
Will they  see our tracks?
Yes.
What  can we do about it?
I dont  know.
Will they  know w hat we are?
What?
If the y see our tracks.  Will  they  know what we are?
He looked  back at  their  great  round tracks in the  snow.
They'll figure  it out,  he said.
Then  he stopped.
We need to  think about  this. Let's go back  to the  fire.
He'd thought to  find some  place  in the road  where the snow had mel ted off co mplet ely but 
then he thought  that since their  tracks  would not reappear  on the  far side it  would be no help.  They 
kicked  snow over  the fire  and went on through  the trees  and circled  and came  back. The y hurried, 
leaving  a maze  of tracks and  then the y set out back  north through the  wood s keeping  the road in view.
The site the y picked  was simp ly the highest ground the y came  to and  it gave  views north 
along  the road  and overlooked  their  backtrack.  He spread the  tarp in  the wet snow and wrapped the  boy 
in the blankets.  You 're going to be cold,  he said.  But ma ybe we w ont be here long.  Within  the hour two 
men came  down the road al most  at a lope.  When the y had passed he stood up to  watch them.  And w hen 
he did they  stopped  and one of the m looked  back. He froze.  He w as wrapped in  one of the gra y 
blankets  and he  would have been  hard to see but  not impossible.  But he  thought probabl y they  had 
smel led the smoke.  They stood talking.  Then  they  went  on. H e sat down. It's okay , he said.  We ju st 
have  to wait.  But I think  its oka y.
They'd had no food and little  sleep in  five da ys and in  this condition  on the  outskirts of a 
smal l town the y came  upon a once  grand house sited on a  rise above the  road. The  boy stood holding 
his hand.  The sno w was largel y melted on the ma cadam and in  the southfacing  fields  and w oods. The y 
stood there.  The plastic  bags over their  feet had long since  worn through and their  feet were wet and 
cold.  The house was tall  and statel y with white  doric colu mns across the front. A port cochere  at the 
side. A gravel  drive  that curved up through a  field  of dead grass. The windows w ere oddly  intact.
What  is this place,  Papa ?
Shh. Let's ju st stand here and  listen.
There  was nothing. The  wind rustling  the dead  roadside bracken.  A distant  creaking.  Door 
or shutter.
I think  we should take  a look.
Papa  let's not go up there.
It's okay .
I dont  think we should go up there.
It's okay . We have to take  a look.
They approached  slowly  up the drive.  No tracks in  the random  patches of m elting snow. A 
tall hedge of dead  privet. An ancient  birdsne st lodged in  the dark  wicker of it.  They  stood in  the y ard 
studying the facade.  The handmade  brick of the  house kilned  out of the  dirt it  stood on. The  peeling 
paint  hanging  in long dr y sleavings  down the colu mns and from  the buckled  soffits.  A lamp that hung 
from  a long chain  overhead.  The bo y clung  to him  as they  climbed  the steps. One of the  window s was 
slightl y open  and a cord ran  from  it and across the porch to  vanish in the  grass. H e held  the boy's hand 
and they  crossed the  porch. Chattel  slaves had  once trod  those boards bearing  food and drink on silver  
trays. They  went to  the window and looked  in.
What  if there's  someon e here,  Papa ?
There's no one  here.
We should  go, Papa.
We've  got to find  something  to eat.  We have  no choice.  We could  find someth ing 
somewhere  else. It's going to be  all right. Come  on.
He took  the pistol  from  his belt  and tried  the door. It sw ung slowl y in on its great  brass 
hinges.  They  stood listening.  Then  they stepped into  a broad fo yer floored  in a domino  of black  and 
white  marbl e tiles.  A broad staircase  ascending.  Fine Morris paper on the  walls, waterstained  and 
sagging.  The plaster  ceiling  was bellied  in great  swags and the  yellowed  dentil  molding  was bowed and 
sprung from  the upper walls. To  the left  through  the doorway  stood a large  walnut  buffet in  what must 
have  been the  diningroom.  The doors and the  drawers were gone but  the rest of it  was too large  to burn. 
They stood in the  door way. Piled in  a windrow in one corner  of the room  was a great  heap  of clothing. 
Clothes  and shoes. Belts. Coats.  Blankets and  old sleeping  bags. He w ould have amp le time later  to 
think  about  that. The  boy hung on to his hand.  He w as terrified.  They  crossed the  foyer to the  room  on 
the far side and  walked in and  stood. A  great  hall of a room  with ceilings  twice  the height  of the doors. 
A fireplace  with raw brick showing where the  wooden mante l and surround had been  pried  away and 
burned.  There were  mattr esses and  bedding arranged  on the floor  in front of the  hearth.  Papa, the  boy 
whispered. Shh, he said.
The ashes were cold. Some  blackened  pots stood about.  He s quatted  on his heels  and 
picked  one up and  smelled  it and  put it  back. He stood and looked  out the  window. G ray trampled 
grass. Gray  snow. The  cord that  came  through the  window w as tied  to a bras s bell  and the  bell was 
fixed  in a rough wooden jig that  had been  nailed  to the  windo w mo lding.  He held  the boy's hand and 
they went down a narrow back hallwa y into the kitchen.  Trash piled  every where. A ruststained  sink. 
Smel l of mold  and excre ment.  They  went  on into the  adjoining smal l room,  perhaps  a pantry .
In the  floor of this  room  was a door or hatch  and it was locked  with a large  padlock  made  of 
stacked  steel  plates.  He stood looking at  it.
Papa,  the bo y said. We  should go. Papa.
There's a  reason this is locked.
The boy pulled  at his hand.  He w as almost  in tears.  Papa ? he said.
We've  got to eat.
I'm not hungry , Papa. I 'm not.
We need to  find a pr ybar or some thing.
They pushed out through the  back  door, the bo y hanging  on to him.  He s hoved  the pistol  in 
his belt  and stood looking  out over  the y ard. There was a brick  walkway  and the  twisted and  wiry  shape 
of what  once had been  a row of box woods. In the  yard was an old iron harrow propped  up on piers of 
stacked  brick  and someone  had wedged between  the rails  of it a  forty  gallon  castiron  cauldron  of the 
kind once used for rendering  hogs. U nderneath  were the  ashes of a fire  and blackened  billets  of w ood. 
Off to one  side a small  wagon with rubber tires.  All these  things he saw and did  not see. At the  far side 
of the  yard was an old wooden smokehouse  and a toolshed. He crossed half  dragging the  child  and 
went  sorting  through tools  standing in a  barrel  under the shed roof. He ca me up with  a longhandled 
spade and  hefted  it in his hand. Come  on, he  said.
Back  in the  house he chopped at  the wood around the  haspstaple  and finall y jamm ed the 
blade  under the  staple  and pried  it up. It  was bolted  through the  wood and the  whole thing ca me up lock 
and all. He kicked  the blade  of the shovel under  the edge  of the boards and  stopped and got his lighter  
out. Then he stood on the  tang  of the shovel and  raised the  edge of the  hatch  and leaned  and got  hold of 
it. Papa, the  boy whispered.
He stopped. Listen  to me, he said. Just stop it.  We're starving.  Do yo u understand ? Then  he 
raised  the hatch  door and swung it over  and let  it down on the  floor behind.
Just wait  here, he said.
I'm going  with yo u.
I thought  you were scared.
I am scared.
Okay . Just stay  close  behind me.
He started  down the rough wooden steps. He ducked  his head and then  flicked  the lighter 
and swung the fla me out over the  darkness like  an offering. Coldness and  damp.  An ungodly  stench. 
The boy clutched  at his coat.  He could see part  of a stone wall.  Clay floor. An old mat tress darkly 
stained.  He crouched  and stepped  down again  and held  out the  light.  Huddled  against  the back  wall 
were naked  people,  male  and fem ale, all trying to hide, shielding  their  faces with  their  hands. O n the 
mattress  lay a man  with his legs gone to  the hip  and the stumps  of the m blackened  and burnt. The  smell 
was hideous.
Jesus, he w hispered.
Then  one b y one the y turned  and blinked  in the  pitiful  light.  Help us, they  whispered. 
Please  help us.
Christ,  he said. Oh Christ.
He turned  and grabbed  the bo y. Hurry , he said. Hurry .
He'd dropped the  lighter.  No time  to look. He pushed the  boy up the stairs.  Help us, they 
called.
Hurry .
A bearded  face appeared  blinking  at the foot of the  stairs. Please, he  called.  Please.
Hurry . For G od's sake hurry .
He shoved the  boy through the  hatch and  sent him  sprawling.  He stood and got hold  of the 
door and  swung it  over and let  it slam  down and he turned  to grab  the bo y but the  boy had gotten  up 
and was doing his litt le dance  of terror.  For the  love  of G od will  you come  on, he hissed. But the  boy 
was pointing  out the  windo w and  when he looked he  went cold  all over.  Coming  across the  field 
toward  the house were four bearded  men  and two w omen. He grabbed the  boy by the hand. Christ, he 
said. Run. Run.
They tore through  the house to  the front  door and do wn the  steps. Half wa y down the drive 
he dragged the  boy into the  field.  He looked back.  They  were  partly  screened  by the ruins of the privet 
but he knew they  had minutes  at most  and maybe no minutes  at all. At the  bottom  of the field  they 
crashed  through a stand  of dead cane  and out into  the road and crossed into  the woods on the far side.  
He redoubled  his grip on the  boy's wrist. Run, he whispered.  We have  to run. He looked toward  the 
house but  he could see  nothing. If the y came  down the drive  they  would see hi m running through  the 
trees  with the  boy. This is the  mom ent. This is the  mom ent. He fell  to the  ground and pulled  the boy to 
him. Shh, he said. Shh.
Are the y going to kill  us? Papa?
Shh.
They lay in the leaves  and the  ash with their  hearts  pounding. He wa s going  to start 
coughing.  He'd have  put his hand over  his mouth  but the bo y was holding  on to it  and w ould not let  go 
and in the other  hand he  was holding  the pistol.  He had to  concentrate  to stifle  the cough  and at the 
same  time he was try ing to listen.  He s wung his chin  through the  leaves, tr ying to see. Keep  your head 
down, he whispered.
Are the y coming?
No.
They crawled  slowly through the  leaves toward  what looked like  lower  ground. H e lay 
listening,  holding the  boy. He could hear  them  in the  road talking.  Voice  of a woman.  Then  he heard 
them in the dr y leaves.  He took the  boy's hand and pushed the  revolver  into it.  Take  it, he whispered. 
Take  it. The bo y was terrified.  He put  his arm  around  him and held  him.  His bod y so thin.  Dont be 
afraid,  he said.  If they  find you you are going to  have to  do it. Do yo u understand? S hh. No cr ying. Do 
you hear  me?  You know how to do it.  You put  it in your mouth  and point it  up. Do it quick  and hard. 
Do yo u understand? Stop cry ing. Do y ou understand?
I think  so.
No. Do yo u understand ?
Yes.
Say yes I do Papa.
Yes I do Papa.
He looked  down at  him.  All he saw wa s terror.  He took the  gun from  him.  No yo u dont, he 
said.
I dont  know what  to do, Papa. I dont know what to  do. Where will  you be?
It's okay .
I dont  know what  to do.
Shh. I'm  right  here. I wont leave  you.
You promise.
Yes. I promise.  I was going to  run. To tr y and lead the m away. But I cant  leave  you.
Papa?
Shh. Sta y down.
I'm so scared.
Shh.
They lay listening.  Can yo u do it? When the  time com es? When the  time com es there  will 
be no time.  Now is the  time.  Curse God and die. What  if it doesnt fire? It  has to fire. What  if it doesnt 
fire? Could y ou crush that  beloved  skull with  a rock? I s there  such a being  within y ou of which  you 
know nothing? Can there  be? Hold hi m in your arms. Just so. The  soul is quick. Pull  him toward  you. 
Kiss him.  Quickl y.
He waited.  The small  nickelplated  revolver  in his hand. He was going to cough.  He put his 
whole  mind  to holding it  back. He tried  to listen but  he could  hear nothing.  I wont leave  you, he 
whispered. I wont ever  leave  you. Do yo u understand ? He la y in the  leaves  holding the  tremb ling child. 
Clutching  the revolver.  All through  the long  dusk and into  the dark. Cold and  starless. Blessed. He  
began  to believe  they  had a  chance.  We ju st have  to wait,  he whispered. So cold.  He tried to  think but 
his mind  swam.  He wa s so weak. All  his talk about  running. He couldnt  run. When  it was trul y black 
about  them  he unfastened  the straps on the  backpack  and pulled  out the  blankets  and spread the m over 
the boy and soon the bo y was sleeping.
In the  night  he heard hideous  shrieks co ming  from  the house and he  tried  to put his hands 
over the bo y's ears and after  a while the  scream ing stopped. He la y listening.  Coming  through the 
canebrake  into the  road he'd seen a box. A thing  like a child's pla yhouse.  He realiz ed it was where the y 
lay watching  the road.  Lying in wait and ringing  the bell in the house for their  comp anions  to co me. He 
dozed  and woke. What  is coming?  Footsteps in the  leaves.  No. Just the  wind. N othing.  He sat up and 
looked  toward the  house but he could  see only  darkness. He shook the bo y awake.  Come  on, he  said. 
We have to  go. The bo y didnt  answer but he knew he was awake. He pulled  the blankets  free and 
strapped  them  onto the  knapsack. Come  on, he whispered.
They set out through  the dark  woods. There  was a moon  somewhere  beyond the ashen 
overcast  and the y could ju st make  out the  trees. The y staggered on like  drunks. If the y find us they 'll 
kill us, wont the y Papa.
Shh. No more  talking.
Wont  they  Papa.
Shh. Yes. Ye s they will.
He'd no idea  what direction  they might  have taken  and his fear was that  they  migh t circle 
and return to the  house. He tried  to reme mber if he knew an ything about  that or if  it were  only  a fable. 
In what  direction  did lost  men  veer? Perhaps it  changed with  hemispheres.  Or handedness. Finall y he 
put it out  of his mind.  The notion  that there  could  be an ything to correct  for. His mind  was betra ying 
him. Phantoms  not heard from  in a thousand y ears rousing slowl y from  their  sleep. Correct  for that. 
The boy was totter ing on his feet.  He asked to be  carried,  stumbling  and slurring his words, and the  
man did carr y him and he fell  asleep  on his s houlder  instantl y. He knew he couldnt  carry him far.
He woke in the  dark of the  wood s in the leaves  shivering violent ly. He sat up and felt  about 
for the  boy. He held his hand  to the  thin ribs. War mth and movem ent. Heartbeat.
When  he woke again  it was almost  light  enough to  see. He threw back the  blanket  and 
stood and  almost  fell. He steadied  himself  and tried to  see about  him in the gra y woods. H ow far had 
they come?  He walked to  the top  of a rise and crouched  and watched  the day accrue.  The chary  dawn, 
the cold illuc id world. In the  distance  what looked  to be a pine  wood, raw and black.  A colorless  world 
of wire  and crepe.  He went  back and got  the bo y and made  him sit up. His head  kept slumping  forward. 
We have to  go, he said. We  have to go.
He carried  him across the field,  stopping  to rest each  fifty counted steps. When  he got to  the 
pines  he knelt  and laid  him in the gritt y duff and  covered hi m with the  blankets  and sat watching  him. 
He looked  like something  out of a deathca mp. Starved, exhausted,  sick with  fear. He leaned  and kissed 
him and got  up and walked out  to the  edge of the  woods and then  he walked  the peri meter  round to see 
if they  were safe.
Across the fields  to the  south he could see  the shape of a  house and a barn. Be yond the trees 
the curve of a  road. A long drive with  dead grass. Dead iv y along  a stone wall  and a  mailbox  and a 
fence  along  the road and  the dead  trees be yond. Cold and silent.  Shrouded in the  carbon fog. He walked  
back  and sat beside  the bo y. It was desperation  that had led him  to such carelessness and  he knew that 
he could not do that  again.  No mat ter what.
The boy wouldnt wake for hours. Still  if he  did he'd be terrified.  It had happened  before. He 
thought  about  waking  him but he knew that  he wouldnt re mem ber anything if he did.  He'd trained  him 
to lie in the woods like  a fawn. For ho w long? In the end  he took the  pistol  from  his belt  and laid  it 
alongside  him under the  blankets and  rose and set out.
He ca me upon the  barn from  the hill above  it, stopping  to watch and  to listen.  He made  his 
way down through the  ruins of an old apple  orchard,  black  and gnarly  stumps,  dead  gras s to his knees. 
He stood in  the door of the  barn and listened.  Pale  slatted  light.  He walked  along the  dusty stalls. He 
stood in  the center  of the  barn ba y and listened  but there  was nothing. He cli mbed  the ladder  to the  loft 
and he wa s so weak he wasnt sure he  was going to  make  it to the top.  He walked  down to the  end of the 
loft and looked  out the  high gable  window at the  country  below,  the pieced  land  dead and  gray , the 
fence,  the road.
There  were bales  of hay  in the  loft floor and he squatted  and sorted  a handful  of seed s from 
them and sat  chewing. Coarse and  dry and dusty . They  had to contain  some  nutrition.  He ro se and 
rolled  two of the  bales across the  floor and let  them fall into the ba y below. Two du sty thumps.  He 
went  back to the  gable  and stood stud ying what  he could see  of the house be yond the corner of the 
barn.  Then he cli mbed  back down the  ladder.
The gras s between  the house and the  barn looked untrodden.  He cros sed to the  porch. The 
porch  screening  rotted  and falling  away . A child's bicy cle. The kitchen  door stood open and he  cros sed 
the porch and stood in  the doorway . Cheap  plywood  paneling  curled  with damp.  Collapsing  into the 
room.  A red formica  table.  He cros sed the room  and opened the  refrigerator  door. Someth ing sat on one 
of the  racks in a  coat of gra y fur. He s hut the door. Trash ever ywhere. He took a  broom  from  the corner 
and poked about with  the handle.  He cli mbed  onto the counter  and felt his wa y through  the dust on top 
of the  cabinets.  A mousetrap.  A packet  of someth ing. He blew awa y the dust. It was a grape  flavored 
powder to  make  drinks with.  He put it  in the  pocket of his coat.
He went through  the house room  by room.  He found nothing.  A spoon in a bedside  drawer. 
He put  that in  his pocket.  He thought there  migh t be some  clothes in  a closet  or some bedding  but there 
wasnt. He went back  out and crossed to  the garage.  He sorted through tools.  Rakes. A s hovel.  Jars of 
nails  and bolts on a  shelf. A boxcutter.  He held it  to the  light  and looked  at the  rusty  blade  and put it 
back.  Then he  picked it  up again.  He took a screwdriver  from  a coffee  can and opened the  handle. 
Inside  were four new blades. He took out  the old  blade and  laid it on the  shelf and put  in one of the  new 
ones and screwed  the handle  back together  and retracted  the blade  and put  the cutter  in his pocket. 
Then  he picked  up the  screwdriver  and put  that in  his pocket  as w ell.
He walked  back out  to the barn.  He had a piece  of cloth  that he intended  to use to collect 
seeds from  the haybales but when he got  to the  barn he stopped and  stood listening  to the  wind. A 
creaking  of tin  somewhere  high  in the  roof above him.  There  was yet a lingering  odor of cows in the  
barn and he stood there  thinking  about cows and he  realized  they were extinct.  Was  that true? There 
could  be a cow somewhere  being fed  and cared  for. Could there? Fed what ? Saved  for w hat? Be yond 
the open door the  dead grass rasped dry ly in the wind. He walked  out and stood looking  across the 
fields  toward the  pine wood where the  boy lay sleeping.  He walked  up through the orchard  and then  he 
stopped  again. He'd stepped on someth ing. He took  a step back  and knelt  and parted  the grass with his 
hands. It  was an apple.  He picked  it up and held it  to the  light.  Hard and brown and shriveled.  He wiped 
it with the  cloth  and bit  into it.  Dry and almost  tasteless.  But an apple.  He ate  it entire,  seed s and  all. He 
held the ste m between  his thumb  and forefinger  and let  it drop. Then  he went treading  softly through 
the gras s. His feet  were still  wrapped in  the remn ants of the  coat and  the shreds of tarp and  he sat and 
untied  them and stuffed  the wrappings in his pocket  and went down the  rows barefoot.  By the time he 
got to the  bottom  of the orchard  he had four more  apples and he  put them  in his pocket  and ca me back. 
He went row b y row till  he'd trod a  puzzle  in the  grass. He'd more  apples  than he  could carr y. He felt 
out the spaces about  the trunks and  filled  his pockets full  and he  piled  apples in the  hood of his parka 
behind  his head and  carried  apples stacked  along  his forearm  against  his chest.  He dumped  them in a 
pile at the door of the  barn and sat  there  and w rapped  up his numb  feet.
In the  mudroom  off the kitchen  he'd seen an  old wicker basket  full of masonjars. He 
dragged  the basket  out into  the floor  and set the  jars out of it  and then  tipped  over the  basket and tapped 
out the dirt.  Then he  stopped. What  had he seen? A  drainpipe.  A trellis.  The dark serpentine  of a dead 
vine running down it  like the  track  of some  enterprise  upon a graph.  He stood up and walked back  
through  the kitchen  and out into  the y ard and stood looking at  the house. The  window s giving  back  the 
gray and namel ess day. The drainpipe  ran do wn the  corner  of the porch. He was still  holding  the basket 
and he set it  down in  the grass and cli mbed  the steps again.  The pipe cam e down the corner  post and 
into a concrete  tank. He brushed away  the trash and rotted  bits of screening  from  the cover.  He w ent 
back  into the  kitchen  and got  the broom  and cam e out and  swept  the cover  clean  and set the  broom  in 
the corner and  lifted  the cover  from  the tank. Inside  was a tray filled  with  a wet gra y sludge  from  the 
roof mix ed with  a compost  of dead  leaves  and twigs. He lifted  out the  tray and set it  in the  floor. 
Underneath  was w hite gravel.  He scooped back  the gravel  with his hand.  The tank  beneath  was filled 
with charcoal,  pieces  burned out of whole  sticks and li mbs in carbon  effigies of the  trees the mselves. 
He put  the tra y back. In the  floor was a green brass ringpull.  He reached  and got  the broom  and swept 
away the ash. There  were sawlines in the  boards. He s wept  the boards clean  and knelt  and hooked his 
fingers  in the ring  and lifted  the trap door and  swung it  open. Do wn there  in the  darkness wa s a cistern 
filled  with water so sweet that  he could  smell  it. He lay in the  floor on his stoma ch and reached  down. 
He could  just touch  the water.  He scooted forward and reached  again  and laved  up a  handful of it  and 
smel led and tasted  it and then  drank. He la y there  a long ti me, lifting  up the water  to his mouth  a 
palmful  at a ti me. Nothing  in his me mory anywhere of any thing so good.
He went back  to the  mudroom  and returned  with two of the  jars and an old  blue ena meled 
pan. He wiped  out the  pan and dipped  it full  of water  and u sed it to clean  the jars. Then he reached  
down and sank one of the  jars till it was full and  raised it  up dripping.  The water  was so clear.  He held 
it to the  light.  A single bit  of sediment  coiling  in the jar on s ome slow hy draulic axis. He tipped  the jar 
and drank and he drank  slowly but still  he drank nearl y the whole jar. He s at there  with his stomach 
bloated.  He could  have drunk mor e but he  didnt. He poured the  rema ining  water into the other  jar and 
rinsed  it out  and he filled  both  jars and then  let down the  wooden cover over  the cistern  and rose and 
with his pockets full  of apples and  carry ing the jars of water  he set out  acros s the fields  toward the pine 
wood.
He was gone longer  than he'd mean t to be and he hurried  his steps the best  he could, the 
water  swinging  and gurgling  in the  shrunken  swag of his gut. He stopped  to rest and began  again. 
When  he got to  the woods the bo y did not look as if he'd even  stirred and  he knelt  and set the  jars 
carefull y in the  duff and picked  up the pistol  and put  it in his belt and  then he  just sat there  watching 
him.
They spent the  afternoon  sitting  wrapped  in the  blankets and  eating  apples. Sipping  the 
water  from  the jars. He took the  packet  of grape flavor  from  his pocket  and opened  it and poured it  into 
the jar and  stirred it  and gave  it to the bo y. You did good Papa,  he said. He slept  while the boy kept 
watch  and in the  evening  they  got out their  shoes and put the m on and went  down to  the farmhouse  and 
collec ted the rest of the  apples. The y filled  three  jars with water  and screwed on the  two-piece  caps 
from  a box of them  he'd found on a shelf in the  mudroo m. Then he  wrapped  every thing in one of the 
blankets  and packed  it into the  knapsack and  tied the other  blankets  acros s the top of the  knapsack and 
shouldered  it up. The y stood in the  door watching  the light  draw down over the  world to the  west. Then 
they went down the drive  and set out  upon the road  again.
The boy hung on to his coat  and he  kept to the  edge  of the road and  tried  to feel  out the 
pave ment  under his feet  in the  dark. In the  distance  he could hear  thunder  and after  a while there  were 
dim shudderings of light  ahead  of them.  He got  out the  plastic  sheeting  from  the knapsack but there  
was hardly  enough  of it left  to cover the m and after  a while  it began to rain.  They stumbled  along side 
by side.  There was nowhere to go. The y had the  hoods of their coats  up but the  coats were  getting  wet 
and heavy  from  the rain.  He stopped  in the  road and tried  to rearrange  the tarp.  The bo y was s haking 
badly.
You're freezing,  arent  you?
Yes.
If we stop we'll get  reall y cold.
I'm reall y cold  now.
What  do y ou want to  do?
Can we stop?
Yes. Okay . We can  stop.
It was as long a  night as he  could reme mber out of a great  plent y of such nights. The y lay 
on the  wet ground b y the side of the  road under the  blankets with  the rain  rattling  on the tarp  and he 
held the bo y and after  a while the boy stopped shaking and  after  a while he slept. The  thunder trundled 
away to the north  and ceased  and there  was just the rain.  He slept and  woke and  the rain  slackened  and 
after a while  it stopped. He w ondered  if it was even midn ight. He was coughing and  it got  worse and  it 
woke the  child.  The dawn was a long ti me coming.  He raised  up from  time to tim e to look  to the  east 
and after a  while it was day.
He wrapped their  coats  each  in turn around the  trunk of a  small  tree and  twisted out  the 
water.  He had the  boy take off his clothes  and he  wrapped  him in one of the  blankets  and w hile he 
stood shivering  he wrung the water  out of his clothes  and passed the m back.  The ground where the y'd 
slept  was dry and they  sat there with  the blankets  draped  over them  and ate  apples and  drank water. 
Then  they  set out upon the  road again,  slumped  and cowled  and shivering  in their  rags like  mendi cant 
friars  sent forth to find  their  keep.
By evening  they at least  were dr y. They studied the  pieces  of map  but he'd little  notion  of 
where the y were. He stood at  a rise in  the road and  tried  to take  his bearings in  the twilight.  They left 
the pike and  took a narrow road through  the countr y and ca me at last upon a  bridge and  a dry  creek  and 
they crawled  down the  bank and huddled  underneath.
Can we have  a fire? the  boy said.
We dont have  a lighter.
The boy looked awa y.
I'm sorry . I dropped it.  I didnt want  to tell  you.
That's oka y.
I'll find us s ome flint.  I've been looking.  And we've still  got the littl e bottle  of gasoline.
Okay .
Are y ou very cold?
I'm okay.
The boy lay with  his head in  the man's  lap. After a while  he said:  They 're going to  kill those 
people,  arent  they?
Yes.
Why do they  have  to do that?
I dont  know.
Are the y going to eat  them?
I dont  know.
They're going to eat  them, arent  they?
Yes.
And we couldnt  help the m because  then  they 'd eat us too.
Yes.
And that's why  we couldnt  help the m.
Yes.
Okay .
They passed through towns that  warned people  away  with messages  scrawled  on the 
billboards.  The billboards  had been whited  out with  thin coats  of paint  in order to  write on the m and 
through  the paint  could  be seen a pale  palimpsest  of advertise ments for goods w hich no longer  existed. 
They sat b y the side of the  road and ate  the last  of the  apples.
What  is it? the  man  said.
Nothing.
We'll  find someth ing to eat. We  alway s do.
The boy didnt  answer. The  man  watched  him.
That's not  it, is it?
It's okay .
Tell me.
The boy looked awa y down the  road.
I want  you to tell  me. It's oka y.
He shook his head.
Look  at me,  the man  said.
He turned  and looked.  He looked like  he'd been cr ying.
Just tell  me.
We wouldnt  ever  eat an ybody, would we?
No. Of course not.
Even  if we were starving?
We're  starving now.
You said we werent.
I said  we werent  dying. I didnt  say we werent starving.
But we w ouldnt.
No. We wouldnt.
No mat ter what.
No. No matt er what.
Because  we're the good gu ys.
Yes.
And we 're carry ing the fire.
And we 're carry ing the fire.  Yes.
Okay .
He found pieces  of flint  or chert  in a ditch  but in the  end it was easier  to rake  the pliers 
down the  side of a rock at  the botto m of which  he'd made  a small  pile of tinder  soaked  in gas. Two 
more  days. Then three.  They were starving  right enough. The  countr y was looted,  ransacked,  ravaged. 
Rifled  of ever y crumb.  The nights were blinding  cold  and casket  black  and the  long reach  of the 
morning  had a terrible  silence  to it.  Like  a dawn before  battle.  The boy's candlecolored  skin wa s all but 
translucent.  With  his great staring  eyes he'd the  look of an alien.
He was beginning  to think  that death was finall y upon the m and that  they should find some 
place  to hide where the y would not be  found. There were  times  when he  sat watching  the bo y sleep  that 
he would begin to sob uncontrollabl y but it  wasnt about death.  He wasnt sure what it  was about but he 
thought  it was about  beaut y or about goodness. Things that  he'd no longer an y way  to think  about at  all. 
They squatted  in a bleak  wood and drank ditchwater  strained  through a rag. He'd seen the  boy in a 
dream laid out upon a  coolingboard  and woke in horror. What  he could  bear in  the waking  world he 
could  not b y night  and he sat  awake for fear  the dream  would return.
They scrabbled  through the  charred ruins of houses they  would not  have entered  before.  A 
corpse floating  in the  black water  of a basemen t among  the trash  and rusting ductwork.  He stood in  a 
livingroo m partl y burned and open to  the sky . The waterbuckled  boards sloping away  into the y ard. 
Sogg y volumes  in a bookcase.  He took one down and opened  it and then  put it  back.  Every thing damp. 
Rotting.  In a drawer he found a candle.  No way  to light  it. He put it  in his pocket.  He walked out  in the 
gray light  and stood and he saw for a brief  mom ent the absolute  truth  of the  world. The cold  relentless 
circling  of the intestat e earth.  Darknes s implac able.  The blind  dogs of the sun in their  running.  The 
crushing  black vacuu m of the  universe. And somewhere  two hunted  anim als trembling  like ground-
foxes in  their cover.  Borrowed tim e and borrowed world and  borro wed e yes with which to  sorrow it.
At the  edge of a  small  town they  sat in  the cab  of a truck  to rest, staring  out a glass washed  
clean  by the recent  rains. A light  dusting of ash. Exhausted.  By the roadside stood another  sign that 
warned of death,  the letters  faded  with the y ears. He almost  smiled. Can you read that? he  said.
Yes.
Dont pa y any attention.  There's no one here.
Are the y dead?
I think  so.
I wish that  little  boy was with  us.
Let's go, he  said.
Rich  dreams  now which he  was loathe  to wake from.  Things no longer  known in the  world. 
The cold drove  him forth  to mend  the fire.  Memor y of her crossing the  lawn toward the  house in the 
early morning  in a thin  rose gown that  clung to her  breasts. He thought each  memory recalled  must  do 
some  violence  to its  origins. A s in a party  game. Say the word and pas s it on. So be sparing. What  you 
alter in the rem embering has y et a realit y, known or not.
They walked through  the streets  wrapped  in the  filth y blankets.  He held the  pistol at  his 
waist  and held the  boy by the hand. At the farther  edge  of the town the y came  upon a solitar y house in 
a field and  they  crossed and entered  and walked through  the rooms.  They came  upon themselv es in a 
mirror  and he al most  raised  the pistol.  It's u s, Papa,  the bo y whispered. It's us.
He stood in  the back  door and looked out  at the  fields  and the road  beyond and the  bleak 
countr y beyond the road. On the patio  was a barbeque  pit mad e from  a fifty -five gallon  drum  slit 
endwa ys with a  torch and  set in a welded  iron fram e. A few dead trees  in the  yard. A fence.  A met al 
tool shed. He s hrugged  off the blanket  and wrapped  it around the bo y's shoulder.
I want  you to wait here.
I want  to go with y ou.
I'm only going over there  to take  a look.  Just sit  here. You 'll be able  to see me the whole 
time. I promise.
He crossed the  yard and pushed open the  door, still  holding  the gun. It was a sort of garden  
shed. Dirt  floor. Metal  shelves  with some  plastic  flowerpots. Every thing covered  with ash. There  were 
garden  tools standing  in the  corner. A lawnmower.  A wooden bench under  the window and beside  it a 
metal cabinet.  He opened  the cabinet.  Old catalogs.  Packets of seed. Begonia.  Morning glor y. He stuck 
them in his pocket. For what? O n the  top shelf were  two cans of motor  oil and he  put the  pistol in  his 
belt and reached  and got them  and set the m on the  bench. The y were ver y old, made  of cardboard with 
metal endcaps. The  oil had  soaked  through the  cardboard  but still  they  seem ed full.  He stepped back 
and looked out the  door. The  boy was sitting  on the  back steps of the  house wrapped  in the  blankets 
watching  him.  When he  turned he saw a gascan  in the  corner behind  the door. He knew it  couldnt  have 
gas in  it yet when he tilted  it with  his foot and let  it fall back again  there  was a gentle  slosh. He picked 
it up and carried  it to the  bench and  tried  to unscrew the cap  but he could  not. He got  the pliers  out of 
his coat  pocket  and extended  the jaws and tried  it. It would j ust fit  and he twisted  off the  cap and laid  it 
on the  bench and  sniffed  the can.  Rank odor. Years old. But  it was gasoline  and it  would burn. He 
screwed the  cap back  on and put  the pliers  in his pocket.  He looked around  for s ome small er container 
but there wasnt one.  He s houldnt  have thrown awa y the bottle.  Check  the house.
Crossing the  grass he felt  half faint  and he had  to stop. He w ondered  if it was from  smell ing 
the gasoline.  The bo y was watching  him.  How man y days to death? Ten ? Not so man y more  than  that. 
He couldnt  think.  Why  had he  stopped ? He turned  and looked down at  the grass. He walked back.  
Testing  the ground with his feet.  He stopped and turned  again.  Then he  went back to  the shed. He 
returned  with a  garden spade and  in the  place  where he'd stood he chucked  the blade  into the ground. It 
sank to  half its length  and stopped with a hollow  wooden  sound. He began  to shovel awa y the dirt.
Slow going. God he was tired.  He leaned  on the spade.  He raised  his head and  looked at  the 
boy. The boy sat as before.  He bent  to his work again.  Before long  he was re sting  between  each 
shovelful.  What  he finall y unburied  was a piece  of ply wood  covered with  roofingfelt.  He shoveled out 
along  the edges.  It was a door perhaps three  feet by six. At one end was a hasp with a padlock  taped  up 
in a plastic  bag. He rested,  holding on to  the handle  of the  spade,  his forehead  in the  crook of his arm. 
When  he looked  up again the  boy was standing in  the y ard just a few feet  from  him.  He wa s ver y 
scared.  Dont open it,  Papa, he whispered.
It's okay .
Please,  Papa. Please.
It's okay .
No it's not.
He had his fists clutched  at his chest  and he was bobbing up and  down with  fear. The  man 
dropped  the shovel and  put his arms  around hi m. Come  on, he said. Let's ju st go sit on the  porch and 
rest a while.
Then  can we go?
Let's ju st sit for a while.
Okay .
They sat wrapped in  the blankets  and looked  out at  the y ard. They  sat for a  long ti me. He 
tried to explain  to the  boy that there was no one buried  in the  yard but the  boy just started  crying. After 
a while he even  thought  that m aybe the child  was right.
Let's ju st sit, he said.  We wont even  talk.
Okay .
They walked through  the house again.  He found a beer  bottle  and an old  rag of a curtain 
and he tore an  edge from  the cloth  and stuffed it  down the neck  of the bottle  with a coathanger.  This is 
our new la mp, he said.
How can we light  it?
I found some  gasoline  in the shed. And some  oil. I'll show you.
Okay .
Come  on, the m an said. Ever ything's okay . I promise.
But when he bent to  see into  the bo y's face  under the  hood of the  blanket  he very  much 
feared  that something  was gone  that could not  be put right  again.
They went out and  cros sed the y ard to the shed. He set the  bottle  on the  bench and  he took a 
screwdriver  and punched a  hole in  one of the cans  of oil and  then punched  a small er one to  help it 
drain.  He pulled  the wick  out of the bottle  and poured the  bottle  about  half full,  old straight  weight  oil 
thick  and gelid  with  the cold  and a long  time  pouring. He twisted  the cap  off the gascan  and he mad e a 
smal l paper  spill from  one of the  seedpackets  and poured gas into  the bottle  and put his thumb  over the 
mouth  and shook it.  Then he poured  some out into  a cla y dish and took  the rag and  stuffed it  back into 
the bottle  with the  screwdriver. He took  a piece  of flint  from  his pocket  and got  the pair  of pliers  and 
struck  the flint  against  the serrated  jaw. H e tried  it a couple  of ti mes and then  he stopped and  poured 
more  gasoline  into the  dish.
This may flare  up, he said.  The bo y nodded. He raked  sparks into  the dish and it  bloomed 
into flam e with a  low w hoosh. He reached  and got  the bottle  and tilted  it and lit  the wick and blew out  
the flam e in the  dish and handed  the smoking  bottle  to the  boy. Here, he said. Take  it.
What  are we going to do?
Hold y our hand  in front of the  flame.  Dont let  it go out.
He rose and took  the pistol  from  his belt.  This  door looks like the  other  door, he said. But 
it's not.  I kno w you're scared. That's  okay . I think  there ma y be things  in there  and we have to  take  a 
look.  There's no place  else to  go. This is it.  I want yo u to help  me. If you dont  want to hold  the la mp 
you'll have to take  the pistol.
I'll hold the la mp.
Okay . This  is w hat the good gu ys do. The y keep tr ying. They  dont  give up.
Okay .
He led  the bo y out into the  yard trailing  the black  smoke  from  the la mp. He put  the pistol  in 
his belt  and picked  up the  spade and began  to chop the  hasp out of the  plywood.  He wedged the corner  
of the  blade  under it  and pried it  up and then  knelt  and took hold  of the lock  and twisted  the whole 
thing  loose and pitched  it into  the grass. He pried  the blade  under the  door and got his fingers  under it 
and then stood and raised  it up. Dirt went rattling  down the  boards. He looked at  the boy. Are you all 
right? he said.  The bo y nodded  mutel y, holding the  lamp  in front  of him.  The man  swung the door over  
and let it  fall in the  grass. Rough stairs carpentered  out of two by  tens leading  down into the  darkness. 
He reached  and took  the la mp from  the bo y. He started  to descend  the stairs  but then he  turned and 
leaned  and kissed the child  on the  forehead.
The bunker was walled  with concrete  block.  A poured  concrete  floor laid  over  with kitchen 
tile. There were  a couple  of iron cots with  bare springs, one against  either  wall,  the ma ttress  pads rolled 
up at  the foot  of them  in arm y fashion. He turned and  looked at  the bo y crouched  above  him blinking  in 
the smoke  rising up from  the la mp and then he descended  to the  lower steps and sat  and held the  lamp 
out. Oh my God, he  whispered.  Oh my God.
What  is it Papa ?
Come  down. O h my God. Come  down.
Crate  upon crate  of canned  goods. Tomato es, peaches, beans,  apricots. Canned  hams. 
Corned  beef. Hundreds of gallons of water  in ten  gallon  plastic  jerry jugs. Paper  towels, toiletpaper,  
paper  plates.  Plastic  trashbags stuffed with blankets.  He held  his forehead in  his hand. Oh m y God, he 
said. He looked  back  at the  boy. It's all right,  he said. Come  down.
Papa?
Come  down. Come  down and see.
He stood the  lamp  on the step  and went up and took  the bo y by the hand. Come  on, he said. 
It's all  right.
What  did y ou find?
I found ever ything. Ever ything. Wait  till you see. He led  him down the  stairs and picked  up 
the bottle  and held  the flame  aloft.  Can yo u see? he said. Can y ou see?
What  is all  this stuff, Papa?
It's food. Can y ou read  it?
Pears. That  says pears.
Yes. Ye s it does. Oh ye s it does.
There  was j ust headroom  for him  to stand. He ducked  under a lantern  with  a green me tal 
shade hanging  from  a hook. He held the  boy by the hand  and they  went  along the  rows of stenciled 
cartons.  Chile,  corn, stew, soup, s paghetti  sauce. The  richness of a vanished  world. Why  is this here? 
the boy said. Is it real?  Oh yes. It's real.
He pulled  one of the  boxes down and clawed  it open and  held up a  can of peaches.  It's here 
because  someone  thought  it might  be needed.
But they  didnt  get to  use it.
No. The y didnt.
They died.
Yes.
Is it okay  for us to take  it?
Yes. It is. The y would want us to. Ju st like we w ould want them  to.
They were the  good guy s?
Yes. They  were.
Like us.
Like us. Ye s.
So it's okay .
Yes. It' s oka y.
There  were knives  and plastic  utensils  and silverware  and kitchen  tools in  a plastic  box. A 
can opener. There  were electr ic torches  that didnt work. He found a box of batteries  and dry  cells  and 
went  through them.  Mostly corroded and  leaking  an acid  goo but some  of the m looked  okay . He finall y 
got one of the lanterns  to work and  he set it  on the table  and blew out the  smok y flam e of the  lamp.  He 
tore a flap  from  the opened cardboard  box and chased  out the smoke  with it  and then  he clim bed up and 
lowered  the trap  door and turned  and looked  at the  boy. What  would you like for s upper? he said.
Pears.
Good choice.  Pears it  is.
He took  two paperware bowls from  a stack  of them  wrapped in plastic  and set them  out on 
the table.  He unrolled  the m attress  pads on the  bunk s for the m to sit on and he  opened the  carton of 
pears and  took out a  can and set  it on the  table  and cla mped  the lid  with the  can opener  and began  to 
turn the wheel.  He looked at  the bo y. The boy was sitting  quietl y on the bunk, still  wrapped  in the 
blanket,  watching.  The man  thought  he had  probably  not fully  com mitted himself  to any of this. You 
could  wake in the  dark wet woods at an y time.  These will  be the  best pears y ou ever  tasted,  he said. 
The best. Ju st you wait.
They sat side b y side and ate  the can  of pears. Then  they  ate a can  of peaches. The y licked 
the spoon s and tipped  the bowls and drank the  rich sweet s yrup. They looked at  each  other.
One more.
I dont  want yo u to get  sick.
I wont get  sick.
You havent  eaten  in a long  time.
I know.
Okay .
He put  the bo y to bed  in the  bunk and smoothed  his filth y hair on the  pillow and  covered 
him with blankets.  When  he clim bed up and  lifted  the door it  was almost  dark out. He went to  the 
garage  and got  the knapsack  and came  back and  took a last  look around and  then went  down the  steps 
and pulled the  door shut and jamm ed one of the  handles of the  pliers through  the heav y inside hasp. 
The electric  lantern  was alread y beginning  to dim  and he looked  through the  stores until  he found s ome 
cases of white  gas in gallon  cans. He got  one of the cans  out and set it  on the  table  and unscrewed the  
cap and punched  out the m etal seal with  a screwdriver. Then  he took  down the  lamp  from  the hook 
overhead  and filled  it. He'd alread y found a plastic  box of butane  lighters  and he lit  the lamp  with one 
of the m and adjusted the  flam e and hung it  back up. Then  he ju st sat on the bunk.
While  the boy slept  he began to  go methodi cally through the  stores. Clothes,  sweaters, 
socks. A stainless steel  basin and sponges and bars of soap. Toothpaste  and toothbrushes.  In the botto m 
of a big plastic  jar of bolts and screws and misce llaneous  hardware he found a  double handful  of gold 
krugerrands in  a cloth  sack. He dumped  them  out and kneaded  them  in his hand and  looked at  them  and 
then scooped them  back into  the jar along  with the  hardware and put  the jar back on the  shelf.
He sorted through  every thing, shifting  boxes and crates  from  one side of the  room  to the 
other.  There  was a small  steel  door that  led into a  second room  where bottles  of gas were stored.  In the 
corner  a chem ical toilet.  There were  vent pipes in  the walls  covered with  wire mesh  and there  were 
drains  in the floor.  It was getting  warm  in the bunker and  he'd taken  off his coat.  He went through 
everything. He found a  box of.45 A CP cartridges  and three  boxes of.30-30 rifle  shells. What  he didnt 
find was a gun. He took  the batter y lantern  and walked over  the floor  and he checked  the walls for any 
hidden  compar tment. After a while  he ju st sat on the bunk eating  a bar of chocolate.  There  was no gun 
and there wasnt going  to be one.
When  he woke the  gaslamp overhead  was his sing softly. The bunker walls were there  in the 
light and the boxes and crates.  He didnt  know where he  was. He was ly ing with  his coat  over him.  He 
sat up and looked at  the boy asleep  on the  other bunk. He'd taken  off his s hoes but  he didnt  remem ber 
that either  and he got the m from  under  the bunk and  pulled the m on and  climb ed the stairs and pulled 
the pliers from  the hasp and  lifted  the door and  peered out.  Earl y morning.  He looked  at the  house and 
he looked out toward  the road  and he was about to  lower the hatch  door again  when he stopped. The  
vague  gray  light  was in the  west. The y'd slept the  night through  and the  day that followed. He lowered  
the door and secured  it again  and cli mbed  back down and sat on the  bunk. He looked  around at the 
supplies.  He'd been  ready  to die  and now he wasnt going to  and he had to  think about  that.  Any one 
could  see the  hatch l ying in the  yard and they  would know at once  what it  was. He had  to think  about 
what  to do. This was not hiding  in the  woods. This was the  last thing  from  that.  Finall y he rose and 
went  to the table  and hooked up the  little  two burner gas stove and lit  it and got  out a fr ying pan and a 
kettle  and opened  the plastic  box of kitchen  imple ments.
What  woke the  boy was him  grinding  coffee in  a small  hand grinder.  He s at up and stared 
all around. Papa? he said.
Hi. Are y ou hungr y?
I have  to go to the  bathroom.  I have to  pee.
He pointed  with the  spatula  toward the  low steel  door. H e didnt  know ho w to use the toilet 
but they  would use it  anyway. They werent  going to  be here that  long  and he wasnt going to  be opening 
and closing the  hatch  any more  than  they had to. The  boy went past, his hair  matted with  sweat.  What 
is that? he  said.
Coffee.  Ham.  Biscuits.
Wow, the  boy said.
He dragged  a footlocker  across the  floor between  the bunks and covered  it with a towel  and 
set out the plates  and cups and  plastic  utensils. He set  out a bowl of biscuits  covered  with a handtowel 
and a plate  of butter  and a can  of condensed mi lk. Salt and pepper.  He looked at  the bo y. The boy 
looked  drugged. He brought the  frying pan from  the stove  and forked a piece  of bro wned ha m onto the 
boy's plate  and scooped scrambl ed eggs from  the other  pan and ladled  out spoonfuls of baked  beans 
and poured coffee  into their  cups. The  boy looked up at  him.
Go ahead,  he said. Dont let  it get cold.
What  do I eat  first?
Whatever  you like.
Is this coffee?
Yes. Here. You put the  butter  on yo ur biscuits. Like  this.
Okay .
Are y ou all right?
I dont  know.
Do yo u feel okay ?
Yes.
What  is it?
Do yo u think  we s hould  thank the  people?
The people?
The people  who gave  us all this.
Well.  Yes, I guess we could do that.
Will you do it ?
Why dont yo u?
I dont  know how.
Yes yo u do. You kno w how to sa y thank  you.
The boy sat staring  at his plate.  He seem ed lost. The  man  was about  to speak when he said:  
Dear people,  thank  you for all  this food and stuff. We  know that y ou saved  it for y ourself and if y ou 
were here  we wouldnt eat  it no matt er how hungry  we were and we're sorry  that you didnt get  to eat  it 
and we hope  that you're safe in heaven  with God.
He looked  up. I s that  okay? he said. Yes. I think  that's okay .
He wouldnt  stay in the  bunker by  himself.  He followed the  man  back and forth  acros s the 
lawn  while he carried  the plastic  jugs of water  to the  bathroom  at the  rear of the  house. They  took  the 
little stove with  them  and a couple  of pans and he heated  water and poured  it into  the tub  and poured in 
water  from  the plastic  jugs. It took  a long ti me but he wanted it  to be  good and warm.  When  the tub 
was almost  full the  boy got undressed and stepped  shivering  into the  water and  sat. Scrawny  and filth y 
and naked. Holding his shoulders. The  only  light  was from  the ring of blue  teeth  in the  burner of the 
stove.  What do y ou think? the  man  said.
Warm at last.
Warm at last?
Yes.
Where  did y ou get that?
I dont  know.
Okay . War m at last.
He washed his dirt y matt ed hair and bathed  him with the soap and  sponges. He drained  
away the filth y water  he sat in and  laved fresh warm  water over hi m from  the pan and wrapped  him 
shivering  in a towel  and wrapped hi m again  in a blanket.  He combed  his hair  and looked  at hi m. Stea m 
was coming  off of him  like smoke.  Are you okay ? he said.
My feet are cold.
You'll have  to wait  for me.
Hurry .
He bathed  and then  clim bed out and poured detergent  into the  bathwater  and shoved their 
stinking  jean s down into  the water  with a toile t plunger.  Are you ready ? he said.
Yes.
He turned  down the  burner until  it sputtered  and went out  and then he  turned on the 
flashlight  and laid  it in the floor.  They  sat on the  edge  of the tub and  pulled  their  shoes on and then  he 
handed  the bo y the pan and soap and  he took the  stove and the  little  bottle  of gas and the  pistol and 
wrapped in  their  blankets  they  went back  across the y ard to the bunker.
They sat on the  cot with  a checkerboard  between  them,  wearing new sweaters and  socks 
and swaddled  in the  new blankets. He'd hooked up a smal l gas heater  and they  drank Coca  Cola out  of 
plastic  mugs  and after  a while he went back to  the house and wrung the  water out  of the jeans and 
brought  them  back and hung the m to dry.
How long can we sta y here Papa?
Not long.
How long is that?
I dont  know. Ma ybe one more  day. Two.
Because  it's dangerous.
Yes.
Do yo u think  they 'll find us?
No. The y wont find us.
They might  find us.
No the y wont. They  wont find us.
Later  when the  boy was a sleep  he went to the  house and dragged some  of the furniture  out 
onto the lawn. Then  he dragged  out a ma ttress  and laid  it over the  hatch  and from  inside  he pulled  it up 
over the pl ywood and carefull y lowered the  door so that the  mattress covered  it comp letely. It wasnt 
much  of a ruse but it  was better  than nothing.  While  the boy slept he  sat on the bunk and  by the light  of 
the lantern  he whittled  fake bullets  from  a treebranch  with his knife,  fitting  them carefull y into the 
empty bores of the  cylinder and then  whittling again.  He s haped  the ends with  the knife  and sanded 
them smooth  with salt and  he stained  them  with soot until  they were the color  of lead.  When he  had all 
five of them  done he fitted  them  to the bores and  snapped  the c ylinder shut and  turned the  gun and 
looked  at it.  Even  this close  the gun looked  as if it  were loaded  and he laid  it by and got up to  feel the 
legs of the jeans steaming  above the  heater.
He'd saved the  small  handful  of empt y cartridge  casings  for the pistol  but the y were gone 
with every thing else. He should have  kept the m in his pocket. He'd even lost  the last  one. He thought 
he might  have been  able to  reload  them  out of the.45 cartridges.  The primers  would probably  fit if he 
could  get the m out without ruining  them.  Shave the  bullets  to size  with the boxcutter.  He got up and 
made a last  tour of the  stores. Then he  turned down the la mp until  the flam e puttered  out and he kissed 
the boy and crawled  into the other  bunk under the  clean  blankets and  gazed one  more  time at this tin y 
paradise  tremb ling in the  orange light  from  the heater  and then  he fell  asleep.
The town had been  abandoned y ears ago but the y walked the  littered  streets carefull y, the 
boy holding  on to his hand.  They  passed a me tal trashdump  where someone  had once  tried  to burn 
bodies.  The charred  mea t and bones under the  damp  ash might  have been  anony mous save for the 
shapes of the  skulls.  No longer  any smel l. There  was a market  at the end of the  street  and in one  of the 
aisles  piled  with empt y boxes there  were three  meta l grocer y carts. He looked  them  over and pulled  one 
of the m free and squatted  and turned  the wheels and  then stood and pushed it  up the  aisle and  back 
again.
We could take  two of the m, the boy said.
No.
I could  push one.
You're the scout.  I need y ou to be  our lookout.
What  are we going to do with  all the  stuff?
We'll  just have  to take  what we can.
Do yo u think  somebod y is coming?
Yes. Someti me.
You said nobod y was coming.
I didnt  mean  ever.
I wish we could live  here.
I know.
We could be  on the lookout.
We are on the  lookout.
What  if some  good guy s came?
Well,  I dont  think we're likel y to meet  any good gu ys on the road.
We're  on the road.
I know.
If you're on the  lookout all  the time does that  mean  that you're scared  all the ti me?
Well.  I suppose y ou have  to be scared  enough to be on the  lookout  in the  first place.  To be 
cautious.  Watchful.
But the rest of the  time you're not scared?
The rest of the  time.
Yeah.
I dont  know. Ma ybe you should alwa ys be on the lookout.  If trouble  comes  when y ou least 
expect  it then  maybe the thing  to do is to alwa ys expect  it.
Do yo u alway s expect  it? Papa?
I do. But  sometimes I might  forget to  be on the  lookout.
He sat the  boy on the  footlocker  under the  gaslamp  and with a plastic  comb and a  pair of 
scissors he set about  cutting  his hair. He tried  to do a good j ob and it  took some  time.  When he  was 
done  he took the  towel from  around the bo y's shoulders  and he scooped the  golden hair  from  the floor 
and wiped the bo y's face and  shoulders  with a damp  cloth  and held a  mirror  for hi m to see.
You did a  good j ob, Papa.
Good.
I look  reall y skinny.
You are reall y skinny.
He cut  his o wn hair  but it  didnt  come  out so good. H e trimmed his beard  with the scissors 
while  a pan of water  heated  and then  he shaved himse lf with a  plastic  safety  razor.  The bo y watched. 
When  he was done he regarded  himself  in the  mirror.  He seem ed to have  no chin. He turned  to the  boy. 
How do I look ? The  boy cocked  his head. I dont know, he said.  Will  you be cold?
They ate a sumptuous  mea l by candleligh t. Ham  and green beans and  mashed  potatoes  with 
biscuits  and grav y. He'd found four quarts of bonded whiske y still in the paper  bags in which the y'd 
been  purchased and he  drank a littl e of it  in a glass with  water. It m ade him dizz y before he'd even 
finished  it and he drank no more.  They  ate peaches  and crea m over  biscuits for dessert and  drank 
coffee.  The paper plates  and plastic  tableware  he dumped  in a trash-bag.  Then the y play ed checkers and 
then he put the  boy to bed.
In the  night  he wa s wakened  by the mu ted patter  of rain  on the  mattr ess over  the door above 
them. He thought  it must  be raining  prett y hard for him  to hear  it. He got  up with the flashlight  and 
climbed  up and raised  the hatch  and pla yed the light  acros s the yard. The yard was alread y flooded and 
the rain was slashing down. He closed the  hatch.  Water  had leaked  in and dripped down the  stairs but 
he thought the  bunker itself  seemed  prett y watertight.  He went to  see about the  boy. He wa s damp with 
sweat and  the man  pulled  back one  of the blankets  and fanned  his face and  then turned  down the heater 
and went back to  bed.
When  he woke again  he thought  the rain  had stopped. But  that wasnt what woke him.  He'd 
been  visited  in a drea m by creatures  of a kind  he'd never seen before.  They  did not speak. He thought  
that they'd been  crouching  by the side  of his cot as he slept  and then  had skulked awa y on his 
awakening.  He turned  and looked at  the boy. Maybe he understood for the  first ti me that to the bo y he 
was himself  an alien.  A being from  a planet  that no longer  existed.  The tales  of which were suspect.  He 
could  not construct  for the  child's pleasure  the world he'd lost without  constructing  the loss as well  and 
he thought perhaps the  child  had known this better  than  he. He tried  to rem ember the drea m but he 
could  not. All  that was left  was the feeling  of it.  He thought  perhaps they 'd come  to warn him.  Of what? 
That he could  not enkindle  in the heart  of the  child  what was ashe s in his o wn. Even  now s ome part of 
him wished they 'd never  found this refuge. Some  part of him  alway s wished it  to be over.
He checked  the valve  on the tank  that it was turned  off and s wung the  little  stove around on 
the footlocker  and sat  and went to work dismant ling it. He unscrewed the  bottom  panel  and he remov ed 
the burner assembl y and disconnected  the two burners with a smal l crescent  wrench. He tipped  out the 
plastic  jar of hardware and  sorted  out a  bolt to  thread into  the fitting  of the  junction  and then  tightened 
it down. He connected  the hose from  the tank  and held  the littl e potm etal burner up in  his hand, small 
and lightweight.  He set it  on the  locker and  carried  the sheetm etal over  and put it  in the  trash and went 
to the stairs to  check  the weather.  The m attress  on top  of the hatch  had soaked up a  good deal  of w ater 
and the door was hard to lift.  He stood with  it resting  on his s houlders  and looked  out at the  day. A light 
drizzle  falling.  Impossible  to tell  what ti me of the da y he was looking  at. He looked  at the house and he 
looked  out over the  dripping  country side and then let  the door back down and descended  the steps and 
set about mak ing breakfast.
They spent the  day eating  and sleeping.  He'd planned  to leave  but the  rain was ju stificat ion 
enough  to stay . The grocery  cart was in the  shed. Not likel y that anyone would travel  the road toda y. 
They sorted through the  stores and set out  what they could take,  making  of it  a measured  cube in the 
corner  of the shelter.  The day was brief, hardl y a da y at all. By dark the  rain had ceased  and the y 
opened  the hatch  and began  to carr y boxes and parcels  and plastic  bags across the wet  yard to the  shed 
and to pack the  cart.  The faintl y lit hatchway  lay in the  dark of the  yard like a grave  yawning  at 
judgment  day in some  old apocal yptic painting.  When the  cart was loaded  with  all that it  could  hold he 
tied a plastic  tarp down over it  and fastened  the grom mets to the wire with  short bungee cords and the y 
stood back  and looked  at it with the  flashlight.  He thought  that he should  have gotten  a couple  of extra 
sets of wheels from  the other  carts in  the store  but it  was too late  now. He should have  saved the 
motor cycle mirror  off their  old cart  too. The y ate dinner and slept  till morning  and then  bathed  again 
with sponges and washed their  hair in basins of warm  water.  They  ate breakfast  and b y first light  they 
were on the  road, wearing  fresh masks  cut from  sheeting,  the boy going ahead  with a  broom  and 
clearing  the wa y of sticks and  branches and the  man  bent over the  handle  of the cart  watching  the road 
fall away before  them.
The cart was too  heavy  to push into  the wet  woods and the y nooned in the  middl e of the 
road and fixed hot  tea and ate  the last  of the canned  ham  with crackers  and with mustard  and 
applesauce.  Sitting  back to back  and watching  the road. Do yo u know where we are  Papa ? the  boy said.
Sort of.
How s ort of?
Well.  I think  we're about two hundred  miles  from  the coast. As  the crow flies.
As the crow flies?
Yes. It me ans going in a  straight  line.
Are we going to  get there  soon ?
Not real  soon. Pretty  soon. We're not  going as the  crow flies.
Because  crows dont have to  follow roads ?
Yes.
They can go wherever  they  want.
Yes.
Do yo u think  there m ight be crow s somewhere?
I dont  know.
But what do yo u think?
I think  it's unlikel y.
Could  they  fly to Mar s or somep lace?
No. The y couldnt.
Because  it's too far?
Yes.
Even  if the y wanted to.
Even  if the y wanted to.
What  if the y tried  and the y just got half  way  or something  and then  they  were too  tired. 
Would  they  fall back  down ?
Well.  They reall y couldnt  get halfway  because  they 'd be in  space and there's not  any air in 
space  so the y wouldnt be  able to  fly and besides it  would be too  cold and  they 'd freeze  to death.
Oh.
Anyway they  wouldnt  know where  Mar s was.
Do we know w here Mar s is?
Sort of.
If we had a  spaceship  could  we go there?
Well.  If you had a reall y good spaceship  and yo u had people  to help  you I suppose y ou 
could  go.
Would  there  be food and stuff when y ou got there?
No. There's nothing  there.
Oh.
They sat for a long  time.  They sat on their  folded blankets  and watched  the road in both 
directions.  No wind. Nothing. After  a while  the bo y said:  There's not an y crows. Are there?
No.
Just in books.
Yes. Ju st in books.
I didnt  think  so.
Are y ou read y?
Yes.
They rose and put awa y their cups and  the rest of the  crackers.  The man  piled  the blankets 
on top  of the cart  and fastened  the tarp down and then  he stood looking  at the  boy. What? the bo y said.
I know yo u thought  we w ere going to die.
Yeah.
But we didnt.
No.
Okay .
Can I ask you some thing?  Sure.
If you were a  crow could y ou fly up high enough to see  the sun ?
Yes. You could.
I thought  so. That  would be reall y neat.
Yes it  would.  Are you read y?
Yes.
He stopped. What  happened  to your flute?
I threw  it awa y.
You threw it  away ?
Yes.
Okay .
Okay .
In the  long gra y dusk the y cros sed a river and  stopped and looked  down from  the concrete 
balustrade  at the slow dead  water passing underneath.  Sketched  upon the  pall of soot downstream  the 
outline  of a burnt cit y like a black  paper  scrim. They saw it again  just at  dark pushing the  heavy  cart up 
a long hill  and the y stopped to rest  and he turned  the cart  sideway s in the  road against  it rolling.  Their 
masks  were alread y gray at the  mouth  and their  eyes darkly  cupped.  They sat in the  ashes by  the side of 
the road and looked  out to  the east  where the shape  of the cit y was darkening  into the  coming  night. 
They saw no lights.
Do yo u think  there's any one there,  Papa?
I dont  know.
How s oon can  we stop ?
We can stop now.
On the  hill?
We can get  the cart  down to those  rock s and  cover it  with li mbs.
Is this a  good place  to stop ?
Well,  people  dont  like to stop on hills.  And we dont like  for people  to stop.
So it's a good place  for us.
I think  so.
Because  we're smart.
Well,  let's not get  too smart.
Okay .
Are y ou read y?
Yes.
The boy stood up and got his broom  and put it  over his shoulder.  He looked  at his father. 
What  are our long term  goals ? he said.
What?
Our long ter m goals.
Where  did y ou hear  that?
I dont  know.
No, where did y ou?
You said it.
When?
A long ti me ago.
What  was the answer ?
I dont  know.
Well.  I dont  either.  Come  on. It 's getting  dark.
Late in the da y following as the y rounded a bend  in the road  the bo y stopped  and put his 
hand  on the carriage.  Papa,  he whispered. The  man  looked  up. A small  figure  distant  on the  road, bent 
and shuffling.
He stood leaning  on the  handle  of the grocer y cart.  Well,  he said. Who's this ?
What  should we do, Papa?
It could be a  decoy .
What  are we going to do?
Let's ju st follow. We'll  see if he  turns around.
Okay .
The traveler  was not one for looking  back.  They  followed  him for a  while and then the y 
overtook  him.  An old  man,  smal l and bent.  He carried  on his back an  old arm y ruck sack with a  blanket 
roll tied across the top  of it and  he tapped  along with  a peeled  stick for a  cane. When  he saw them  he 
veered  to the  side of the  road and turned  and stood waril y. He had a filth y towel  tied under his j aw as if 
he suffered  from  toothache  and even b y their  new world standards he sme lled terrible.
I dont  have an ything, he said.  You can  look if y ou want.
We're  not robbers.
He leaned  one ear forward. What? he called.
I said  we're not  robbers.
What  are you?
They'd no wa y to answer the question.  He wiped his nose with the  back of his wrist and  
stood waiting.  He had no shoes at  all and  his feet  were wrapped  in rags and cardboard  tied with green 
twine  and an y number  of la yers of vile  clothing  showed through  the tears  and holes in it.  Of a sudden 
he seemed to wilt even  further. He leaned  on his cane  and lowered  himself  into the  road where he  sat 
among  the ashes with  one hand over his head.  He looked like  a pile of rags fallen  off a cart.  They  came 
forward and stood looking  down at hi m. Sir? the man  said. Sir?
The boy squatted  and put a  hand on his s houlder.  He's scared,  Papa. The m an is scared.
He looked  up the road  and down. If this is an ambush  he goes first, he said.
He's just scared, Papa.
Tell him we wont hurt hi m.
The old man  shook his head  from  side to side, his fingers laced  in his filth y hair. The  boy 
looked  up at his father.
Maybe he thinks we're not real.
What  does he think  we are?
I dont  know.
We cant  stay here. We  have to  go.
He's scared,  Papa.
I dont  think y ou should touch  him.
Maybe we could  give  him someth ing to eat.
He stood looking  off down the road. Damn,  he whispered. He looked  down at  the old  man. 
Perhaps he'd turn into  a god and  they  to trees.  All right,  he said.
He untied  the tarp and  folded it  back and  rumm aged  through the  canned goods and ca me up 
with a tin  of fruit cocktail  and took  the can  opener from  his pocket  and opened the  tin and  folded back 
the lid and walked over  and s quatted  and handed it  to the  boy.
What  about  a spoon ?
He's not  getting  a spoon.
The boy took the  tin and  handed it  to the  old man.  Take  it, he whispered.  Here.
The old man  raised his e yes and looked at  the bo y. The boy gestured  at him  with the  tin. He 
looked  like someone  trying to feed  a vulture  broken in  the road. It's okay , he said.
The old man  lowered his hand  from  his head. He blinked.  Gray blue eyes half buried  in the 
thin and sooty  creases  of his s kin.
Take  it, the bo y said.
He reached  with  his s crawn y claws  and took it  and held  it to his chest.
Eat it, the bo y said.  It's good. He mad e tipping  motions with his hands. The  old man  looked 
down at  the tin.  He took a fresh grip  and lifted  it, his no se wrinkling.  His long and  yellowed  claws 
scrabbled  at the me tal. Then he  tipped it  and drank.  The juice ran  down his filth y beard.  He lowered the 
can, chewing with  difficult y. He jerked his head when he  swallowed.  Look, Papa, the  boy whispered.
I see, the  man  said.
The boy turned and  looked at  him.
I know what the  question is, the  man  said. The answer is no.
What's the  question?
Can we keep  him.  We cant.
I know.
You know.
Yeah.
All right.
Can we give  him something  else?
Let's see  how he  does with  this.
They watched  him eat. When  he wa s done  he sat holding  the e mpty tin and looking  down 
into it as if more  might appear.
What  do y ou want to  give him?
What  do y ou think  he should have?
I dont  think he  should  have an ything.  What  do yo u want to give  him?
We could cook  something  on the stove. He could  eat with us.
You're talking  about  stopping. For the night.
Yeah.
He looked  down at  the old man  and he looked  at the  road. All right,  he said.  But then 
tomorrow  we go on.
The boy didnt  answer.
That's the  best deal  you're  going to  get.
Okay .
Okay  means okay . It doesnt  mean  we negotiat e another  deal  tomorrow.
What's negotiat e?
It means  talk about  it some  more  and com e up with  some other deal.  There  is no other  deal. 
This is it.
Okay .
Okay .
They helped  the old  man  to his feet and  handed him  his cane.  He didnt  weigh a  hundred 
pounds. He stood looking  about uncertainl y. The m an took the  tin from  him and slung it  into the 
woods. The old  man  tried  to hand  him the cane  but he pushed it  away . When did  you eat last? he said.
I dont  know.
You dont rem ember.
I ate just now.
Do yo u want to  eat with  us?
I dont  know.
You dont know ?
Eat what?
Maybe some  beef stew. With  crackers.  And coffee.
What  do I have  to do ?
Tell us where the  world went.
What?
You dont have  to do an ything. Can y ou walk  okay ?
I can  walk.
He looked  down at  the boy. Are you a little  boy?  he said.
The boy looked at  his father.
What  does he look  like? his father  said.
I dont  know. I cant  see good.
Can you see me?
I can  tell someone's  there.
Good. We need  to get  going. He looked  at the  boy. Dont hold his hand, he  said.
He cant  see.
Dont hold  his hand. Let's go.
Where  are we going? the  old man  said.
We're  going to eat.
He nodded and  reached  out with his cane  and tapped  tentat ively at the  road.
How old are y ou?
I'm ninet y.
No yo u're not.
Okay .
Is that  what y ou tell people?
What  people?
Any people.
I guess so.
So the y wont hurt yo u?
Yes.
Does that  work?
No.
What's in  your pack ?
Nothing.  You can  look.
I know I can look.  What's in there?
Nothing.  Just some  stuff.
Nothing  to eat.
No.
What's y our nam e?
Ely.
Ely what ?
What's wrong with El y?
Nothing.  Let's go.
They bivouacked  in the  wood s much  nearer  to the road  than he  would have liked.  He had to 
drag the cart  while  the bo y steered  from  behind  and the y built  a fire for the  old man  to warm  himself 
though  he didnt  much  like that either.  They ate and the old  man  sat wrapped  in his solitar y quilt  and 
gripped  his spoon like a  child.  They  had onl y two cups and he drank his coffee  from  the bowl he'd 
eaten  from,  his thumbs  hooked over  the rim.  Sitting  like a starved  and threadbare  buddha, staring  into 
the coals.
You cant  go with us, yo u know, the  man  said.
He nodded.
How long have y ou been  on the  road ?
I was alway s on the  road. You cant sta y in one place.
How do yo u live?
I just keep going. I knew this  was com ing.
You knew it  was com ing?
Yeah. This  or something  like it. I alwa ys believed  in it.
Did y ou try to get  ready  for it?
No. What  would you do?
I dont  know.
People  were alwa ys getting  read y for tomorrow.  I didnt  believe  in that.  Tomorrow  wasnt 
getting  ready  for them.  It didnt  even know the y were there.
I guess not.
Even  if you knew what to  do yo u wouldnt  know w hat to do. You wouldnt know if y ou 
wanted  to do it  or not. Suppose yo u were the  last one left?  Suppose y ou did that to  yourself?
Do yo u wish yo u would die?
No. But I migh t wish I had died.  When y ou're alive  you've alwa ys got that ahead of y ou.
Or yo u might  wish yo u'd never  been born.
Well.  Beggars  cant be  choosers.
You think  that would be asking too much.
What's done  is done. Any way, it's foolish  to ask for luxuries  in tim es like these.
I guess so.
Nobody  wants to be here  and nobod y wants to leave.  He lifted  his head and looked  across 
the fire at  the boy. Then he looked  at the man.  The man  could  see his small  eyes watching  him in the 
firelight.  God kno ws what those e yes saw. He got up to  pile more  wood on the fire  and he  raked the 
coals  back from  the dead  leaves. The  red sparks rose in a shudder and  died in the  blackness overhead.  
The old man  drank the  last of his coffee  and set the  bowl before  him and leaned  toward the heat  with 
his hands out.  The man  watched hi m. How would y ou know if y ou were  the last  man  on earth? he  said.
I dont  gues s you would know it.  You'd j ust be it.
Nobody  would know it.
It wouldnt  make  any difference.  When  you die it's the  same  as if  every body else did too.
I guess God w ould know it. Is that it?
There  is no God.
No?
There  is no God and we are his prophets.
I dont  understand how yo u're still alive.  How do y ou eat?
I dont  know.
You dont know ?
People  give y ou things.
People  give y ou things.
Yes.
To eat.
To eat. Yes.
No the y dont.
You did.
No I didnt.  The bo y did.
There's other  people  on the road.  You're not the  only ones.
Are y ou the only  one?
The old man  peered  warily. What  do yo u mean?  he said.
Are there  people  with y ou?
What  people?
Any people.
There's not  any people.  What  are y ou talking  about?
I'm talking  about  you. About what line  of work yo u might  be in.
The old man  didnt answer.
I suppose yo u want to go with  us.
Go with y ou.
Yes.
You wont take  me with  you.
You dont want  to go.
I wouldnt  have even  come  this far but I was hungry .
The people  that gave y ou food. Where  are the y?
There's not  any people.  I just made  that up.
What  else did yo u make  up?
I'm just on the road the  same  as you. No different.
Is yo ur name  reall y Ely?
No.
You dont want  to say  your name.
I dont  want to sa y it.
Why?
I couldnt  trust  you with it.  To do something  with it.  I dont want an ybody talking  about m e. 
To say where I wa s or what  I said when I wa s there.  I mean,  you could  talk about  me maybe. But 
nobod y could  say that it was me.  I could be an ybody. I think in  times  like these  the less said  the better. 
If someth ing had happened  and we were  survivors and we me t on the  road then  we'd have  something  to 
talk about.  But we're not. So we dont.
Maybe not.
You j ust dont  want to sa y in front  of the bo y.
You're not a shill  for a pack  of roadagents?
I'm not anything. I'll leave  if you want me  to. I can  find the  road.
You dont have  to leave.
I've not seen  a fire in  a long ti me, that's all.  I live  like an anima l. You dont want  to know 
the things I've eaten.  When  I saw that  boy I thought  that I had died.
You thought  he wa s an angel?
I didnt  know w hat he was. I never thought  to see a  child  again. I didnt  know that  would 
happen.
What  if I said  that he's a god?
The old man  shook his head.  I'm past all  that now. Have been for y ears. Where  men  cant 
live gods fare no better.  You'll see.  It's better  to be alone.  So I hope that's not true  what y ou said 
because  to be  on the road with  the last  god would be a terrible  thing  so I hope it's not  true. Things  will 
be better  when every body's gone.
They will?
Sure the y will.
Better  for who?
Ever ybody.
Ever ybody.
Sure. We'll  all be better  off. We'll  all breathe  easier.
That's good to  know.
Yes it  is. When we're all  gone at  last then  there'll  be nobod y here  but death  and his day s 
will be number ed too. He'll  be out in the  road there  with nothing  to do and  nobody  to do it  to. He'll sa y: 
Where  did ever ybody go? And that's how it will  be. What's wrong with that?
In the  morning  they  stood in the  road and  he and the  boy argued about  what to give  the old 
man.  In the end  he didnt  get much.  Some  cans of vegetables  and of fruit.  Finall y the bo y just went  over 
to the edge  of the road  and sat in the  ashes. The old  man  fitted  the tins into  his knapsack  and fastened 
the straps. Y ou should thank  him you know, the  man  said. I wouldnt  have  given y ou anything.
Maybe I should and  maybe I shouldnt.
Why wouldnt  you?
I wouldnt  have given  him mine.
You dont care  if it hurts his feelings?
Will it hurt  his feelings?
No. That's not wh y he did  it.
Why did he do it?
He looked  over at  the bo y and he  looked at  the old  man.  You wouldnt understand,  he said. 
I'm not sure I do.
Maybe he believes  in God.
I dont  know what  he believes  in.
He'll get  over it.
No he wont.
The old man  didnt answer. He looked  around at  the da y.
You wont wish u s luck  either,  will you? the man  said.
I dont  know what  that would m ean. What  luck  would look like.  Who would know such a  
thing?
Then  all went on. When  he looked back  the old  man  had set out with  his cane, tapping  his 
way, dwindling  slowly  on the road  behind the m like some  storybook peddler  from  an antique  time, 
dark and bent and  spider  thin and s oon to  vanish forever.  The bo y never  looked back  at all.
In the  early afternoon  they  spread their  tarp on the road  and sat and ate  a cold  lunch.  The 
man watched  him.  Are y ou talking?  he said.
Yes.
But you're not happy .
I'm okay.
When  we're out of food yo u'll have  more  time to think about  it.
The boy didnt  answer. The y ate. He looked back  up the road.  After a while  he said:  I kno w. 
But I wont remem ber it the wa y you do.
Probabl y not.
I didnt  say you were wrong.
Even  if you thought  it.
It's okay .
Yeah, the  man  said. Well.  There's not a  lot of good news on the  road. In tim es like these.
You shouldnt mak e fun of him.
Okay .
He's going  to die.
I know.
Can we go now?
Yeah, the  man  said. We can  go.
In the  night  he w oke in the  cold dark coughing  and he  coughed till  his chest  was raw. He 
leaned  to the fire  and blew on the  coals and  he put on more  wood and ro se and walked awa y from  the 
camp as far as the  light  would carry  him.  He knelt  in the  dry leaves and  ash with the  blanket  wrapped 
about  his shoulders and after  a while  the coughing  began to  subside.  He thought about  the old  man  out 
there  somewhere.  He looked  back  at the  camp  through the black  palings  of the trees.  He hoped the  boy 
had gone back to  sleep. He knelt  there  wheezing  softly, his hands on his knees. I am  going to die,  he 
said. Tell me how I am  to do that.
The day following  they  trekked  on till  almost  dark.  He could find  no s afe place  to make  a 
fire. When he  lifted  the tank  from  the cart he thought  that it felt  light.  He sat and  turned the  valve  but 
the valve  was alread y on. He turned  the litt le knob on the  burner. Nothing.  He leaned  and listened.  He 
tried both  valves again  in their  comb inations.  The tank  was emp ty. He squatted  there  with his hands 
folded  into a fist against  his forehead,  his ey es closed. After  a while he  raised his head  and j ust sat  there 
staring  out at  the cold  and darkening  wood s.
They ate a cold  supper of cornbread  and beans  and franks from  a tin.  The boy asked him 
how the  tank had gone  empt y so soon but he said  that it just had.
You said it  would last for weeks.
I know.
But it's j ust been a  few day s.
I was wrong.
They ate in silence.  After a  while the boy said: I forgot  to turn off the  valve,  didnt I?
It's not y our fault.  I should have  checked.
The boy set his plate  down on the  tarp. He looked  away .
It's not y our fault.  You have to  turn off both valves.  The threads  were suppo sed to be sealed 
with teflon  tape or it  would leak  and I didnt  do it. It's m y fault.  I didnt  tell you.
There  wasnt an y tape  though, was there?
It's not y our fault.
They plodded on, thin  and filth y as street  addicts.  Cowled in  their blankets  against  the cold 
and their breath  smoking,  shuffling  through the  black  and silky  drifts.  They  were crossing the  broad 
coastal  plain  where the  secular  wind s drove  them  in howling clouds  of ash to  find shelter  where the y 
could.  Hou ses or barns or under the  bank of a roadside  ditch  with the  blankets  pulled over  their  heads 
and the noon sky  black  as the cellars  of hell.  He held  the bo y against  him,  cold to  the bone. Dont lose  
heart,  he said.  We'll be  all right.
The land was gullied  and eroded and barren.  The bones of dead  creatures  sprawled  in the 
washes. Middens of anony mous trash. Farmhouses  in the  fields  scoured of their  paint  and the 
clapboards  spooned and sprung from  the wallstuds. All of it  shadowless and without feature.  The road 
descended  through a  jungle of dead  kudzu. A marsh  where the  dead reeds  lay over the  water. Be yond 
the edge of the  fields  the sullen  haze hung over  earth  and s ky alike.  By late afternoon  it had  begun to 
snow and they  went  on with the  tarp over the m and the wet snow his sing on the plastic.
He'd slept litt le in week s. When  he woke in the  morning  the bo y was not there  and he  sat up 
with the pistol  in his hand and  then stood and  looked for him  but he was not in  sight. He pulled  on his 
shoes and walked  out to the  edge of the  trees. Bleak  dawn in  the east.  The alien  sun com mencing  its 
cold transit.  He sa w the  boy coming  at a run acros s the fields.  Papa, he called.  There's a train  in the 
woods.
A train?
Yes.
A real  train?
Yes. Come  on.
You didnt  go up to it  did yo u?
No. Ju st a little.  Come  on.
There's nobod y there?
No. I dont think  so. I came  to get  you.
Is there  an engine?
Yes. A big diesel.
They cros sed the field  and entered  the wood s on the  far side.  The tracks  came  down out  of 
the country  on a  banked rise and  ran through the  wood s. The  locomo tive was a diesel  electr ic and there 
were eight  stainless  steel  passenger  coaches behind  it. He took hold of the  boy's hand. Let's  just sit and 
watch,  he said.
They sat on the  embank ment and waited.  Nothing  moved.  He handed  the pistol  to the  boy. 
You take  it, Papa,  the bo y said.
No. That's not the  deal.  Take  it.
He took  the pistol  and sat with  it in his lap and the  man  went down the right  of way  and 
stood looking  at the train.  He crossed the tracks  to the  other side  and walked down the  length  of the 
cars. When  he ca me out from  behind  the last  coach he  waved for the bo y to come  and the bo y rose and 
put the pistol  in his belt.
Ever ything was covered  in ash. The  aisles litter ed. Suitcases  stood open in the  seats where 
they'd been  lifted  down from  the overhead  racks and rifled  long ago. In the  club  car he found a  stack of 
paper  plates  and he blew the  dust from  them and put  them  inside his parka  and that  was all.
How did it  get here,  Papa ?
I dont  know. I guess someone  was taking  it south.  A group of people.  This is probabl y 
where the y ran out  of fuel.
Has it  been here  for a long ti me?
Yes. I think  so. A prett y long ti me.
They went through the  last of the cars and  then walked  up the track  to the  locomo tive and 
climbed  up to the  catwalk.  Rust and scaling  paint.  They  pushed into  the cab and he  blew away  the ash 
from  the engineer's  seat and put  the bo y at the controls.  The controls were ver y simple.  Little to do but 
push the  throttle  lever  forward. He made  train  noise s and  diesel  horn noise s but  he wasnt sure what  
these  might  mean  to the  boy. After a while  they  just looked out through  the silted  glass to  where the 
track  curved  away  in the  waste of weeds. If they  saw different  worlds w hat they knew was the  same. 
That the train  would sit there  slowly  decomposing  for all  eternit y and that  no train  would ever  run 
again.
Can we go, Papa?
Yes. Of cour se we can.
They began to  come  upon from  time to time small  cairns of rock b y the roadside. The y 
were signs in g ypsy language,  lost patterans.  The first  he'd seen  in some  while,  comm on in the  north, 
leading  out of the looted  and exhausted cities,  hopeless  messages  to loved  ones lost and dead.  By then 
all stores of food had given  out and  murder  was every where upon the  land.  The world soon to be  
largel y populated  by men  who would eat  your children  in front  of yo ur eyes and the  cities  themselv es 
held by cores of blackened  looters  who tunneled  among  the ruins and crawled  from  the rubble white  of 
tooth  and e ye carry ing charred and  anony mous tins of food in n ylon nets like  shoppers in the 
commissaries  of hell.  The soft black  talc blew through the  streets  like squid ink  uncoiling  along  a sea 
floor  and the cold  crept  down and the dark  came  early and the scavengers  passing down the  steep 
canyons with  their  torches trod  silky  holes in the  drifted  ash that  closed behind  them  silentl y as ey es. 
Out on the  roads the pilgri ms sank down and fell  over and  died and the  bleak  and shrouded earth  went 
trundling  past the sun and returned  again  as trackless and  as unremarked  as the path  of any  name less 
sisterworld  in the ancient  dark be yond.
Long  before the y reached  the coast  their  stores were all  but gone. The  country  was stripped 
and plundered y ears ago and the y found nothing in  the houses and buildings  by the roadside.  He found 
a telephone  director y in a filling  station  and he wrote  the nam e of the  town on their  map  with  a pencil. 
They sat on the  curb in front  of the building  and ate  crackers  and looked  for the town but  they  couldnt 
find it. He sorted through  the sections  and looked  again.  Finall y he showed the  boy. They were some 
fifty miles west of w here he'd thought. He drew stick  figures on the  map.  This  is us, he said. The bo y 
traced  the route  to the sea  with his finger.  How long will  it take us to get  there? he said.
Two weeks. Three.
Is it blue ?
The sea? I dont  know. It used to be.
The boy nodded. He sat looking  at the map.  The man  watched  him.  He thought  he knew 
what  that was about.  He'd pored over  maps  as a child,  keeping  one finger  on the town where he  lived. 
Just as he would look up his fa mily in the  phone director y. Themse lves among  others, every thing in its 
place.  Justified  in the  world. Come  on, he  said. We should go.
In the  late afternoon  it began to rain.  They left the  road and  took a dirt  drive through  a field 
and spent the night  in a shed. The shed had a  concrete  floor and at  the far end stood some  emp ty steel 
drums.  He blocked  the door s with  the drums  and built  a fire in  the floor  and he made  beds out of some 
flatten ed cardboard  boxes. The rain  drumm ed all night on the  steel  roof overhead.  When he woke the  
fire had burned down and it  was very  cold. The  boy was sitting  up w rapped  in his blanket.
What  is it?
Nothing.  I had a bad drea m.
What  did y ou drea m about?
Nothing.
Are y ou okay?
No.
He put  his arms  around him  and held  him.  It's okay , he said.
I was cry ing. But you didnt wake  up.
I'm sorry . I wa s just so tired.
I meant in the drea m.
In the  morning  when he  woke the rain  had stopped. He listened  to the slack  drip of water. 
He shifted  his hips on the hard  concrete  and looked  out through the  boards at  the gra y countr y. The boy 
was still  sleeping.  Water  dripped in  puddles in the  floor. Smal l bubbles appeared  and skated  and 
vanished  again.  In a town in the  piedmon t they'd slept  in a place  like this and listened  to the  rain.  There 
was an oldfashioned  drugstore there  with a  black m arble  counter and  chrome  stools with tattered  plastic 
seats patched  with electric al tape.  The pharmac y was looted but  the store  itself  was oddl y intact. 
Expensive  electroni c equip ment  sat unmolest ed on the  shelves.  He stood looking the  place  over. 
Sundries. Notions. What  are these ? He took  the bo y's hand  and led  him out but the bo y had alread y 
seen it.  A human  head  beneath  a cakebell  at the  end of the  counter.  Dessicated.  Wearing  a ballcap. 
Dried  eyes turned sadl y inward. Did he dream  this? He did  not. He rose and knelt  and blew  at the  coals 
and dragged up the  burned board ends and got  the fire  going.
There  are other good gu ys. You s aid so.
Yes.
So where are  they ?
They're hiding.
Who  are the y hiding from?
From  each  other.
Are there  lots of the m?
We dont know.
But some.
Some.  Yes.
Is that  true?
Yes. That's true.
But it migh t not be true.
I think  it's true.
Okay .
You dont believe  me.
I believe  you.
Okay .
I alwa ys believe  you.
I dont  think so.
Yes I do. I have to.
They hiked back  down to the  highway  through the  mud.  Smel l of earth  and wet ash in  the 
rain. Dark water in  the roadside  ditch.  Sucking  out of an  iron culvert  into a pool. In a  yard a plastic 
deer.  Late  the day following the y entered  a smal l town where three  men  stepped from  behind a  truck 
and stood in the road  before the m. Emaciated, clothed  in rags. Holding lengths  of pipe. What  have  you 
got in the  basket? He leveled  the pistol  at the m. They stood. The  boy clung to his coat.  No one spoke. 
He set the  cart forward again  and they  mov ed to the  side of the  road. He had the  boy take  the cart  and 
he walked  backwards keeping  the pistol on the m. He tried  to look  like any comm on migrator y killer  but 
his heart  was hamm ering and he  knew he wa s going  to start  coughing. The y drifted  back into  the road 
and stood w atching.  He put  the pistol  in his belt  and turned  and took  the cart.  At the  top of the rise 
when he looked  back  they  were still  standing  there.  He told the  boy to push the cart  and he walked out 
through  a yard to where  he could see  back down the road  but now they  were gone.  The bo y was very 
scared.  He laid  the gun on top of the  tarp and took the  cart and they  went  on.
They lay in a field  until  dark watching  the road but no one ca me. It wa s ver y cold. When  it 
was too dark to  see the y got the cart  and stumbled  back  to the  road and he  got the  blankets out  and the y 
wrapped the mselves  up and went on. Feeling  out the  paving under  their  feet. One wheel  on the cart  had 
developed  a periodic  squeak  but there  was nothing to  be done about  it. The y struggled  on for s ome 
hours and then  floundered  off through the  road side brush and la y shivering  and exhausted  on the  cold 
ground and  slept till  day. When he woke he  was sick.
He'd come  down with  a fever and  they  lay in the  woods like  fugitives.  Nowhere  to build  a 
fire. Nowhere  safe. The bo y sat in the  leaves watching  him.  His ey es brimm ing. Are yo u going to  die, 
Papa? he said. Are y ou going  to die?
No. I'm  just sick.
I'm reall y scared.
I know. It's all right.  I'm going to  get better.  You'll see.
His dreams  brightened.  The vanished  world returned.  Kin long dead washed up and cast  fey 
sidewise looks upon hi m. None spoke. He thought  of his life. So long  ago. A  gray day in a foreign cit y 
where he  stood in a window and watched  the street below.  Behind him  on a wooden table  a sma ll lamp 
burned.  On the  table  books and papers. It had  begun to rain  and a cat  at the corner  turned and  cros sed 
the sidewalk and  sat beneath  the cafe awning.  There was a woman  at a table  there  with  her head in  her 
hands. Years later  he'd stood in the  charred  ruins of a librar y where blackened  books la y in pools of 
water.  Shelves tipped  over. Some  rage at  the lies  arranged  in their  thousands ro w on row. He picked  up 
one of the books and thumbed  through the  heavy  bloated  pages. He 'd not  have thought  the value  of the 
smal lest thing  predicated  on a world to com e. It surprised hi m. That  the space which these  things 
occupied  was itself  an expectat ion. He let  the book fall and  took a last  look around and  made  his w ay 
out into the  cold gra y light.
Three  days. Four. He slept poorl y. The racking  cough woke him.  Rasping suck of air.  I'm 
sorry , he said to  the pitiless  dark.  It's oka y said the bo y.
He got  the littl e oilla mp lit and left  it sitting  on a  rock and he rose and  shuffled  out through 
the leaves  wrapped  in his blankets.  The boy whispered  for him  not to go. Ju st a little  way s, he said. Not 
far. I'll hear y ou if you call.  If the la mp should blow out  he could not  find his wa y back.  He sat in the 
leaves  at the top  of the hill  and looked  into the blackness.  Nothing  to see. No wind. In the  past when he 
walked  out like  that and sat looking  over the  countr y lying in just the faintest  visible  shape  where the 
lost moon  tracked  the caustic  waste he'd s ometimes see a light.  Dim  and shapeless in the  murk.  Acros s 
a river or deep  in the  blackened  quadrants of a  burned cit y. In the morn ing someti mes he'd return  with 
the binoculars  and glass the countr yside for an y sign of smoke  but he never  saw an y.
Standing  at the edge  of a winter field  among  rough men.  The bo y's age.  A little  older. 
Watching  while they opened up the  rocky  hillside  ground with  pick and  matto ck and brought  to light  a 
great  bolus of serpents perhaps a  hundred in number.  Collected  there for a  comm on warmth.  The dull 
tubes  of them  beginning  to move  sluggishl y in the  cold hard light.  Like  the bowels of s ome great  beast 
exposed to  the da y. The men  poured gasoline  on them  and burned the m alive,  having  no remed y for 
evil but only  for the i mage  of it as the y conceived  it to be. The  burning snakes twisted  horribly  and 
some  crawled burning  acros s the floor of the  grotto  to illum inate its darker recesses. As they  were mu te 
there  were no screa ms of pain and  the men  watched the m burn and  writhe and blacken  in just such 
silence  themselves  and they  disbanded  in silence  in the winter  dusk each  with his own thoughts to  go 
home  to their  suppers.
One night  the bo y woke from  a dream  and would not tell  him what  it was.
You dont have  to tell  me, the man  said. It's all  right.
I'm scared.
It's all  right.
No it's not.
It's just a drea m.
I'm reall y scared.
I know.
The boy turned awa y. The man  held hi m. Listen  to me,  he said.
What.
When  your dreams  are of some world that  never was or of some  world that  never  will be 
and you are happ y again  then  you will have  given up. Do y ou understand? And yo u cant give  up. I 
wont let  you.
When  they  set out again  he was very  weak and for all  his speeches  he'd beco me more faint 
of heart  than  he had been  in years. Filth y with diarrhea,  leaning  on the bar handle  of the  shopping  cart. 
He looked  at the  boy out of his sunken haggard  eyes.
Some  new distance  between the m. He could  feel it. In two da y's time they came  upon a 
countr y where firestorms  had pas sed leaving  mile on mi le of burn. A cake  of ash in the  roadway  inches 
deep  and hard going  with the  cart. The  blacktop  underneath  had buckled  in the heat  and then  set back 
again.  He leaned  on the  handle  and looked down the  long straight  of way . The thin  trees  down. The 
waterwa ys a gray  sludge. A blackened  jackstraw land.
Beyond a cros sroads in  that wilderness they  began  to come  upon the  possessions of 
travelers  abandoned  in the  road y ears ago.  Boxes and bags. Every thing melted and black.  Old plastic 
suitcases  curled  shapeless  in the  heat. Here  and there  the impr int of things wre sted out of the  tar by 
scavengers.  A mile on and they  began  to com e upon the  dead. Figures half  mired  in the  blacktop, 
clutching  themselv es, mouths  howling.  He put  his hand on the  boy's shoulder. Take  my hand,  he said. I 
dont think y ou should see this.
What  you put in  your head is there  forever?
Yes.
It's okay  Papa.
It's okay ?
They're alread y there.
I dont  want yo u to look.
They'll still be there.
He stopped and  leaned  on the cart.  He looked  down the  road and he  looked at  the bo y. So 
strangel y untroubled.
Why dont we j ust go on, the  boy said.
Yes. Okay .
They were tr ying to get  away  werent the y Papa ?
Yes. They  were.
Why didnt the y leave  the road?
They couldnt.  Every thing was on fire.
They picked  their  way  among  the mum mied figures.  The black  skin stretched  upon the 
bones and their  faces  split and shrunken  on their  skulls.  Like victi ms of some ghastl y envacuuming. 
Passing them  in silence  down that  silent  corridor through  the drifting  ash where the y struggled  forever 
in the road's cold coagulate.
They passed through the  site of a roadside  haml et burned  to nothing.  Some metal storage 
tanks,  a few standing flues  of blackened  brick. There  were gra y slagpools of mel ted glass in  the ditches 
and the raw lightwires  lay in rusting skeins for mi les along  the edge  of the roadwa y. He was coughing 
every step of it.  He sa w the  boy watching  him.  He was w hat the boy thought about.  Well  should he.
They sat in the  road and  ate leftover  skilletbr ead hard  as biscuit  and their  last can  of 
tunafish.  He opened a  can of prunes and the y passed it between  them.  The boy held the  tin up and 
drained  the last of the  juice and then  sat with the  tin in his lap  and pas sed his forefinger  around the 
inside  of it  and put his finger  in his mouth.
Dont cut  your finger, the  man  said.
You alway s say that.
I know.
He watched  him lick the lid  of the tin.  With  great  care.  Like a  cat licking  its reflection  in a 
glass. Stop watching  me, he said.
Okay .
He folded  down the  lid of the can  and set it  in the  road before  him.  What? he  said. What  is 
it?
Nothing.
Tell me.
I think  there's someone  following us.
That's what  I thought.
That's what  you thought?
Yes. That's what I thought  you were going to  say. What  do yo u want to do?
I dont  know.
What  do y ou think?
Let's ju st go. We should hide  our trash.
Because  they'll think we have  lots of food.
Yes.
And the y'll try to kill  us.
They wont kill  us.
They might  try to.
We're  okay .
Okay .
I think  we should lay  in the weeds for the m. See who the y are.
And how man y.
And how man y. Yes.
Okay .
If we can  get across the  creek we could  go up on the  bluffs there and  watch the  road.
Okay .
We'll  find a  place.
They rose and piled  their  blankets  in the  cart. Get  the tin,  the man  said.
It was late  into the long twilight  before  the road  cros sed the  creek.  They  trundled  over  the 
bridge  and pushed the  cart out  through the  woods looking  for s ome place  to leave  it where it  would not 
be seen. They  stood looking  back at  the road in the  dusk.
What  if we put  it under  the bridge? the  boy said.
What  if the y go down there  for w ater?
How far back do y ou think  they are?
I dont  know.
It's getting  dark.
I know.
What  if the y go b y in the  dark ?
Let's ju st find a place  where  we can watch.  It's not dark  yet.
They hid the  cart and went up the  slope among  the rocks carr ying their  blankets  and they 
dug the mselves  in where they  could  see back  down the  road through  the trees  for perhaps half a  mile. 
They were sheltered  from  the wind and the y wrapped themse lves in their  blankets  and took  turns 
watching  but after  a while the boy was asleep.  He was almost  asleep  himse lf when he saw a figure  
appear  at the top  of the road and  stand there.  Soon two mor e appeared.  Then  a fourth. The y stood and 
grouped.  Then the y came  on. He could ju st make  them out in the  deep dusk. He thought the y might 
stop soon and he wished he'd found a place  further from  the road. If the y stopped at  the bridge  it would 
be a long cold  night. The y cam e down the road  and cros sed the bridge.  Three  men  and a  woman.  The 
woman  walked  with a  waddling gait  and as she approached  he could  see that  she was pregnant. The  
men carried  packs on their  backs and the  woman  carried  a small  cloth suitcase.  All of them  wretched 
looking  beyond description.  Their  breath  steam ing softl y. They  crossed the  bridge and continued  on 
down the  road and vanished  one by  one into  the waiting  darkness.
It was a long  night an yway. When it  was light  enough  to see he pulled  on his shoes and rose  
and wrapped  one of the  blankets around  him and walked  out and  stood looking at  the road  below. The 
bare ironcolored  wood and the fields  beyond. The corrugate  shapes of old harrowtroughs still  faintl y 
visible.  Cotton  perhaps. The  boy was sleeping  and he  went down to  the cart  and got  the map  and the 
bottle  of w ater and a  can of fruit  from  their  small  stores and he ca me back  and sat in  the blankets  and 
studied  the m ap.
You alway s think  we've gone further than  we have.
He moved  his finger. Here  then.
More.
Here.
Okay .
He folded  up the li mp and rotting  pages. O kay, he said.
They sat looking  out through the  trees  at the  road.
Do yo u think  that your fathers are  watching?  That  they  weigh y ou in their  ledgerbook? 
Against  what? There  is no book and y our fathers  are dead  in the  ground.
The country  went  from  pine  to liveoak  and pine.  Magnolias. Trees  as dead as an y. He 
picked  up one of the  heavy  leaves  and crushed  it in his hand to powder and let  the powder sift through  
his fingers.
On the  road earl y the da y following.  They'd not gone far when the  boy pulled  at his sleeve 
and they  stopped and  stood. A  thin stem  of smoke  was rising  out of the  woods ahead.  They  stood 
watching.
What  should we do, Papa?
Maybe we should take  a look.
Let's ju st keep going.
What  if the y're going the  same  way we are?
So? the boy said.
We're  going to have  them  behind us. I'd like to  know who it  is.
What  if it's an  army?
It's just a sma ll fire.
Why dont we j ust wait?
We cant  wait. We're  almost  out of food. We have  to keep  going.
They left the cart  in the wood s and  he checked  the rotation  of the rounds in the  cylinder. 
The wooden and the  true. The y stood listening.  The smoke  stood verticall y in the  still air. No sound of 
any kind. The leaves  were soft from  the recent  rains  and quiet  underfoot. He turned  and looked  at the 
boy. The small  dirty  face  wide with  fear. The y circled  the fire at  a distance,  the boy holding  on to his 
hand.  He crouched  and put  his arm  around  him and they  listened  for a  long tim e. I think  they 've gone, 
he whispered.
What?
I think  they're gone.  They  probabl y had a lookout.
It could be a  trap, Papa.
Okay . Let's wait  a while.
They waited.  They  could  see the  smoke  through the  trees. A wind had begun to  trouble  the 
top of the spire and  the smoke  shifted  and the y could  smell  it. They could smel l someth ing cooking. 
Let's circle  around, the  man  said.
Can I hold yo ur hand ?
Yes. Of cour se you can.
The wood s were ju st burned trunks. There  was nothing  to see.  I think the y saw us, the  man 
said. I think the y saw us and ran  away. They  saw we had a gun.
They left their  food cooking.
Yes.
Let's take  a look.
It's reall y scary , Papa.
There's no one  here. It's okay .
They walked into  the little  clearing,  the boy clutching  his hand. The y'd taken  ever ything 
with them  except  whatever  black  thing  was skewered  over the coals.  He wa s standing  there  checking 
the perim eter when the bo y turned  and buried  his face against  him.  He looked quickl y to see what had 
happened.  What  is it? he said. What  is it? The  boy shook his head.  Oh Papa,  he said. He turned  and 
looked  again.  What  the bo y had seen  was a charred  human  infant  headless and gutted  and blackening 
on the  spit. He bent  and picked  the bo y up and  started for the  road with  him,  holding  him close. I'm 
sorry , he whispered. I'm  sorry .
He didnt  know if he'd ever speak again.  They camped  at a river and  he sat b y the fire 
listening  to the water  running in  the dark. It  wasnt a safe place  because  the sound of the  river masked 
any other but he  thought it  would cheer  the bo y up. The y ate the last  of their  provisions and he sat  
studying the map.  He measured  the road with  a piece  of string and  looked at  it and  measured  again. 
Still a long way  to the  coast. He didnt  know w hat they 'd find when the y got there.  He shuffled the 
sections  together  and put  them  back  in the  plastic  bag and  sat staring into  the coals.
The following  day they  crossed the  river b y a narrow iron bridge and  entered  an old m ill 
town. The y went through the  wooden houses but they  found nothing.  A man  sat on a porch in his 
coveralls  dead  for ye ars. He looked  a straw man  set out to announce  some  holida y. They went down the 
long dark wall of the  mill, the window s bricked  up. The  fine black  soot raced  along the  street  before 
them.
Odd things scattered  by the side of the  road. Electr ical appliances,  furniture.  Tools.  Things 
abandoned  long ago  by pilgrims  enroute to  their  several and  collectiv e deaths.  Even a y ear ago the  boy 
migh t somet imes pick  up something  and carr y it with  him for a  while but he didnt do that  any more. 
They sat and rested  and drank the  last of their good water  and left  the plastic  jerry jug standing in  the 
road.  The bo y said:  If we had that  little  baby  it could go with  us.
Yes. It could.
Where  did the y find it?
He didnt  answer.
Could  there be  another  one s omewhere? I dont  know. It's pos sible.
I'm sorry  about what  I said about  those people.  What people?
Those  people that  got burned up. That  were struck in  the road and  got burned up.
I didnt  know that  you said anything bad.
It wasnt bad. Can we go now ?
Okay . Do yo u want to ride  in the  cart?
It's okay .
Why dont yo u ride for while?
I dont  want to. It's okay .
Slow water  in the flat  countr y. The slough s by the roadside mot ionless  and gra y. The 
coastal  plain  rivers  in leaden  serpentine  across the wasted  farmland.  They  went  on. A head  in the  road 
was a dip and  a stand of cane.  I think  there's a bridge  there, he  said. Probably  a creek.
Can we drink  the water?
We dont have  a choice.
It wont make  us sick.
I dont  think so. It could  be dr y.
Can I go ahead?
Yes. Of cour se you can.
The boy set off down the road.  He'd not seen  him run in  a long ti me. Elbows out,  flapping 
along  in his outsized  tennis  shoes. He stopped and  stood watching, biting  his lip.
The water was little  more  than  a seep. He could  see it  moving  slightl y where  it drew down 
into a concrete  tile under the  roadway  and he spat  into the  water and  watched  to see if it  would move. 
He got  a cloth  from  the cart and  a plastic  jar and cam e back  and w rapped  the cloth over  the mouth  of 
the jar and  sank it in  the water  and watched  it fill.  He raised  it up dripping  and held  it to the  light.  It 
didnt  look too  bad. He took the  cloth  away  and handed  the jar to the  boy. Go ahead,  he said.
The boy drank and handed  it back.
Drink some  more.
You drink some,  Papa.
Okay .
They sat filtering  the ash from  the water  and drinking  until  they  could  hold no more.  The 
boy lay back in  the grass.
We need to  go.
I'm reall y tired.
I know.
He sat watching  him.  They'd not eaten  in two day s. In two more  they would begin  to get 
weak. He cli mbed  the bank  through the  cane to  check the  road. Dark and black  and trackless where it 
crossed the  open countr y. The winds had swept the  ash and  dust from  the surface.  Rich  lands at one 
time. No sign of life  anywhere.  It wa s no countr y that he knew. The  names  of the  town s or the  rivers. 
Come  on, he said. We  have to  go.
They slept mor e and more.  More than once  they  woke sprawled  in the road  like traffic 
victims. The sleep  of death. He sat  up reaching  about for the  pistol.  In the leaden  evening  he stood 
leaning  with  his elbows on the cart  handle  and looking  across the fields  at a house perhaps a mi le away. 
It was the boy who had  seen it.  Shifting  in and out of the  curtain  of soot like  a house in some  uncertain 
dream. He leaned  on the  cart and looked at  him.  It would cost the m some  effort  to get  there.  Take  their 
blankets.  Hide the  cart someplac e along  the road.  They  could  reach it  before  dark but the y couldnt  get 
back.
We have to  take a  look. We  have no choice.
I dont  want to.
We havent  eaten  in da ys.
I'm not hungry .
No, yo u're starving.
I dont  want to go there  Papa.
There's no one  there. I prom ise.
How do yo u know?
I just know.
They could be  there.
No the y're not. It will  be okay .
They set out across the  fields wrapped  in their  blankets,  carry ing only  the pistol  and a  bottle 
of water.  The field  had been turned  a last ti me and there  were stalks of stubble  sticking  out of the 
ground and  the faint  trace  of the  disc was still  visible from  east to  west. It had rained  recentl y and the 
earth  was s oft underfoot and  he kept his e ye on the ground and  before long  he stopped and picked  up an 
arrowhead.  He s pat on it  and wiped away  the dirt on the  seam  of his trouser s and  gave it  to the  boy. It 
was white quartz,  perfect  as the  day it was mad e. There  are more,  he said.  Watch  the ground, y ou'll see. 
He found two more.  Gray flint.  Then he  found a coin. Or a button.  Deep crust of verdigris.  He chipped 
at it with the nail  of his thu mb. It was a coin.  He took out his knife  and chiseled  at it with care.  The 
letter ing was in Spanish. He started  to call  to the bo y where he  trudged ahead  and then  he looked  about 
at the gra y country  and the gra y sky and he  dropped the coin  and hurried  on to catch  up.
They stood in front  of the house looking  at it.  There  was a gravel drive  that curved awa y to 
the south. A brick loggia.  Double stairs  that swept up to  the colu mned  portico.  At the  rear of the  house 
a brick dependenc y that may once have  been a kitchen.  Beyond that a log cabin.  He started  up the stairs 
but the bo y pulled  at his sleeve.
Can we wait  a while?
Okay . But it's getting  dark.
I know.
Okay .
They sat on the  steps and looked out  over the  country .
There's no one  here, the  man  said.
Okay .
Are y ou still scared?
Yes.
We're  okay .
Okay .
They went up the  stairs to the  broad brickfloored  porch.  The door was painted  black  and it 
was propped open with  a cinderblock.  Dried  leaves and  weed s blown behind  it. The bo y clutched  his 
hand.  Why  is the door open,  Papa ?
It just is. It's probably  been  open for ye ars. May be the last people  propped it  open to  carry 
their things  out.
Maybe we should wait  till tomorrow.
Come  on. We'll  take a  quick look.  Before it  gets too dark.  If we s ecure  the area then  maybe 
we can  have a fire.
But we w ont stay in the  house will we?
We dont have  to stay  in the house.
Okay .
Let's have  a drink  of w ater.
Okay .
He took  the bottle  from  the side  pocket of his parka  and screwed off the  top and watched 
the boy drink. Then  he took a  drink himself  and put the  lid back on and took  the bo y's hand and the y 
entered  the darkened  hall.  High ceiling.  An import ed chandelier.  At the landing  on the  stairs was a tall 
palladi an window and the  faintest  shape  of it  headlong on the  stairwell  wall  in the  day's last light.
We dont have  to go upstairs, do we?  the boy whispered.
No. May be tomorrow.
After  we've secured  the area.
Yes.
Okay .
They entered  the drawingroo m. The shape  of a carpet  beneath  the silty ash. Furniture 
shrouded in  sheeting.  Pale  squares on the walls  where paintings  once had hung. In the  room  on the 
other  side of the  foyer stood a grand piano.  Their  own s hapes sectioned  in the thin  and water y glass of 
the window there. The y entered  and stood listening.  They  wandered  through the rooms  like skeptical 
housebuy ers. They stood looking out  through the  tall window s at the darkening  land.
In the  kitchen  there  was cutler y and cooking pans and  english china.  A butler's pantry 
where the  door closed  softly behind the m. Tile floor and rows of s helves  and on the  shelves  several 
dozen  quart jars. He cro ssed the  room  and picked one  up and blew the  dust from  it. Green beans. Slices 
of red  pepper standing  among  the ordered rows. Tomato es. Corn. Ne w potatoes.  Okra. The  boy 
watched  him.  The man  wiped the  dust from  the caps of the jars and pushed on the lids  with his thumb. 
It was getting  dark  fast. He carried  a pair  of the jars to the  windo w and held  them  up and turned  them. 
He looked  at the  boy. These m ay be poison, he  said. We'll  have to cook  every thing reall y well.  Is that 
okay?
I dont  know.
What  do y ou want to  do?
You have to  say.
We both have  to say .
Do yo u think  they 're okay?
I think  if we cook the m reall y good they 'll be all right.
Okay . Why do y ou think  nobod y has eaten  them?
I think  nobody  found them.  You cant see  the house from  the road.
We saw it.
You saw it.
The boy studied the  jars.
What  do y ou think? the  man  said.
I think  we've got no choice.
I think  you're right. Let's  get some  wood before  it gets  any darker.
They carried  armlo ads of dead li mbs up the  back stairs through  the kitchen  and into the 
diningroo m and broke them  to length  and stuffed the  fireplace  full. He lit  the fire and  smoke  curled  up 
over the painted  wooden lintel  and rose to the  ceiling  and curled down again.  He fanned the  blaze  with 
a magazin e and soon the  flue began  to draw and the  fire roared  in the  room  lighting  up the walls and 
the ceiling  and the glass chandelier  in its m yriad facets.  The flames  lit the darkening  glass of the 
window where the  boy stood in hooded silhouette  like a troll  come  in from  the night.  He seemed 
stunned  by the heat.  The man  pulled  the sheets  off the long  Empire  table  in the  center  of the  room  and 
shook them  out and m ade a nest of them  in front of the  hearth.  He sat the  boy down and pulled  off his 
shoes and pulled  off the  dirty  rags with  which his feet  were w rapped.  Ever ything's oka y, he whispered. 
Ever ything's okay .
He found candles  in a kitchen  drawer and lit  two of the m and then  melted wax onto  the 
counter  and stood the m in the wax. He went outside  and brought in  more  wood and piled  it beside the 
hearth.  The boy had not moved.  There  were pots and pans in the  kitchen  and he  wiped one out and  
stood it  on the  counter and  then he tried  to open one of the  jars but he  could not.  He carried  ajar of 
green  beans and one of potatoes  to the front  door and by  the light  of a candle  standing in  a glass he 
knelt  and placed  the first jar sideway s in the  space between  the door and the jamb  and pulled the  door 
against  it. Then he  squatted  in the fo yer floor and hooked his foot  over the  outside edge  of the door and 
pulled  it against  the lid  and twisted  the jar in his hands. The  knurled lid  turned  in the  wood grinding  the 
paint.  He took a  fresh grip on the  glass and  pulled  the door tighter  and tried  again. The  lid slipped in  the 
wood, then  it held.  He turned the  jar slowl y in his hands, then took  it from  the jamb  and turned  off the 
ring of the lid  and set it  in the  floor. Then  he opened  the second jar and rose and carried  them back  into 
the kitchen,  holding  the glass in  his other hand with  the candle  rolling  about  and sputtering.  He tried  to 
push the  lids up off the jars with his thumbs  but they  were on too  tight.  He thought that  was a good 
sign. He set the  edge  of the lid  on the counter  and punched  the top of the jar with his fist  and the  lid 
snapped off and  fell in the  floor and he raised  the jar and sniffed  at it.  It smel led delicious.  He poured 
the potatoes  and the  beans into a  pot and carried  the pot into  the diningroo m and set it  in the  fire.
They ate slowly out of bone china  bowls, sitting  at opposite  sides of the table  with a single 
candle  burning  between the m. The pistol  lying to hand like  another  dining imp lement. The warming 
house creaked  and groaned.  Like  a thing  being called  out of long hibernation.  The boy nodded over his 
bowl and  his s poon clatter ed to the floor. The  man  rose and came  around and carried  him to the  hearth 
and put him  down in  the sheets and  covered him  with the  blankets.  He must  have gone  back to  the table 
because  he woke in the  night  lying there  with  his face in  his cros sed ar ms. It was cold in  the room  and 
outside  the wind was blowing. The  window s rattled  softly in their  fram es. The candle  had burned out 
and the fire  was down to coals.  He ro se and built  back the  fire and sat beside  the bo y and pulled  the 
blankets  over hi m and brushed back  his filth y hair. I think  maybe they  are watching,  he said. The y are 
watching  for a thing  that even death  cannot  undo and if  they  do not  see it the y will turn away  from  us 
and they  will not come  back.
The boy didnt  want him to go up stairs.  He tried  to reason with  him.  There  could  be blankets 
up there,  he said.  We need  to take  a look.
I dont  want yo u to go up there.
There's no one  here.
There  could  be.
There's no one  here. Dont y ou think  they 'd have co me down by  now ?
Maybe they're scared.
I'll tell them  we w ont hurt them.
Maybe they're dead.
Then  they  wont m ind if we take  a few things.  Look, whatever  is up there  it's better  to know 
about  it than to not  know.
Why?
Why. Well,  because we dont  like surprises. Surprises are scar y. And we dont like  to be 
scared.  And there  could  be things up there  that we need.  We have  to take  a look.
Okay .
Okay ? Just like  that?
Well.  You're not going  to listen  to me.
I have  been listening  to yo u.
Not ver y hard.
There's no one  here. There  has been no one  here for y ears. There  are no tracks in the  ash. 
Nothing  disturbed. No furniture  burned in the  fireplace.  There's food here.
Tracks  dont sta y in the ash. You said so yo urself. The wind blow s them away.
I'm going  up.
They stayed at the house for four da ys eating  and sleeping.  He'd found more  blankets 
upstairs  and they  dragged  in great  piles  of w ood and  stacked the  wood in the corner  of the  room  to dr y. 
He found an antique  bucksa w of wood and wire  that he u sed to saw the dead  trees to  length. The  teeth 
were rust y and dull and  he sat in front  of the fire  with a  rattail  file and tried to  sharpen  them  but to  little 
purpose. There  was a creek  some hundred y ards from  the house and he hauled  endless pails  of water 
across the  stubble fields  and the  mud  and the y heated  water and  bathed  in a tub off the  back  bedroom 
on the  lower floor and  he cut  their hair  and shaved his beard.  They had clothes  and blankets  and pillows 
from  the upstairs rooms  and they  fitted  themselves  out in new attire,  the bo y's trouser s cut to length 
with his knife. He made  a nesting  place  in front  of the hearth,  turning  over a tallbo y chest  to use as a 
headboard  for their  bed and to  hold the  heat.  All the while  it continued  to rain.  He set pails  under the 
downspouts at the  housecorners  to catch  fresh water  off the old  standing-seam  meta l roof and at  night 
he could hear  the rain  drumm ing in the  upper rooms  and dripping  through the  house.
They rumm aged through the  outbuildings  for any thing of use. He found a wheelbarrow and  
pulled  it out and tipped  it over and  turned the  wheel slowly , examining  the tire.  The rubber was glazed  
and cracked  but he thought  it might hold  air and  he looked through  old boxes and jumbles  of tools  and 
found a  bicy cle pump  and screwed  the end of the  hose to the  valvestem  of the  tire and began  to pump. 
The air leaked  out around the  rim but he turned  the wheel  and had the  boy hold down the tire  until  it 
caught  and he  got it  pumped  up. He unscrewed the  hose and turned  the wheelbarrow  over and trundled 
it across the floor  and back. Then  he pushed it  outside for the  rain to clean.  When  they  left two da ys 
later the weather  had cleared  and they  set out  down the  mudd y road  pushing  the wheelbarrow  with their 
new blankets  and the  jars of canned  goods w rapped  in their  extra  clothes.  He'd found a pair  of 
workshoes and the bo y was wearing blue  tennis  shoes with  rags stuffed  into the  toes and the y had fresh 
sheeting  for face  masks.  When the y got to  the blacktop  they had to turn  back along  the road  to fetch  the 
cart but it  was less than a m ile. The bo y walked  alongside  with one hand on the  wheelbarrow. We  did 
good, didnt  we Papa ? he said. Ye s we did.
They ate well but  they  were still  a long way  from  the coast. He knew that  he was placing 
hopes where he'd no reason to.  He hoped it  would be brighter  where for all  he knew the  world grew 
darker  daily. He'd once  found a lightm eter in a camer a store that  he thought  he m ight use to  average  out 
readings  for a few months  and he carried  it around with him  for a long ti me thinking  he might  find 
some  batteries  for it  but he never  did. At night  when he woke coughing he'd sit  up with his hand pushed  
over his head against  the blackness.  Like  a man  waking in a grave.  Like  those disinterred  dead  from  his 
childhood  that had been  relocated  to accom modate a highwa y. Many  had died in  a cholera  epide mic 
and they 'd been buried  in haste  in wooden boxes and the  boxes w ere rotting  and falling  open. The  dead 
came to light  lying on their  sides with  their legs  drawn up and some  lay on their  stomachs.  The dull 
green  antique  coppers spilled  from  out the tills  of their  eyesocke ts onto the  stained  and rotted  coffin 
floors.
They stood in a grocer y store in  a small  town w here a mount ed deerhead  hung from  the 
wall.  The bo y stood looking  at it a long tim e. There  was broken glass in the  floor and the  man  made 
him wait  at the  door w hile he kicked through  the trash  in his work shoes but he  found nothing. There  
were two gas pumps  outside  and the y sat on the  concrete  apron and lowered  a smal l tin can on a  string 
into the underground tank and  hauled it  up and poured  the cupful  of gasoline  it held  into a plastic  jug 
and lowered it  again.  They 'd tied a small  length  of pipe to  the can  to sink it  and the y crouched over  the 
tank like apes fishing with  sticks in an anthil l for the  better  part of an  hour until  the jug w as full.  Then 
they screwed on the  cap and set  the ju g in the botto m rack  of the cart  and went on.
Long  days. Open countr y with the  ash blowing over the  road. The  boy sat b y the fire at 
night  with the  pieces  of the map  across his knees. He had the  names  of towns and rivers b y heart  and he 
measured  their  progress daily .
They ate more  sparingl y. They 'd almost  nothing  left. The bo y stood in the  road holding  the 
map.  They  listened  but the y could hear  nothing. Still  he could see open  country  to the east  and the air 
was different.  Then  they  came upon it  from  a turn in the  road and the y stopped and stood with  the salt 
wind blowing  in their  hair where  they 'd lowered the  hoods of their coats  to listen.  Out there  was the 
gray beach with  the slow combers  rolling  dull and leaden  and the distant  sound of it. Like  the 
desolation  of some  alien  sea breaking  on the shores of a world unheard  of. O ut on the tidal  flats la y a 
tanker  half careened.  Beyond that the ocean vast  and cold  and s hifting  heavil y like a slo wly heaving  vat 
of slag  and then the  gray  squall  line of ash. He looked at  the bo y. He could  see the  disappointm ent in 
his face.  I'm sorry  it's not blue, he  said. That's oka y, said the bo y.
An hour later  they were sitting  on the beach  and staring  out at  the wall of smog  across the 
horizon.  They  sat with their  heels dug into  the sand and watched  the bleak  sea wash up at their  feet. 
Cold.  Desolate.  Birdless.  He'd left  the cart in  the bracken  beyond the dunes and the y'd taken  blankets 
with them  and sat wrapped in  them  in the wind-shade  of a great  driftwood log. The y sat there  for a long 
time. Along the shore of the  cove below the m windrows of small  bone s in the wrack.  Further  down the 
saltbleach ed ribcages  of what ma y have been  cattle.  Gray salt rime  on the  rock s. The  wind blew and 
dry seedpods scamper ed down the sands and stopped and  then went  on again.
Do yo u think  there could  be ships out there?
I dont  think so.
They wouldnt be able  to see very  far.
No. The y wouldnt.
What's on the  other  side?
Nothing.
There  must  be something.
Maybe there's  a father  and his little  boy and the y're sitting  on the  beach.
That would be oka y.
Yes. That  would be oka y.
And the y could be carr ying the fire too?
They could be.  Yes.
But we dont know.
We dont know.
So we have to  be vigilant.
We have to  be vigilant.  Yes.
How long can we sta y here ?
I dont  know. We  dont have  much  to eat.
I know.
You like  it.
Yeah.
Me too.
Can I go s wimming?
Swimm ing?
Yes.
You'll freeze  your tokus off.
I know.
It will be  reall y cold. Worse than  you think.
That's oka y.
I dont  want to have  to come  in after  you.
You dont think  I should go.
You can go.
But you dont think  I should.
No. I think  you should.
Reall y?
Yes. Reall y.
Okay .
He rose and let  the blanket  fall to the  sand and then  stripped out  of his coat and  out of his 
shoes and clothes.  He stood naked, clutching  himself  and dancing.  Then he  went running down the  
beach.  So w hite. Knobb y spinebones. The  razorous shoulder blades  sawing  under the pale  skin. 
Running  naked and leaping  and screaming  into the slow roll of the  surf.
By the time he ca me out he was blue with  cold and his teeth  were chattering.  He walked 
down to me et him and wrapped  him shuddering in  the blanket  and held hi m until  he stopped  gasping. 
But when he looked the  boy was cry ing. What  is it? he said. Nothing.  No, tell  me. Nothing.  It's nothing.
With  dark the y built  a fire  against  the log  and ate  plates  of okra and beans and the  last of 
the canned  potatoes. The  fruit  was long  gone. They  drank  tea and sat b y the fire and the y slept  in the 
sand and listened  to the  roll of the  surf in  the ba y. The long  shudder and  fall of it. He got  up in the night 
and walked  out and  stood on the beach  wrapped in his blankets.  Too black to  see. Taste  of salt on his 
lips. Waiting.  Waiting.  Then the  slow boom  falling  down shore.  The seething  hiss of it washing over  the 
beach  and drawing  away again.  He thought  there  could  be deathships out  there y et, drifting  with their 
lolling  rags of s ail. Or life  in the  deep. Great  squid propelling  themse lves over the  floor of the  sea in the 
cold darkness. S huttling  past like  trains,  eyes the size  of saucers. And perhaps bey ond those shrouded 
swells another  man  did walk with  another child  on the  dead gra y sand s. Slept  but a sea  apart on another 
beach  among  the bitter  ashes of the  world or stood in their  rags lost to  the same  indifferent  sun.
He rem embered  waking once  on s uch a night to  the clatt er of crabs in  the pan where  he'd 
left steakbones  from  the night before.  Faint deep  coals of the  driftwood fire  pulsing in  the onshore 
wind. L ying under such a m yriad of stars. The  sea's black  horizon.  He ro se and  walked out  and stood 
barefoot  in the  sand and watched  the pale surf appear  all down the  shore and roll  and crash and darken  
again.  When  he went back  to the  fire he knelt  and smoothed  her hair  as she slept and  he said if he  were 
God he would have  made  the world ju st so and no different.
When  he got back  the bo y was awake and  he was s cared.  He'd been  calling  out but not loud 
enough  that he  could hear  him.  The man  put his arms  around hi m. I couldnt  hear  you, he said. I couldnt 
hear you for the surf. He put wood on the  fire and fanned  it to life  and the y lay in their blankets 
watching  the flames  twist in the  wind and then  they  slept.
In the  morning  he rekindled  the fire and the y ate and watched  the shore. The  cold and  rainy 
look of it not  so different  from  seascapes in the  northern  world. No gulls  or shorebirds. Charred  and 
senseless artifacts  strewn down the  shoreline  or rolling  in the surf. The y gathered  driftwood and 
stacked  it and covered  it with  the tarp  and then  set off down the beach.  We're beachco mbers,  he said.
What  is that?
It's people  who walk  along the  beach  looking for things  of value that  migh t have  washed 
up.
What  kind of things?
Any kind of things.  Anything that you might  be able  to use.
Do yo u think  we'll find an ything?
I dont  know. We'll  take  a look.
Take  a look,  the bo y said.
They stood on the rock  jetty and looked  out to the  south. A gray  salt spittle  lagging  and 
curling  in the rock pool.  Long curve  of beach be yond. Gray as lava  sand. The  wind coming  off the 
water  smelled  faintl y of iodine.  That  was all.  There was no sea smel l to it.  On the rocks the  remnants  of 
some  dark seamoss.  They  crossed and went  on. At the end of the  strand their  way was blocked b y a 
headland  and they  left the beach and  took an old  path up through  the dunes and through  the dead 
seaoats  until  they  came out upon a low promontor y. Below them  a hook of land  shrouded  in the dark 
scud blowing  down the  shore and bey ond that lying half over  and awash the shape of a  sailboat's hull. 
They crouched  in the  dry tufts of gras s and  watched. What  should we do?  the boy said.
Let's ju st watch for a  while.
I'm cold.
I know. Let's move  down a  little  ways. Out of the  wind.
He sat holding  the boy in front of hi m. The dead grass thrashed softl y. Out there a  gray 
desolation.  The endless seacrawl.  How long  do w e have  to sit  here ? the  boy said.
Not long.
Do yo u think  there are  people  on the boat,  Papa ?
I dont  think so.
They'd be all tilted  over.
Yes they  would. Can  you see any  tracks  out there?
No.
Let's ju st wait a  while.
I'm cold.
They trekked  out along  the crescent  sweep of beach,  keeping  to the  firmer  sand below  the 
tidewrack.  They stood, their  clothes  flapping  softly. Glass floats covered  with a gra y crust. The  bone s 
of seabirds. At the  tide line a woven mat  of weeds and the  ribs of fishes in their  millions  stretching 
along  the shore as far  as eye could  see like an isocline  of death.  One vast salt  sepulchre. Senseless.  
Senseless.
From  the end of the  spit to the  boat  there was perhaps a hundred  feet of open water. The y 
stood looking  at the boat.  Some sixty feet long,  stripped to the  deck,  keeled  over in ten  or twelve  feet of 
water.  It had been  a twin-m asted  rig of some sort but the  masts  were broken off close  to the  deck and 
the only  thing  rema ining  topside  were some  brass cleats  and a  few of the  rail stanchions along  the edge 
of the  deck. That  and the steel  hoop of the  wheel sticking  up out of the  cockpit  aft. He turned and 
studied  the beach  and the  dunes bey ond. Then  he handed  the bo y the pistol and  sat in the  sand and 
began  to unlace  the cords of his s hoes.
What  are you going to do, Papa?
Take  a look.
Can I go with yo u?
No. I want y ou to stay here.
I want  to go with y ou.
You have to  stand guard. And besides the  water' s deep.
Will I be able  to see y ou?
Yes. I 'll keep  checking  on yo u. To make  sure every thing's okay.
I want  to go with y ou.
He stopped. You cant,  he said. Our clothes  would blow away . Somebod y has to  take  care of 
things.
He folded  every thing into a pile.  God it was cold. He bent  and kissed the  boy on his 
forehead.  Stop worry ing, he said.  Just keep  a lookout.  He waded naked into  the water and stood and 
laved  himse lf wet. Then  he trudged  out splashing and  dove headlong.
He swam  the length  of the steel  hull and turned,  treading  water, gasping with  the cold. 
Amidships  the sheer-rail  was j ust awash. He pulled  himself  along  to the  transom.  The steel  was gray 
and saltscoured  but he could m ake out the worn gilt  lettering.  Pájaro de  Esperanza.  Tenerife.  An empt y 
pair of lifeboat  davits.  He got hold  of the rail  and pulled  himse lf aboard  and turned and  crouched on the 
slant  of the wood deck  shivering.  A few lengths of braided  cable  snapped off at  the turnbuckles. 
Shredded  holes in the  wood where  hard ware  had been  ripped out.  Some terrible  force  to sweep the 
decks of ever ything. He w aved  at the  boy but he didnt  wave back.
The cabin  was low with  a vaulted  roof and portholes  along the  side. He crouched  and wiped 
away the gray salt and looked  in but he  could see nothing.  He tried  the low teak  door but  it was locked. 
He gave  it a shove  with his bony  shoulder. He looked  around for something  to pr y with. He was 
shivering  uncontrollabl y and his teeth  were chatter ing. He thought  about kicking  the door with the  flat 
of his foot  but then  he thought that  was not a  good idea. He held  his elbow in his hand  and banged into 
the door again.  He felt  it give.  Very  slightl y. He kept at  it. The  jamb  was s plitting  on the inside  and it 
finall y gave way  and he pushed it  open and  stepped down the comp anionwa y into the cabin.
A stagnant  bilge  along the  lower bulkhead  filled  with  wet papers and trash. A sour smell  
over every thing. Damp  and cla mmy. He thought the  boat had  been ransacked  but it  was the sea that  had 
done  it. There  was a mahogan y table  in the  middl e of the  saloon with hinged  fiddles. The  locker  door s 
hanging  open into  the room  and all  the brasswork a dull  green. He went through  to the  forward cabins. 
Past the  galle y. Flour and coffee  in the  floor and  canned goods half  crushed and rusting. A head  with a 
stainless  steel  toilet  and sink. The  weak sea light  fell through  the clerestor y portholes.  Gear scattered 
everywhere.  A mae  west floating  in the  seepage.
He was half expecting  some horror but there  was none. The  mattr ess pads in  the cabins  had 
been  slung into the  floor and  bedding and clothing  were piled  against  the wall.  Every thing wet. A door 
stood open  to the locker  in the bow but it  was too  dark to see  inside. He ducked  his head and stepped  in 
and felt about.  Deep bins with  hinged wooden covers. Sea gear  piled  in the  floor. He began  to drag 
everything out and pile  it on the tilted  bed. Blankets,  foulweather  gear. He ca me up with  a damp 
sweater  and pulled  it over his head. He found a pair  of yellow rubber seaboots and he  found a ny lon 
jacket  and he zipped  himself  into that and pulled  on the stiff  yellow breeches  from  the souwester  gear 
and thumbed  the suspenders  up over his s houlders  and pulled  on the boots. Then  he went  back up on 
the deck. The  boy was sitting  as he'd left  him,  watching  the ship. He stood up in  alarm  and the  man 
realized  that in his new clothes  he mad e an uncertain  figure. It's me,  he called,  but the  boy only stood 
there  and he  waved to him  and went below  again.
In the  second stateroo m there  were drawers under the  berth that  were  still in place  and he 
lifted  them  free and slid  them  out. Manuals and papers in  Spanish.  Bars of s oap. A black  leather  valise 
covered  in mo ld with papers  inside. He put the  soap in the  pocket  of his coat and  stood. There  were 
books in Spanish strewn across the  berth, swollen and  shapeless.  A single  volume  wedged in the  rack 
against  the forward  bulkhead.
He found a rubberized  canvas seabag and  he prowled the  rest of the  ship in his boots, 
pushing himse lf off the  bulkheads against  the tilt, the yellow slicker  pants rattling  in the  cold. He filled 
the bag with odds and ends of clothing.  A pair of w omen's sneakers he  thought would fit  the boy. A 
foldingknife  with a wooden handle.  A pair of sunglasses. Still  there  was someth ing perverse in  his 
searching.  Like  exhausting  the least  likel y places  first when looking  for someth ing lost. Finall y he went 
into the galle y. He turned on the  stove and turned  it off again.
He unlatched  and raised the  hatch  to the  engine  compart ment. Half flooded and  pitch  dark. 
No smell  of gas or oil. He closed  it again. There  were lockers  built  into the benches  in the cockpit  that 
held cushions, sailcanvas,  fishing gear.  In a locker  behind the  wheel pedestal  he found coils of n ylon 
rope and steel  bottles  of ga s and  a toolbox  made  of fiberglass.  He sat in the  floor of the  cockpit  and 
sorted  through the tools.  Rusty but serviceable.  Pliers, screwdrivers, wrenches. He latched  the toolbox 
shut and  stood and looked for the  boy. He wa s huddled  in the  sand asleep  with his head on the  pile of 
clothes.
He carried  the toolbox  and one of the  bottles  of ga s into  the galle y and went forward and  
made a last  tour of the  staterooms.  Then he  set about going  through the  lockers in the  saloon, looking 
through  folders and papers in  plastic  boxes, try ing to find the  ship's log. He found a set  of china packed 
away unused in  a wooden crate  filled  with  excelsior.  Most of it  broken. Service  for eight,  carry ing the 
name of the  ship. A gift,  he thought.  He lifted  out a  teacup  and turned  it in his palm  and put it  back. 
The last thing  he found was a square oak  box with dovetailed  corners and a brass plate  let into the lid. 
He thought  it might  be a humidor  but it  was the wrong s hape  and when he picked  it up and felt  the 
weight  of it  he knew w hat it was. He unsnapped the  corroding latches  and opened it.  Inside was a brass  
sextant,  possibly a hundred  years old. He lifted  it from  the fitted  case  and held it  in his hand.  Struck by 
the beaut y of it. The  brass w as dull  and there  were patches  of green on it  that took the  form  of another 
hand  that once  had held  it but  otherwise it  was perfect.  He wiped the verdigris  from  the plate  at the 
base. Hezzaninth,  London. He held  it to his ey e and turned  the wheel.  It was the  first thing  he'd seen  in 
a long tim e that stirred  him.  He held  it in his hand and then  he fitted  it back  into the  blue baize  lining  of 
the case and  closed the  lid and  snapped  the latches  shut and  set it  back in the  locker  and closed  the 
door.
When  he went back  up on deck again  to look  for the bo y the boy was not there.  A moment 
of panic  before  he sa w him walking  along the  bench downshore with the  pistol  hanging in his hand,  his 
head  down. Standing  there  he felt  the hull of the  ship lift  and slide.  Just slightl y. Tide  com ing in. 
Slapping  along  the rocks of the  jetty down there. He turned  and went back  down into the  cabin.
He'd brought the  two coils of rope  from  the locker  and he measured  the dia meter  of them 
with the span of his hand and  that by three and  then counted  the number  of coils.  Fifty  foot rope s. He 
hung the m over a  cleat  on the  gray  teakwood deck  and went back  down into the  cabin.  He collected 
everything and stacked it  against  the table.  There  were some plastic  jugs of water  in the  locker off the 
galle y but all were empt y save one. He picked  up one of the  empt ies and saw that  the plastic  had 
cracked  and the water  leaked  out and he  guessed the y had frozen  somewher e on the  ship's aim less 
voyagings.  Probabl y several  times.  He took  the half  full jug and set it  on the  table  and unscrewed the  
cap and sniffed the  water and  then raised  the jug in both hands and drank.  Then he  drank again.
The cans in the  galle y floor did  not look in  any way  salvable  and even  in the  locker  there 
were some  that were badly  rusted  and some  that wore an ominous  bulbed look. The y'd all been stripped 
of their  labels  and the  contents  written  on the me tal in black  marker  pen in Spanish. Not all  of which he 
knew, had burst free  of their  labels.  He s orted  through the m, shaking the m, squeezing  them  in his hand. 
He stacked  them  on the counter  above  the smal l galle y refrigerator.  He thought there  must  be crates  of 
foodstuffs packed  somewher e in the  hold but  he didnt  think an y of it would be edible.  In any  case there 
was a li mit to what the y could  take in  the cart.  It occurred  to him that he took  this windfall  in a fashion 
dangerousl y close to  matt er of fact  but still  he said what he had  said before. That  good luck  might  be no 
such thing.  There  were few nights l ying in the  dark that  he did not  envy  the dead.
He found a can  of olive  oil and s ome cans of mi lk. Tea in a rusted metal cadd y. A plastic 
container  of some sort of mea l that he did  not recognize.  A half  empt y can of coffee.  He went 
methodic ally through the  shelves  in the  locker,  sorting  what to take  from  what to leave.  When  he had 
carried  ever ything into the  saloon and stacked  it against  the compan ionwa y he went  back into  the 
galle y and opened the  toolbox and  set about  removing  one of the burners from  the littl e gimba lled 
stove.  He disconnected  the braided  flexline  and removed  the alu minu m spiders from  the burners and 
put one of them  in the  pocket  of his coat. He unfastened  the bras s fittings  with  a wrench  and took  the 
burners loose. Then  he uncoupled  them and fastened  the hose to the coupling  pipe  and fitted  the other 
end of the hose to the  gasbottle  and carried  it out to  the saloon.  Lastl y he made  a bindle  in a plastic  tarp 
of some  cans of j uice and cans of fruit  and of vegetables  and tied  it with  a cord and then  he stripped  out 
of his clothes  and piled  them among  the goods he'd collected  and went up onto  the deck  naked and  slid 
down to the  railing  with the  tarp and s wung over the  side and  dropped into the  gray and freezing  sea.
He waded ashore  in the last  of the  light  and s wung the  tarp down and pal med the water  off 
his arms  and chest and  went to get  his clothes.  The bo y followed  him.  He kept  asking him  about his 
shoulder,  blue and discolored  from  where he'd slamm ed it against  the hatch  door. It' s all right,  the man 
said. It doesnt hurt. We  got lots  of stuff. Wait  till you see.
They hurried down the  beach against  the light.  What  if the  boat washes away ? the boy said.
It wont wash awa y.
It could.
No it  wont. Come  on. Are y ou hungr y?
Yes.
We're  going to eat  well  tonight.  But we need to  get a  move  on.
I'm hurr ying, Papa.
And it  may rain.
How can y ou tell?
I can  smell  it.
What  does it  smell  like?
Wet ashes. Come  on.
Then  he stopped. Where's the  pistol? he said.
The boy froze. He looked  terrified.
Christ,  the man  said. He looked  back up the  beach. The y were alread y out of sight of the 
boat.  He looked at  the boy. The bo y had put  his hands on top of this head  and he was about to  cry. I'm 
sorry , he said. I'm  reall y sorry.
He set down the  tarp with  the canned  goods. We have  to go back.
I'm sorry , Papa.
It's okay . It will  still be there.
The boy stood with his shoulders slumped.  He wa s beginning  to sob. The  man  knelt  and put 
his arms  around him.  It's all  right,  he said. I'm  the one who 's supposed to  make  sure we have  the pistol 
and I didnt do it.  I forgot.
I'm sorry , Papa.
Come  on. We're oka y. Ever ything's okay .
The pistol  was where he'd left  it in the  sand. The man  picked  it up and shook it  and he sat 
and pulled the  cylinder pin and handed it  to the  boy. Hold this, he said.
Is it okay , Papa ?
Of course it's oka y.
He rolled  the cylinder out into  his hand and blew  the sand from  it and handed  it to the bo y 
and he blew through the  barrel  and he blew  the sand out of the  frame  and then  took the  parts from  the 
boy and refitted  ever ything and cocked  the pistol and  lowered the  hamm er and cocked  it again. He 
aligned  the cylinder for the  true cartridge  to come  up and he let  the ham mer down and put the  pistol  in 
his parka  and stood up. We're oka y, he said. Come  on.
Is the  dark going to catch  us?
I dont  know.
It is, isnt it?
Come  on. We'll  hurry .
The dark did catch  them.  By the time they reached  the headland  path it  was too  dark to see 
anything. They stood in the  wind from  off the  sea with the  gras s hissing all  about  them,  the bo y holding 
on to  his hand. We ju st have to  keep going, the  man  said. Come  on.
I cant  see.
I know. We'll  just take  it one step at  a tim e.
Okay .
Dont let  go.
Okay .
No mat ter what.
No mat ter what.
They went on in the  perfect  blackness,  sightless as the blind.  He held out  one hand before 
him although  there  was nothing  on that  salt heath  to collide  with. The  surf s ounded  more  distant  but he 
took his bearings b y the wind as well and after  tottering  on for the better  part of an hour the y emerg ed 
from  the grass and seaoats and  stood again  on the dr y sand of the  upper beach.  The wind was colder.  
He'd brought the  boy around on the  lee side  of him  when suddenly  the beach  before the m appeared 
shuddering  out of the blackness  and vanished  again.
What  was that,  Papa ?
It's okay . It's lightning.  Come  on.
He slung the  tarp of goods up over his shoulder  and took the  boy's hand and the y went on, 
tramping  in the sand like  parade  horses against tripping  over  some piece  of driftwood or seawrack.  The 
weird  gray  light  broke over the  beach  again. Far awa y a faint  rumble  of thunder muffl ed in the murk.  I 
think  I saw our tracks, he said.
So we're going the  right wa y.
Yes. The right  way.
I'm reall y cold,  Papa.
I know. Pray  for lightning.
They went on. When  the light  broke over  the beach  again  he saw that  the bo y was bent over 
and was whispering to  himself.  He looked for their  tracks  going up the beach  but he could not  see 
them. The wind had picked  up even more  and he was waiting  for the  first spits of rain. If the y got 
caught  out on the  beach  in a rainstor m in the night  they  would be  in trouble.  They turned their  faces 
away from  the wind, holding  on to the  hoods of their  parkas. The sand rattling  against  their  legs and 
racing  away in the dark and  the thunder  cracking  just offshore. The  rain ca me in off the sea  hard and 
slant  and stung their  faces and  he pulled  the bo y against  him.
They stood in the  downpour. How far had the y come?  He waited  for the lightning  but it  was 
tailing  off and when the  next one ca me and then the  next  he knew that  the storm  had taken  out their 
tracks.  They  trudged  on through the  sand at the  upper edge  of the beach,  hoping to  see the shape  of the 
log where they 'd camp ed. Soon the lightning  was all but gone. Then in  a shift in  the wind he heard  a 
distant  faint  patter.  He stopped. Listen,  he said.
What  is it?
Listen.
I dont  hear an ything.
Come  on.
What  is it,  Papa ?
It's the tarp.  It's the rain  falling  on the  tarp.
They went on, stumbl ing through the  sand and the  trash along  the tidelin e. They came  upon 
the tarp al most  at once and  he knelt  and dropped the  bindle  and groped about  for the  rock s he'd 
weighed  the plastic  with and pushed them  beneath  it. He raised up the  tarp and  pulled it  over the m and 
then used the rocks to  hold down the edges inside.  He got the  boy out of his wet coat  and pulled  the 
blankets  over the m, the rain pelting  them  through the  plastic.  He s hucked  off his o wn coat  and held the 
boy close  and soon they  were asleep.
In the  night  the rain  ceased and  he woke and la y listening.  The heav y wash and thud of the  
surf after  the wind had  died. In the  first dull  light  he rose and walked  down the  beach.  The storm  had 
litter ed the shore and he walked  the tidelin e looking  for any thing of use. In the shallows be yond the 
breakwater  an ancient  corpse rising and  falling  among  the driftwood. He wished he  could hide  it from 
the boy but the  boy was right.  What  was there  to hide ? When  he got  back he was awake sitting  in the 
sand watching  him.  He wa s wrapped in  the blankets  and he'd spread their  wet coats over the  dead 
weeds to dr y. He walked  up and eased  himself  down beside  him and they  sat watching  the leaden  sea 
lift and fall be yond the breakers.
They were most  of the  morning  offloading  the ship. He kept  a fire going  and he'd wade 
ashore naked  and shivering  and drop the  towrope and stand in  the warmth  of the blaze  while the boy 
towed  in the seabag  through the  slack swells and dragged  it onto the  beach. The y empt ied out the bag 
and spread  blankets  and clothing  out on the  warm  sand to dr y before  the fire. There  was more  on the 
boat than the y could  carry  and he  thought the y might  stay a few da ys on the  beach  and eat  as much  as 
they could but  it was dangerous. The y slept that  night  in the  sand with the  fire standing  off the cold  and 
their goods scattered  all about  them.  He w oke coughing  and rose and took  a drink of water  and dragged 
more  wood onto the fire,  whole logs of it  that sent up a great  cascade  of sparks. The salt  wood burned 
orange  and blue  in the  fire's heart  and he  sat watching  it a long ti me. Later  he walked up the  beach,  his 
long shadow reaching  over  the sands before him,  sawing  about with  the wind in  the fire.  Coughing. 
Coughing.  He bent over, holding  his knees. Taste  of blood. The  slow s urf crawled  and seethed  in the 
dark and he thought  about his life  but there was no life  to think  about and  after  a while he walked back. 
He got  a can of peaches  from  the bag and opened  it and sat before  the fire  and ate  the peaches  slowly 
with his s poon while  the bo y slept.  The fire flared  in the  wind and sparks raced  away down the  sand. 
He set the  empt y tin between his feet.  Ever y day is a lie,  he said.  But y ou are dying. That  is not a lie.
They carried  their  new stores bundled in  tarps or blankets  down the  beach  and packed 
everything into the cart.  The bo y tried  to carr y too much  and when the y stopped to rest he'd take  part of 
his load  and put it  with his own. The  boat had  shifted  slightl y in the  storm.  He stood looking  at it. The 
boy watched  him.  Are you going back out  there? he said. I think  so. O ne last look  around. I 'm kind of 
scared.  We're oka y. Just keep watch.  We've got  more  than  we can carr y now. I know. I ju st want  to take 
a look. Okay .
He went over  the ship from  bow to stern again.  Stop. Think. He sat  in the  floor of the 
saloon  with his feet  in the  rubber boots propped against  the pedestal  of the table.  It was alread y getting 
dark.  He tried  to reme mber what he  knew about boats. He got  up and went out on deck  again.  The bo y 
was sitting  by the fire.  He stepped down into  the cockpit  and sat on the  bench with his back  against  the 
bulkhead,  his feet  on the  deck almost  at eye level.  He had on nothing  but the  sweater  and the souwe ster 
outfit  over  that but  there  was littl e warmth  to it and he could  not stop shivering.  He wa s about  to get  up 
again  when he realized  that he'd been looking  at the  fasteners in  the bulkhead  on the  far side of the 
cockpit.  There  were four of the m. Stainless  steel.  At one ti me the benches had  been covered  with 
cushions and he  could see the  ties at the  corner where the y'd ripped awa y. At the  bottom  center  of the 
bulkhead  just above  the seat there  was a nylon strap sticking  out, the end of it  doubled  and cros s-
stitched.  He looked  at the fasteners  again. The y were rotar y latches  with wings for yo ur thumb.  He got 
up and  knelt at  the bench and turned  each  one all  the wa y to the left.  They were springloaded  and when 
he had them  undone he took  hold of the strap  at the  bottom  of the board  and pulled  it and the board  slid 
down and ca me free.  Inside under the  deck was a space  that held some  rolled  sails  and w hat looked  to 
be a two man  rubber  raft rolled  and tied  with  bungee cords. A pair of smal l plastic  oars. A box of flares.  
And behind  that was a composi te toolbox,  the opening of the  lid sealed  with  black electr ical tape.  He 
pulled  it free and  found the end of the  tape  and peeled  it off all  the wa y around  and unlatched  the 
chrom e snaps and opened the  box. Inside was a y ellow plastic  flashlight,  an electr ic strobebeacon 
powered b y a drycell, a first-aid  kit. A yellow plastic  EPIRB. And a black  plastic  case  about the  size of 
a book. H e lifted  it out  and unsnapped the  latches  and opened  it. Inside was fitted  an old 37 mil limeter 
bronze  flarepistol.  He lifted  it from  the case in  both hands and turned  it and looked at  it. He depres sed 
the lever  and broke it  open. The  chamber  was emp ty but there were  eight  round s of flares  fitted  in a 
plastic  container,  short and squat and  newlooking. He fitted  the pistol  back in the  case and  closed and 
latched  the lid.
He waded ashore  shivering  and coughing  and wrapped hi mself  in a blanket  and sat  in the 
warm  sand in  front of the  fire with  the boxes beside  him.  The boy crouched  and tried  to put his ar ms 
around  him which at  least  brought a smi le. What  did you find, Papa ? he said.
I found a  first-aid kit.  And I found a flarepistol.
What's that?
I'll show yo u. It's to signal with.
Is that  what y ou went to  look for?
Yes.
How did yo u know it was there?
Well,  I was hoping it  was there. It  was most ly luck.
He opened  the case  and turned  it for the  boy to see.
It's a gun.
A flaregun.  It shoots a thing  up in the  air and it  makes  a big light.
Can I look at it?
Sure y ou can.
The boy lifted  the gun from  the case and held  it. Can yo u shoot somebod y with it? he  said.
You could.
Would  it kill them?
No. But it  might  set the m on fire.
Is that  why  you got it?
Yes.
Because  there's nobod y to signal  to. Is there?
No.
I'd like  to see it.
You mean  shoot it?
Yes.
We can shoot it.
For real?
Sure.
In the  dark ?
Yes. In the dark.
It could be like  a celebration.
Like a celebra tion. Yes.
Can we shoot it  tonight?
Why not?
Is it loaded?
No. But we can  load it.
The boy stood holding  the gun. He pointed  it toward the sea.  Wow, he said.
He got  dressed and  they  set out  down the  beach  carry ing the last  of their  plunder. Where  do 
you think  the people went,  Papa ?
That were on the  ship ?
Yes.
I dont  know.
Do yo u think  they  died?
I dont  know.
But the odds are not  in their  favor.
The man  smiled. The odds are not in  their  favor ?
No. Are they ?
No. Probably  not.
I think  they died.
Maybe they did.
I think  that's what happened  to the m.
They could be  alive  somewhere,  the man  said.  It's possible.  The bo y didnt  answer. They 
went  on. They 'd wrapped  their  feet in sailcloth  and bound them  up in blue  plastic  pampooti es cut from 
a tarp and the y left strange tracks  in their  com ings and going. He thought  about the  boy and his 
concerns  and after  a while  he said: You're probabl y right. I think  they 're probabl y dead.
Because  if the y were alive  we'd be taking  their  stuff.
And we 're not taking  their  stuff.
I know.
Okay .
So how man y people  do y ou think  are alive?
In the  world ?
In the  world. Ye s.
I dont  know. Let's stop and  rest.
Okay .
You're wearing me  out.
Okay .
They sat among  their  bundles.
How long can we sta y here, Papa?
You asked me  that.
I know.
We'll  see.
That means not ver y long.
Probabl y.
The boy poked holes in  the sand with  his fingers until  he had a  circle  of them.  The m an 
watched  him.  I dont know ho w man y people  there  are, he said.  I dont think  there are  very  man y.
I know. He pulled  his blanket  about  his s houlders and  looked out  down the  gray  and barren 
beach.
What  is it? the  man  said.
Nothing.
No. Tell  me.
There  could  be people  alive  somepla ce else.
Whereplac e else?
I dont  know. Any wher e.
You mean  besides on earth?
Yes.
I dont  think so. The y couldnt live  anyplace else.
Not even  if the y could get  there?
No.
The boy looked awa y.
What? the  man  said.
He shook his head. I dont  know what  we're doing,  he said.
The man  started  to answer. But  he didnt.  After a while  he said:  There are  people.  There  are 
people  and we'll  find them.  You'll see.
He fixed  dinner while  the boy play ed in the sand. He had a  spatula  made from  a flattened 
foodtin  and with  it he built  a small  village.  He dredged  a grid of streets.  The man  walked down and 
squatted  and looked  at it. The  boy looked up. The  ocean's going to  get it,  isnt it? he said.
Yes.
That's oka y.
Can you write the alphabet?
I can  write it.
We dont work on yo ur lesson s any more.
I know.
Can you write someth ing in the  sand ?
Maybe we could  write  a letter  to the good gu ys. So if the y came  along the y'd know we were 
here.  We could  write it  up there  where it  wouldnt  get washed away.
What  if the  bad gu ys saw it ?
Yeah.
I shouldnt  have said that.  We could write  them  a letter.
The boy shook his head. That's oka y, he said.
He loaded  the flarepistol  and as soon as it  was dark the y walked out  down the  beach  away 
from  the fire  and he asked the  boy if he  wanted to shoot it.
You shoot it,  Papa. You kno w how to do it.
Okay .
He cocked  the gun and aimed  it out over the  bay and pulled  the trigger.  The flare  arced  up 
into the murk  with a long  whoosh and broke  somewher e out over  the water  in a clouded  light  and hung 
there.  The hot tendrils  of magnesiu m drifted  slowly  down the dark  and the pale  foreshore tide  started  in 
the glare  and slowly  faded. He looked  down at the  boy's upturned  face.
They couldnt  see it  very  far, could  they , Papa?
Who?
Anybody.
No. Not far.
If you wanted  to sho w where  you were.
You mean  like to the  good guy s?
Yes. Or any body that you wanted the m to know where y ou were.
Like who ?
I dont  know.
Like God ?
Yeah. Ma ybe somebod y like that.
In the  morning  he built  a fire  and walked out  on the beach  while  the bo y slept.  He wa s not 
gone  long but he felt  a strange unease  and w hen he got back  the bo y was standing  on the beach 
wrapped in  his blankets  waiting  for him.  He hurried  his steps. By  the ti me he got to hi m he was sitting 
down.
What  is it? he said.  What is it?
I dont  feel good, Papa.
He cupped  the bo y's forehead in  his hand. He wa s burning.  He picked hi m up and carried 
him to the  fire. It's oka y, he said. You're going  to be oka y.
I think  I'm going to  be sick.
It's okay .
He sat with  him in the sand and  held his forehead  while he  bent and  vomited.  He wiped the 
boy's mouth  with  his hand. I 'm sorry, the boy said. Shh. You didnt do an ything wrong.
He carried  him up to the  camp  and covered  him with  blankets.  He tried  to get him  to drink 
some  water. He put more  wood on the fire  and knelt  with his hand on his forehead.  You 'll be all  right 
he said. He wa s terrified.
Dont go awa y, the boy said.
Of course I wont go awa y.
Even  for j ust a litt le while.
No. I'm  right  here.
Okay . Okay , Papa.
He held  him all night,  dozing  off and waking in terror,  feeling  for the  boy's heart.  In the 
morning  he was no better.  He tried  to get  him to drink some  juice but  he would not. He pressed his  
hand  to his forehead,  conjuring  up a coolness that  would not com e. He wiped his white  mouth  while  he 
slept.  I will  do w hat I promised,  he whispered.  No matter what. I will  not send y ou into the darkness 
alone.
He went through  the first- aid kit  from  the boat but  there  was nothing  much  there  of use. 
Aspirin. Bandages  and disinfectant.  Some antibioti cs but the y had a short shelflife.  Still  that was all  he 
had and he helped  the bo y drink  and put one  of the capsules  on his tongue. He was s oaked  in sweat. 
He'd alread y stripped hi m out of the  blankets  and now he unzipped  him out of his coat  and then  out of 
his clothes  and moved  him away  from  the fire. The  boy looked up at  him.  I'm so cold,  he said.
I know. But y ou have  a reall y high  tempera ture and we have to  get y ou cooled  off.
Can I have another  blanket?
Yes. Of cour se.
You wont go away .
No. I wont go away .
He carried  the boy's filth y clothes  into the surf and washed them,  standing shivering  in the 
cold salt water  naked from  the waist  down and  sloshing  them  up and  down and  wringing  them  out. He 
spread the m by the fire on sticks angled  into the  sand and piled  on more  wood and went  and sat b y the 
boy again,  smoothing  his mat ted hair.  In the evening  he opened a can  of soup and  set it  in the  coals and 
he ate and  watched the  darkness come  up. When he woke he  was lying shivering  in the sand and the 
fire had died  almost  to ash and it  was black  night.  He sat up wildl y and reached  for the  boy. Yes, he 
whispered. Yes.
He rekindled  the fire and he got a  cloth  and wet it  and put it  over the  boy's forehead.  The 
wintr y dawn w as com ing and when it  was light  enough  to see he went  into the  wood s beyond the dunes 
and came  back dragging  a great  travois of dead  limbs  and branches and set  about breaking  them up and 
stacking  them near  the fire.  He crushed aspirins in a  cup and dissolved the m in water and put  in some 
sugar and sat  and lifted  the boy's head  and held the  cup while  he drank.
He walked  the beach,  slumped  and coughing. He stood looking  out at  the dark s wells.  He 
was staggering  with fatigue.  He went back  and sat b y the boy and refolded  the cloth  and wiped his face  
and then spread the  cloth  over his forehead.  You have  to sta y near, he said.  You have  to be quick.  So 
you can be with hi m. Hold him  close. Last  day of the  earth.
The boy slept all  day. He kept waking hi m up to drink  the sugarwater,  the bo y's dry throat 
jerking and chugging.  You have to  drink he said. Oka y, wheezed  the boy. He twisted  the cup into  the 
sand beside  him and cushioned the  folded blanket  under  his s weat y head and  covered hi m. Are yo u 
cold? he said.  But the  boy was alread y asleep.
He tried  to sta y awake all  night  but he could  not. He woke endlessl y and sat and slapped  
himse lf or rose to put  wood on the  fire.  He held the  boy and bent  to hear the  labored  suck of air. His 
hand  on the thin  and laddered  ribs. He walked  out on the beach  to the edge  of the light  and stood with 
his clenched  fists on top of his skull and  fell to  his knees sobbing in rage.
It rained briefl y in the night,  a light  patter  on the  tarp.  He pulled  it over the m and turned 
and lay holding  the child,  watching  the blue fla mes through the  plastic.  He fell  into a dream less sleep.
When  he woke again  he hardl y knew w here he was. The fire  had died,  the rain  had ceased. 
He threw back  the tarp and pushed himse lf up on his elbows. Gray  daylight. The boy was watching 
him. Papa, he said.
Yes. I 'm right here.
Can I have a drink  of water ?
Yes. Ye s, of course  you can. Ho w are  you feeling?
I feel  kind of weird.
Are y ou hungr y?
I'm just reall y thirsty .
Let me get the  water.
He pushed back  the blankets  and rose and walked  out past  the dead  fire and got  the bo y's 
cup and filled  it out of the  plastic  water jug and came  back and  knelt  and held the  cup for him.  You 're 
going  to be oka y, he said. The  boy drank. He nodded and looked  at his father.  Then  he drank the  rest of 
the water. More, he  said.
He built  a fire  and propped  the bo y's wet clothes up and  brought him  a can of apple  juice. 
Do yo u reme mber anything? he said.
About what?
About being  sick.
I rem ember shooting  the flaregun.
Do yo u reme mber getting  the stuff from  the boat?
He sat sipping  the juice.  He looked  up. I'm  not a  retard, he  said.
I know.
I had  some weird dreams.
What  about?
I dont  want to tell  you.
That's oka y. I want yo u to brush yo ur teeth.
With  real toothpaste.
Yes.
Okay .
He checked  all the foodtins but he  could find  nothing suspect. He threw  out a few that 
looked  prett y rusty. They  sat that evening b y the fire and the bo y drank  hot soup and the m an turned  his 
steaming  clothes  on the  sticks and sat  watching hi m until  the boy becam e embarr assed.  Stop watching 
me, Papa, he said.
Okay .
But he didnt.
In two da y's time they were walking the  beach  as far as the headland  and back, trudging 
along  in their  plastic  bootees.  They  ate huge m eals and he put up a sailcloth  leanto  with ropes and  poles 
against  the wind. They  pruned  down their  stores to a  manageab le load for the  cart and he thought  they 
migh t leave  in two more  days. Then  coming  back to  the camp  late in the  day he saw bootprints  in the 
sand. He stopped and  stood looking down the  beach. Oh Christ, he  said. Oh Christ.
What  is it,  Papa ?
He pulled  the pistol from  his belt.  Come  on he said.  Hurry.
The tarp was gone. Their  blankets.  The waterbottle  and their  campsite  store of food. The 
sailcloth  was blown up into  the dunes. Their shoes were gone. He ran  up through the  swale  of seaoats 
where he'd left  the cart but the  cart was gone. Ever ything. You stupid ass, he said.  You stupid  ass.
The boy was standing  there  wide-e yed. What happened,  Papa?
They took ever ything. Come  on.
The boy looked up. He was beginning  to cr y.
Stay with me,  the man  said. Stay  right  with me.
He could  see the  tracks of the  cart where  they  sloughed up through  the loose  sand. 
Bootprints.  How man y? He lost the  track  on the better  ground bey ond the bracken  and then  picked  it up 
again.  When  they  got to the road  he stopped the  boy with his hand. The  road was exposed to the  wind 
from  the sea and  it was blown free of ash save for patches  here  and there.  Dont step in the  road, he said. 
And stop cry ing. We need  to get all  the sand off of our feet.  Here. Sit down.
He untied  the wrappings  and shook them  out and tied  them  back again.  I want y ou to help, 
he said. We're looking  for sand. Sand in the  road. Even ju st a little  bit. To see which wa y they went. 
Okay ?
Okay .
They set off down the blacktop  in opposite directions.  He'd not gone  far before the  boy 
called  out. Here it  is, Papa. The y went this wa y. When  he got there  the boy was crouched  in the  road. 
Right  here, he  said. It was a half  teaspoon of beachsand  tilted  from  somewhere  in the understructure  of 
the grocery  cart.  The man  stood and  looked out  down the  road. Good w ork, he  said. Let's go.
They set off at  a jogtrot.  A pace he  thought he'd be able  to keep up but he  couldnt.  He had 
to stop, leaning  over and coughing.  He looked up at  the boy, wheezing.  We'll  have  to walk, he said.  If 
they hear us the y'll hide b y the side of the  road. Come  on.
How man y are there,  Papa ?
I dont  know. Ma ybe just one.
Are we going to  kill them?
I dont  know.
They went on. It was alread y late in the da y and it was another  hour and deep  into the  long 
dusk before the y overtook  the thief,  bent  over the  loaded cart,  trundling  down the road  before the m. 
When  he looked  back and saw them  he tried  to run with  the cart  but it  was u seless  and finall y he 
stopped  and stood behind the  cart holding a  butcher  knife. When  he sa w the  pistol  he stepped back  but 
he didnt drop the  knife.
Get away from  the cart, the  man  said.
He looked  at the m. He looked  at the  boy. He wa s an outcast  from  one of the  comm unes and 
the fingers of his right  hand had been  cut awa y. He tried  to hide it  behind  him.  A sort of fleshy  spatula. 
The cart was piled  high.  He'd taken  every thing.
Get away from  the cart and  put down the knife.
He looked  around. As  if there  might  be help somewhere.  Scrawny , sullen,  bearded,  filth y. 
His old plastic  coat  held  together  with tape.  The pistol was a double  action  but the  man  cocked it 
anyway. Two loud  clicks.  Otherwise only  their  breathing  in the silence  of the  salt moor land.  They 
could  smell  him in his stinking rags. If y ou dont  put down the knife  and get  away  from  the cart,  the 
man said, I'm  going to  blow yo ur brains out. The  thief  looked at  the child and  what he saw wa s ver y 
sobering  to him.  He laid  the knife  on top of the blankets  and backed awa y and stood.
Back.  More.
He stepped  back again.
Papa? the bo y said.
Be quiet.
He kept  his ey es on the  thief. Goddamn  you, he said.
Papa  please dont  kill the man.
The thief's e yes swung wildly . The boy was crying.
Come  on, man.  I done  what you said. Listen  to the  boy.
Take  your clothes  off.
What?
Take  them off. Ever y goddamned  stitch.
Come  on. Dont do this.
I'll kill you where you stand.
Dont do this,  man.
I wont tell  you again.
All right. All  right. Just take  it eas y.
He stripped  slowly and piled  his vile  rags in the  road.
The shoe s.
Come  on, man.
The shoe s.
The thief  looked at  the boy. The bo y had turned  away  and put  his hands over his ears.  
Okay , he said.  Okay. He s at naked in  the road and  began to  unlace  the rotting  pieces  of leather  laced  to 
his feet.  Then  he stood up, holding  them  in one hand.
Put the m in the cart.
He stepped  forward  and placed  the shoes on top of the  blankets  and stepped  back. Standing 
there  raw and naked,  filth y, starving. Covering  himself  with his hand. He was alread y shivering.
Put the  clothes  in.
He bent  and scooped up the  rags in his arms  and piled the m on top  of the shoes. He stood  
there  holding  himself.  Dont do this, man.
You didnt  mind  doing  it to us.
I'm begging  you.
Papa,  the bo y said.
Come  on. Listen  to the  kid.
You tried  to kill  us.
I'm starving,  man.  You'd have done the  same.
You took ever ything.
Come  on, man.  I'll die.
I'm going  to leave  you the way you left us.
Come  on. I 'm begging y ou.
He pulled  the cart back and swung it around  and put the  pistol on top  and looked  at the  boy. 
Let's go, he  said. And they  set out  along the  road south, with  the bo y crying and looking  back at  the 
nude  and slatlike  creature  standing there  in the  road shivering  and hugging hi mself.  Oh Papa, he 
sobbed.
Stop it.
I cant  stop it.
What  do y ou think  would have happened  to us if we hadnt  caught  him?  Just stop it.
I'm trying.
When  they  got to the  curve in the  road the  man  was still  standing  there. There  was no place 
for him  to go. The  boy kept looking  back  and when he could  no longer see hi m he stopped  and then he 
just sat down in the road  sobbing.  The man  pulled  up and stood looking  at him.  He dug their  shoes out 
of the  cart and sat down and began  to take  the wrappings off the  boy's feet.  You have to stop cr ying, he 
said.
I cant.
He put  on their shoes and then  stood and walked  back up the  road but he  couldnt see  the 
thief.  He cam e back  and stood over the  boy. He's gone, he said.  Come  on.
He's not  gone, the  boy said. He looked up. His face  streaked  with soot. He 's not.
What  do y ou want to  do?
Just help  him,  Papa. Just help  him.
The man  looked  back  up the road.
He was j ust hungr y, Papa. He's going to die.
He's going  to die  anyway.
He's so scared,  Papa.
The man  squatted  and looked at  him.  I'm scared,  he said. Do yo u understand? I 'm scared.
The boy didnt  answer. He ju st sat there  with his head  bowed, sobbing.
You're not the  one who has to worry  about ever ything.
The boy said someth ing but he  couldnt  under stand  him.  What? he said.
He looked  up, his wet and grim y face.  Yes I am,  he said. I am  the one.
They wheeled  the tottering  cart back up the  road and stood there  in the  cold  and the 
gathering  dark  and called  but no one cam e.
He's afraid  to answer, Papa.
Is this where we stopped?
I dont  know. I think  so.
They went up the  road calling  out in the  empt y dusk, their  voices  lost over the  darkening 
shorelands. The y stopped and  stood with their  hands cupped to  their mou ths, hallooing  mind lessly into 
the waste. Finall y he piled  the man's  shoes and clothes  in the road. He put  a rock on top  of them.  We 
have  to go, he said.  We have  to go.
They made  a dry  camp  with no fire.  He s orted  out cans for their  supper and warmed  them 
over the gas burner and  they  ate and the  boy said nothing.  The man  tried  to see his face  in the  blue  light 
from  the burner. I wasnt going  to kill  him,  he said. But  the bo y didnt  answer. They  rolled  themselves  in 
the blankets  and la y there in  the dark.  He thought  he could  hear the  sea but  perhaps it was j ust the  wind. 
He could  tell by his breathing  that the boy was awake  and after  a while  the bo y said:  But we did kill 
him.
In the  morning  they  ate and set out.  The cart  was s o loaded  it was hard to push and one of  
the wheels was giving out.  The road bent  its wa y along  the coast,  dead sheaves  of saltgrass 
overhanging  the pavemen t. The leadcolored  sea shifting  in the distance.  The silence.  He w oke that 
night  with the  dull carbon light  of the  cros sing moon  beyond the murk  making  the shapes of the  trees 
almost  visible  and he  turned awa y coughing.  Smell  of rain  out there.  The bo y was awake. You have to  
talk to me, he said.
I'm trying.
I'm sorry  I woke yo u.
It's okay .
He got  up and walked out  to the  road. The black  shape of it  running from  dark to dark. 
Then  a distant  low rumble.  Not thunder.  You could  feel it under  your feet. A sound without cognate  
and so without  description.  Someth ing imponder able shifting  out there  in the  dark. The earth  itself 
contract ing with the  cold.  It did not  come  again.  What  time of year? What  age the  child? He walked  out 
into the road and stood. The  silence.  The salitter  drying from  the earth.  The mudst ained  shapes of 
flooded  cities  burned to  the waterline.  At a cros sroads a  ground set with dolm en stones where the 
spoken bones of oracles  lay moldering.  No sound but the  wind. What  will y ou say? A living  man  spoke 
these  lines? He s harpened  a quill  with  his small  pen knife to  scribe these  things in sloe  or lampbl ack? 
At some  reckonable  and entabled  mom ent? He is coming  to steal  my eyes. To seal m y mouth  with  dirt.
He went through  the cans  again one  by one, holding  them  in his hand and squeezing  them 
like a man checking  for ripeness at  a fruitstand.  He sorted out  two he thought questionable  and packed 
away the rest and  packed the  cart and the y set out upon the  road again.  In three  days they  cam e to a 
smal l port town and they  hid the cart  in a garage behind  a house and piled  old boxes over it  and then sat 
in the house to see  if any one would co me. No one did.  He looked  through the  cabinets  but there  was 
nothing  there.  He needed vita min D for the bo y or he  was going to  get rickets.  He stood at  the sink and 
looked  out down the drivewa y. Light  the color of wash water  congealing  in the  dirty  panes of glass. The  
boy sat slumped  at the table  with  his head in  his arms.
They walked through  the town and  down to  the docks. The y saw no one. He had  the pistol 
in the pocket  of his coat  and he carried  the flaregun  in his hand. The y walked  out on the pier,  the rough 
boards dark with  tar and  fastened down with spikes to  the ti mbers  underneath.  Wooden  bollards. Faint 
smel l of salt  and creosote  coming  in off the  bay. On the far shore a  row of warehouses and the  shape  of 
a tanker red  with rust. A tall  gantry  crane  against  the sullen  sky. There's no one here,  he said. The  boy 
didnt  answer.
They wheeled  the cart  through the  back streets  and across the  railroad  tracks and  came  into 
the main  road again  at the  far edge  of the town. As they  passed the  last of the  sad w ooden  buildings 
someth ing whistled  past his head  and clattered  off the street  and broke  up against  the wall  of the block 
building  on the  other side.  He grabbed the  boy and fell  on top of him  and grabbed  the cart  to pull  it to 
them. It tipped and  fell over spilling  the tarp  and blankets  into the street.  In an upper  windo w of the 
house he could  see a m an drawing a  bow on the m and he  pushed the bo y's head  down and tried  to cover 
him with his bod y. He heard  the dull  thwang of the  bowstring  and felt  a sharp hot pain  in his leg.  Oh 
you bastard,  he said. You bastard. He clawed  the blankets  to one side and  lunged and grabbed  the 
flaregun  and raised  up and cocked  it and rested his arm  on the side  of the cart.  The boy was clinging  to 
him. When the  man  stepped back  into the  frame  of the window to draw the  bow again  he fired. The 
flare went rocketing  up toward the window in a  long white  arc and then  they  could  hear  the man 
screa ming.  He grabbed  the bo y and pushed him down and dragged  the blankets  over the  top of him. 
Dont move,  he said. Dont move  and dont  look. He pulled  the blankets  out into  the street  looking for the 
case for the flarepistol.  It finall y slid out of the  cart and  he snatched  it up and  opened it  and took out  the 
shells  and reloaded  the pistol  and breeched  it shut and put  the rest of the  loads in  his pocket. Sta y just 
like you are, he whispered. He patted  the boy through the  blankets  and ro se and ran li mping  acros s the 
street.
He entered  the house through the  back door with  the flare- gun leveled  at his waist. The 
house was stripped out  to the  wall studs. He stepped through  into the  livingroom  and stood at  the stair 
landing.  He listened  for move ment in the  upper rooms.  He looked out  the front  windo w to where the 
cart lay in the  street and  then he  went up the stairs.
A woman  was sitting  in the  corner holding  the m an. She'd taken off her  coat  to cover hi m. 
As soon as she saw him  she began  to curse him.  The flare had  burned out in  the floor leaving  a patch  of 
white  ash and there  was a faint  smell  of burnt wood in the room.  He cros sed the room  and looked out 
the window. The woman's  eyes followed hi m. Scrawny , lank  gray  hair.
Who  else is up here?
She didnt  answer. He stepped past her  and went through  the rooms.  His leg was bleeding  
badly. He could feel  his trousers sticking  to the  skin. He went back  into the  front room.  Where's the 
bow? he said.
I dont  have it.
Where  is it?
I dont  know.
They left you here, didnt  they?
I left  myself here.
He turned  and went li mping  down the  stairs and he  opened the  front door and went  out into 
the street  backward watching  the house. When  he got  to the cart  he pulled it  upright  and piled  their 
things  back in. Sta y close, he  whispered.  Stay  close.
They put up in  a store building  at the end of the  town. He wheeled  the cart  through and  into 
a room  at the  rear and s hut the door and  pushed the cart  against  it sidewa ys. He dug out  the burner and 
the tank of gas and  lit the burner and  set it  in the  floor and then  he unbuckled  his belt  and took off the 
bloodstained  trousers. The  boy watched.  The arrow had cut  a gash ju st above his knee  about three 
inches  long. It was still  bleeding  and his whole  upper leg  was discolored  and he could  see that  the cut 
was deep. Some  homem ade broadhead  beaten  out of strapiron,  an old spoon, God kno ws what. He 
looked  at the  boy. See if  you can find the  first-aid  kit, he said.
The boy didnt  move.
Get the first-aid  kit, damn  it. Dont j ust sit  there.
He jumped  up and went  to the  door and began digging  under the  tarp and  the blankets  piled 
in the cart.  He cam e back  with the kit  and gave  it to the m an and the  man  took  it without  com ment and 
set it in the concrete  floor  in front of hi m and unsnapped  the catches  and opened  it. He reached  and 
turned  up the burner  for the light.  Bring  me the water bottle,  he said. The  boy brought the  bottle  and the 
man unscrewed the  lid and poured  water over the  wound and held  it shut between  his fingers while  he 
wiped  away the blood.  He s wabbed the  wound with disinfectant  and opened a  plastic  envelope  with his 
teeth  and took out a  small  hooked s uture  needle  and a  coil of silk thread  and sat holding  the silk  to the 
light while  he threaded  it through the  needle's e ye. He took a cla mp from  the kit  and caught  the needle 
in the ja ws and locked  them and set  about suturing  the wound. He w orked  quickl y and he took no great  
pains  about it.  The bo y was crouching  in the  floor. He looked  at him  and he bent  to the  sutures  again. 
You dont have  to watch,  he said.
Is it okay ?
Yeah. It's oka y.
Does it  hurt?
Yes. It hurts.
He ran the  knot down the  thread and  pulled  it taut  and cut  off the  silk with the  scissors from 
the kit and looked at  the boy. The bo y was looking at  what he'd done.
I'm sorry  I yelled at you.
He looked  up. That's okay , Papa.
Let's start  over.
Okay .
In the  morning  it was raining  and a hard wind was rattling  the glass at  the rear  of the 
building.  He stood looking  out. A steel  dock half  collapsed  and submerged  in the ba y. The wheelhouses 
of sunken fishingboats  standing out  of the gra y chop. N othing  moving  out there.  Any thing that could 
move  had long been  blown away . His leg was throbbing  and he pulled  away  the dres sing and 
disinfected  the wound and looked  at it.  The flesh s wollen  and discolored  in the truss of the black  
stitching.  He dressed it  and pulled  his bloodstiffened  trousers on.
They spent the  day there,  sitting  among  the boxes and crates.  You have to talk  to me, he 
said.
I'm talking.
Are y ou sure ?
I'm talking  now.
Do yo u want me  to tell  you a story?
No.
Why not?
The boy looked at  him and looked  away.
Why not?
Those  stories are not  true.
They dont have  to be true.  They 're stories.
Yes. But in  the stories we're alwa ys helping  people  and we dont  help people.
Why dont yo u tell me a story ?
I dont  want to.
Okay .
I dont  have an y stories  to tell.
You could  tell me a story  about y ourself.
You alread y know all  the stories about  me. You were there.
You have stories  inside that  I dont  know about.
You mean  like dreams?
Like drea ms. Or just things that  you think  about.
Yeah, but  stories are  supposed to be  happy .
They dont have  to be.
You alway s tell happ y stories.
You dont have  any happ y ones?
They're more  like real life.
But my stories are  not.
Your stories are  not. No.
The man  watched  him.  Real  life is prett y bad?
What  do y ou think?
Well,  I think  we're still  here. A lot  of bad things have  happened  but we 're still here.
Yeah.
You dont think  that's so great.
It's okay .
They'd pulled  a worktable  up to  the windows and spread out their  blankets  and the  boy was 
lying there  on his stomach  looking out  acros s the bay. The man  sat with his leg  stretched  out. On the 
blanket  between  them were the  two pistols and the  box of flares.  After a while  the man  said: I think  it's 
pretty good. It's a prett y good story . It counts  for s omething.
It's okay , Papa. I ju st want to have  a little  quiet  time.
What  about  dreams? You used to tell  me drea ms sometimes.
I dont  want to talk  about  anything.
Okay .
I dont  have good dreams  anyway. They 're alwa ys about  something  bad happening.  You 
said that was oka y because  good dreams  are not a  good sign.
Maybe. I dont  know.
When  you wake up coughing  you walk out along  the road  or somewhere  but I can  still hear 
you coughing.
I'm sorry .
One ti me I heard  you crying.
I know.
So if I shouldnt  cry you shouldnt cr y either.
Okay .
Is yo ur leg going to get  better?
Yes.
You're not ju st saying that.
No.
Because  it looks reall y hurt.
It's not that  bad.
The man  was tr ying to kill  us. Wasnt he.
Yes. He wa s.
Did y ou kill him?
No.
Is that  the truth?
Yes.
Okay .
Is that  all right?
Yes.
I thought  you didnt  want to talk?
I dont.
They left two day s later,  the m an limping  along  behind  the cart  and the  boy keeping  close 
to his side until  they  cleared  the outskirts  of the town. The  road ran along  the flat gra y coast and there 
were drifts  of sand in the  road that  the winds had left  there.  It mad e for heav y going and the y had to 
shovel  their wa y in places with  a plank  they  carried  in the lower rack  of the  cart. The y walked out 
down the  beach and  sat in the  lee of the dunes and studied  the m ap. They'd brought  the burner with 
them and the y heated  water  and made  tea and sat wrapped in  their blankets  against  the wind. 
Down shore  the weathered  timbers  of an ancient  ship. Gray and sand scrubbed  beams,  old hand-turned 
scarpbolts.  The pitted  iron hardware deep  lilac  in color, smel tered  in some  bloom ery in Cadiz or Bristol 
and beaten  out on a blackened  anvil, good to  last three  hundred y ears against the  sea. The  following 
day they  passed through the  boarded ruins of a  seaside resort and  took the road  inland  through a pine 
wood, the  long straight  blacktop  drifted  in pineneedles,  the wind in the  dark trees.
He sat in  the road  at noon in  the best light  there  would be and  snipped  the sutures with  the 
scissors and put the  scissors back in  the kit  and took  out the  clamp.  Then he  set about pulling  the small 
black  threads  from  his skin, pressing down with the flat  of his thu mb. The boy sat in the  road watching. 
The man  fastened  the clamp  over the  ends of the threads  and pulled  them  out one b y one.  Small  pin-lets 
of blood.  When he was done he put  away  the clamp  and taped  gauze  over the wound and then  stood 
and pulled his trousers up and  handed the  kit to  the bo y to put away .
That hurt,  didnt it? the  boy said.
Yes. It did.
Are y ou real brave?
Just mediu m.
What's the  bravest thing  you ever  did?
He spat into  the road a blood y phlegm.  Getting  up this  morning,  he said.
Reall y?
No. Dont listen  to me.  Come  on, let's  go.
In the  evening  the murk y shape  of another  coastal  city, the cluster  of tall  buildings  vaguel y 
askew. He thought  the iron  armatur es had softened in  the heat  and then  reset  again to  leave  the 
buildings  standing  out of true. The  melted windo w glass hung frozen  down the  walls like  icing  on a 
cake.  They went on. In the nights  sometimes now he 'd wake  in the  black and  freezing  waste out of 
softly colored worlds of human  love, the  song s of birds, the  sun.
He leaned  his forehead  on his arms  crossed upon the  bar handle  of the cart  and coughed.  He 
spat a bloody  drool. More and  more  he had  to stop and rest.  The bo y watched  him.  In some other world 
the child  would alread y have begun  to vacate  him from  his life.  But he had no life  other.  He knew the 
boy lay awake in  the night  and listened  to hear if he  were breathing.
The days sloughed past uncounted  and uncalendared.  Along the  interstate  in the distance 
long lines of charred  and rusting  cars. The raw rims  of the wheels sitting  in a stiff gra y sludge  of melt ed 
rubber,  in blackened  rings of wire. The  incinerat e corpses shrunk to the size  of a child  and propped  on 
the bare springs of the  seats. Ten thousand  dreams  ensepulchred  within  their  crozzled  hearts.  They 
went  on.
Treading  the dead  world under like  rats on a wheel.  The nights  dead still  and deader  black. 
So cold.  They  talked  hardl y at all. He coughed  all the ti me and the bo y watched  him spitting  blood. 
Slump ing along.  Filthy , ragged,  hopeless. He'd stop and lean  on the cart  and the  boy would go on and 
then stop and look back  and he would raise  his weeping e yes and see him  standing there  in the  road 
looking  back at  him from  some  unim aginab le future,  glowing in  that waste like a tabernacle.
The road crossed a dried  slough w here pipes of ice  stood out of the  frozen mud  like 
forma tions  in a cave.  The rema ins of an old  fire b y the side of the  road. Bey ond that a long  concrete 
causewa y. A dead  swamp.  Dead trees standing  out of the  gray  water  trailing  gray and relic  hagmoss. 
The silky  spills  of ash against  the curbing. He stood leaning  on the gritt y concrete  rail. Perhaps in  the 
world's de struction  it would be  possible  at last  to see  how it was made. Oceans, moun tains.  The 
ponderous counterspecta cle of things ceasing  to be. The  sweeping  waste, h ydropti c and coldl y secular. 
The silence.
They'd begun  to come  upon dead windfalls  of pinetrees,  great  swaths of ruin  cut through 
the country side. The wreckage  of buildings  strewn over the landscape  and skeins  of wire from  the 
roadside  poles garbled  like knitting.  The road was littered  with  debris and it  was work to get  the cart 
through.  Finall y they  just sat by the side  of the road and  stared at  what was before the m. Roofs of 
houses, the trunks of trees.  A boat. The  open sky  beyond where in the  distance  the sullen  sea lagged 
and shifted.
They sorted through the  wreckage  strewn along the  road and in  the end he  came  up with a 
canvas  bag that  he could  tote over his shoulder and a  small  suitcase  for the  boy. They  packed  their 
blankets  and the  tarp and w hat was left  of the canned  goods and set out again  with  their knapsacks  and 
their bags leaving  the cart behind. Cla mbering  through the  ruins. Slo w going.  He had to stop and  rest. 
He sat in  a roadside  sofa, the  cushions bloated  in the  damp.  Bent over, coughing.  He pulled  the 
bloodstained  mask from  his face  and got up and  rinsed it  in the ditch  and wrung it  out and  then ju st 
stood there  in the  road. His breath  pluming  white. Winter  was alread y upon the m. He turned  and looked 
at the bo y. Standing  with his suitcase  like an orphan  waiting  for a bu s.
In two da y's time they came  to a broad  tidal  river where  the bridge  lay collapsed  in the slow 
moving  water. The y sat on the  broken abut ment  of the road and  watched the  river  backing upon itself  
and coiling  over the  iron trellis- work. He looked across the  water to  the countr y beyond.
What  are we going to do Papa? he said. Well  what  are we, said the  boy.
They walked out  the long  spit of tidal  mud  where a small  boat la y half buried and stood 
there  looking  at it.  It was altogether  derelict.  There  was rain in  the wind. The y trudged  up the beach 
with their  baggage looking  for shelter  but the y found none. He scuffled together  a pile  of the 
bonecolored  wood that  lay along the  shore and got a fire  going and  they  sat in  the dunes with  the tarp 
over them  and watched the  cold  rain com ing in from  the north.  It fell  harder, di mpling  the sand. The 
fire steamed  and the  smoke  swung in  slow coils  and the  boy curled  up under the pattering  tarp and s oon 
he was asleep.  The m an pulled  the plastic  over himself  in a hood and  watched the  gray sea shrouded 
away out there  in the  rain and watched  the surf break  along the  shore and draw awa y again  over the 
dark and stippled  sand.
The next da y they  headed  inland.  A vast low s wale  where ferns and h ydrange as and wild 
orchids  lived on in  ashen effigies  which the wind had not y et reached.  Their  progres s was a torture.  In 
two da ys when the y came  out upon a road  he set the  bag down and sat bent  over with his arms  crossed 
at his chest and  coughed till  he could cough  no more.  Two more  days and they  may have  traveled  ten 
miles. They cros sed the river  and a short wa ys on they  came to a crossroads. D owncountr y a storm  had 
passed over the  isthmus  and leveled  the dead black  trees from  east to  west like  weeds in  the floor of a 
strea m. Here the y camped  and when he la y down he knew that  he could  go no further and that  this was 
the place  where he would die.  The boy sat watching  him,  his e yes welling.  Oh Papa, he  said.
He watched  him come  through  the grass and kneel  with the  cup of water  he'd fetched. 
There  was light  all about him.  He took the  cup and drank and  lay back.  They  had for food a single tin  
of peaches  but he  made  the boy eat it and  he would not take  any. I cant,  he said.  It's all right.
I'll save your half.
Okay . You save it  until  tomorrow.
He took  the cup and  moved  away and when he moved  the light  moved  with him.  He'd 
wanted  to tr y and make  a tent  out of the  tarp but  the man  would not let  him.  He s aid that he didnt  want 
anything covering  him.  He lay  watching  the boy at the  fire. He wanted  to be able  to see. Look around 
you, he said. There  is no prophet in  the earth's long  chronicle  who 's not honored here  toda y. Whatever 
form  you spoke  of yo u were right.
The boy thought  he smelled  wet ash on the  wind. He went up the road  and come  dragging 
back  a piece  of pl ywood from  the roadside  trash and he drove  sticks into the  ground with a  rock and 
made of the  plywood  a ricket y leanto  but in the  end it didnt  rain.  He left  the flarepistol  and took the 
revolver  with hi m and he  scoured the countr yside for an ything to eat  but he came  back e mptyhanded. 
The man  took  his hand, wheezing.  You need  to go on, he  said. I cant  go with yo u. You need to keep 
going.  You dont  know what  might  be do wn the  road. We  were alway s luck y. You'll be lucky  again. 
You'll see. Just go. It's all  right.
I cant.
It's all  right. This  has been a long  time coming.  Now it's here.  Keep going south. Do  
everything the way  we did it.
You're going to be  okay , Papa. You have to.
No I'm  not. Keep the  gun with y ou at all times. You need  to find  the good gu ys but y ou 
cant take  any chances.  No chances. Do yo u hear?
I want  to be with y ou.
You cant.
Please.
You cant.  You have  to carr y the fire.
I dont  know how to.
Yes yo u do.
Is it real? The fire?
Yes it  is.
Where  is it? I dont know where it  is.
Yes yo u do. It' s inside  you. It was alway s there.  I can see  it.
Just take  me with  you. Please.
I cant.
Please,  Papa.
I cant.  I cant  hold m y son dead  in m y arms. I thought I could  but I cant.
You said y ou wouldnt  ever leave  me.
I know. I'm  sorry . You have  my whole heart.  You alway s did. You're the best  guy. You 
alwa ys were.  If I'm not here y ou can still talk to me.  You can  talk to me  and I'll talk  to you. You'll see.
Will I hear y ou?
Yes. You will. You have to  make  it like  talk that you imag ine. And y ou'll hear  me. You 
have  to practice.  Just dont  give up. Oka y?
Okay .
Okay .
I'm reall y scared  Papa.
I know. But y ou'll be okay . You 're going to be luck y. I know yo u are. I've got to  stop 
talking.  I'm going  to start  coughing again.
It's okay , Papa. You dont have  to talk.  It's okay .
He went down the  road as far as he dared  and then  he came  back. His father  was a sleep.  He 
sat with him  under the pl ywood and watched hi m. He closed his e yes and talked  to hi m and he  kept his 
eyes closed  and listened.  Then  he tried  again.
He woke in the  darkness, coughing softl y. He lay  listening.  The bo y sat b y the lire wrapped 
in a blanket  watching  him.  Drip of w ater. A fading light.  Old drea ms encroached  upon the  waking 
world. The  dripping  was in the  cave.  The light  was a candle  which  the bo y bore in  a ringstick  of beaten 
copper.  The wax spattered  on the  stones. Tracks of unknown creatures  in the  mortif ied loess. In that 
cold corridor the y had reached  the point  of no return which was measured  from  the first solel y by the 
light they carried  with the m.
Do yo u reme mber that little boy, Papa?
Yes. I reme mber him.
Do yo u think  that he's all right  that little  boy?
Oh ye s. I think  he's all right.
Do yo u think  he wa s lost?
No. I dont think  he was lost.
I'm scared  that he wa s lost.
I think  he's all right.
But who will  find him  if he's lost ? Who  will find  the littl e boy?
Goodness will find  the littl e boy. It alwa ys has. It will again.
He slept  close to  his father that  night  and held  him but when he woke in the  morning  his 
father  was cold and  stiff. He sat there  a long ti me weeping and then  he got  up and walked out  through 
the wood s to the road. When  he cam e back  he knelt  beside his father  and held  his cold  hand and said 
his nam e over and  over again.
He sta yed three  days and then he  walked  out to  the road  and he looked  down the  road and 
he looked back  the wa y they had come.  Someone  was coming.  He started  to turn and  go back into  the 
woods but he didnt.  He j ust stood in the  road and  waited,  the pistol  in his hand. He'd piled  all the 
blankets  on his father  and he was cold  and he was hungry . The man  that hove into  view and stood there  
looking  at him was dres sed in a gra y and yellow ski parka.  He carried  a shotgun upside down over his  
shoulder  on a braided  leather  lanyard and he wore a  nylon bandolier  filled  with  shells  for the gun. A 
veteran  of old  skirmishes,  bearded,  scarred across his cheek  and the  bone stoven and the  one e ye 
wandering.  When he  spoke his mou th worked imperf ectly, and when he  smiled.
Where's the  man  you were  with ?
He died.
Was that  your father?
Yes. He wa s my papa.
I'm sorry .
I dont  know what  to do.
I think  you should come  with me.
Are y ou one of the  good gu ys?
The man  pulled  back  the hood from  his face.  His hair  was long  and mat ted. He looked  at 
the sky. As if there  were an ything there  to be  seen. He looked at  the bo y. Yeah,  he said. I'm  one of the 
good gu ys. Why  dont  you put the pistol  away?
I'm not supposed to let  anyone take  the pistol.  No matt er what.
I dont  want yo ur pistol.  I just dont want y ou pointing  it at me.
Okay .
Where's y our stuff?
We dont have  much  stuff.
Have y ou got a sleeping  bag?
No.
What  have  you got? Some  blankets?
My papa's w rapped  in the m.
Show me.
The boy didnt  move.  The man  watched  him.  He s quatted  on one  knee and swung the  
shotgun up from  under his arm  and stood it in  the road  and leaned  on the fore- stock. The  shotgun  shells 
in the loops of the  bandolier  were handloaded  and the  ends sealed  with candlewax.  He smell ed of 
woodsmoke.  Look,  he said. You got two choices  here. There  was s ome discussion about whether  to 
even  come  after y ou at all. You can sta y here  with y our papa  and die  or yo u can go with me.  If yo u stay 
you need  to keep  out of the  road. I dont know ho w you made it this far.  But yo u should go with me.  
You'll be all  right.
How do I kno w you're one of the  good guy s?
You dont. You'll have  to take  a shot.
Are y ou carrying the fire?
Am I what?
Carrying the fire.
You're kind of weirded  out, arent  you?
No.
Just a littl e.
Yeah.
That's oka y.
So are  you?
What,  carrying the fire?
Yes.
Yeah. We  are.
Do yo u have an y kids ?
We do.
Do yo u have a  little  boy?
We have a  little  boy and we have a litt le girl.
How old is he ?
He's about  your age.  Maybe a little  older.
And yo u didnt  eat the m.
No.
You dont eat  people.
No. We dont  eat people.
And I can go with  you?
Yes. You can.
Okay  then.
Okay .
They went into  the woods and the  man  squatted  and looked  at the  gray  and wasted  figure 
under  the tilted  sheet of pl ywood. Are these  all the blankets  you have?
Yes.
Is that  your suitcase?
Yes.
He stood. He looked  at the  boy. Why  dont y ou go back  out to  the road and  wait for me.  I'll 
bring  the blankets  and ever ything.
What  about  my papa?
What  about  him.
We cant  just leave  him here.
Yes we can.
I dont  want people  to see him.
There's no one  to see him.
Can I cover him  with leaves?
The wind will  blow them  away.
Could  we cover him  with one of the  blankets?
Yes. I 'll do it.  Go on now.
Okay .
He waited  in the  road and when the  man  came  out of the  woods he was carry ing the 
suitcase  and he  had the blankets  over his shoulder.  He s orted  through the m and handed  one to the  boy. 
Here, he  said. Wrap this  around y ou. You 're cold. The  boy tried  to hand him  the pistol  but he  wouldnt 
take it. You hold  onto that,  he said.
Okay .
Do yo u know ho w to shoot it?
Yes.
Okay .
What  about  my papa?
There's nothing  else to be done.
I think  I want to  say goodb ye to him.
Will you be all  right?
Yes.
Go ahead.  I'll wait  for yo u.
He walked  back into  the woods and knelt  beside his father.  He was w rapped  in a blanket  as 
the man  had promised  and the bo y didnt  uncover him  but he  sat beside him  and he was cr ying and he 
couldnt  stop. He cried  for a long  time.  I'll talk to you ever y day, he whispered. And I wont forget.  No 
matter what. Then  he rose and turned  and walked back  out to  the road.
The woman  when she saw him  put her arms  around him  and held  him.  Oh, she said, I am  so 
glad to see y ou. She would talk  to him somet imes about  God. He tried  to talk  to God but the  best thing 
was to talk  to his father  and he did talk  to hi m and he  didnt forget.  The woman  said that  was all right. 
She said  that the  breath  of God w as his breath  yet though it  pass from  man to man  through all  of ti me.
Once there  were brook trout  in the  streams  in the moun tains.  You could  see them  standing 
in the amb er current  where the  white edges of their  fins wimpl ed softl y in the flow. The y smell ed of 
moss  in your hand.  Polished  and muscular  and torsional.  On their  backs were vermi culate patterns  that 
were m aps of the world in  its becom ing. Maps and maz es. Of a thing which  could not be  put back.  Not 
be made  right  again.  In the deep  glens where the y lived  all things were older  than m an and the y 
hummed of m ystery.
The End
