
THE MADNESS of an autumn prairie cold front coming through. You could 
feel it: something terrible was going to happen. The sun low in the sky, a 
minor light, a cooling star. Gust after gust of disorder. Trees restless , 
temperatures falling, the whole northern religion of things coming to an end. 
No children in the yards here. Shadows lengthened on yellowing zoysia. Red 
oaks and pin oaks and swamp white oaks rained acorns on houses with no 
mortgage. Storm windows shudde red in the empty bedrooms. And the drone 
and hiccup of a clothes dryer, the nasal contention of a leaf blower, the 
ripening of local apples in a paper bag, the smell of the gasoline with which 
Alfred Lambert had cleaned the paintbrush from his morning pain ting of the 
wicker love seat.  
Three in the afternoon was a time of danger in these gerontocratic suburbs of 
St. Jude. Alfred had awakened in the great blue chair in which he'd been 
sleeping since lunch. He'd had his nap and there would be no local news unt il 
five o'clock. Two empty hours were a sinus in which infections bred. He 
struggled to his feet and stood by the Ping -Pong table, listening in vain for 
Enid.  
Ringing throughout the house was an alarm bell that no one but Al fred and 
Enid could hear direct ly. It was the alarm bell of anxiety. It was like one of 
those big cast -iron dishes with an electric clapper that send schoolchildren 
into the street in fire drills. By now it had been ringing for so many hours that 
the Lamberts no longer heard the message  of "bell ringing" but, as with any 
sound that continues for so long that you have the leisure to learn its 
component sounds (as with any word you stare at until it resolves itself into a 
string of dead letters), instead heard a clapper rapidly striking a metallic 
resonator, not a pure tone but a granular sequence of percussions with a 
keening overlay of overtones; ringing for so many days that it simply blended 
into the background ex cept at certain early -morning hours when one or the 
other of them  
awoke in a sweat and realized that a bell had been ringing in their heads for 
as long as they could remember; ringing for so many months that the sound 
had given way to a kind of metasound whose rise and fall was not the beating 
of compression wa ves but the much, much slower wax ing and waning of their 
consciousness of the sound. Which consciousness was particularly acute 
when the weather itself was in an anxious mood. Then Enid and Alfred —she 
on her knees in the dining room opening drawers, he in  the basement 
surveying the disastrous Ping -Pong table — each felt near to exploding with 
anxiety.  
The anxiety of coupons, in a drawer containing candles in designer autumn 
colors. The coupons were bundled in a rubber band, and Enid was realizing 
that their  expiration dates (often jauntily circled in red by the manufacturer) 
lay months and even years in the past: that these hundred -odd coupons, 
whose total face value exceeded sixty dollars (potentially one hundred twenty 
dollars at the Chiltsville supermarke t that doubled coupons), had all gone 
bad. Tilex, sixty cents off. Excedrin PM, a dollar off. The dates were not even 
close. The dates were histori cal. The alarm bell had been ringing for years.  
She pushed the coupons back in among the candles and shut th e drawer. She 
was looking for a letter that had come by Registered mail some days ago. 
Alfred had heard the mailman knock on the door and had shouted, "Enid! 
Enid!" so loudly that he couldn't hear her shouting back, "Al, I'm getting it!" 
He'd continued to shout her name, coming closer and closer, and because the 
sender of the letter was the Axon Corporation, 24 East Industrial Serpentine, 
Schwenksville, PA, and be cause there were aspects of the Axon situation that 
Enid knew about and hoped that Alfred didn 't, she'd quickly stashed the 
letter some where within fifteen feet of the front door. Alfred had emerged 
from the basement bellowing like a piece of earth -moving equipment, 
"There's somebody at the door!" and she'd fairly screamed, "The mailman! 
The mailm an!" and he'd shaken his head at the complexity of it all.  
Enid felt sure that her own head would clear if only she didn't have to 
wonder, every five minutes, what Alfred was up to. But, try as she might, she 
couldn't get him interested in life. When she e ncouraged him to take up his 
metallurgy again, he looked at her as if she'd lost her  
4                                                                                                                    THE CORRECTIONS  
mind. When she asked whether there wasn't some yard work he could do, he 
said his legs hurt. When she reminded him that the husbands of her friends 
all had hobbies (Dave Schumpert his stained glass, Kirby Root his intricate 
chalets for nesting purple finch es, Chuck Meisner his hourly monitoring of 
his investment portfolio), Alfred acted as if she were trying to distract him 
from some great labor of his. And what was that labor? Repainting the porch 
furniture? He'd been repainting the love seat since Labor D ay. She seemed to 
recall that the last time he'd painted the furniture he'd done the love seat in 
two hours. Now he went to his workshop morning after morning, and after a 
month she ventured in to see how he was doing and found that all he'd 
painted of the  love seat was the legs.  
He seemed to wish that she would go away. He said that the brush had got 
dried out, that that was what was taking so long. He said that scraping wicker 
was like trying to peel a blueberry. He said that there were crickets. She felt  a 
shortness of breath then, but perhaps it was only the smell of gasoline and of 
the dampness of the workshop that smelled like urine (but could not possibly 
be urine). She fled upstairs to look for the letter from Axon.  
Six days a week several pounds of mail came through the slot in the front 
door, and since nothing incidental was allowed to pile up down stairs —since 
the fiction of living in this house was that no one lived here —Enid faced a 
substantial tactical challenge. She didn't think of herself as a  guerrilla, but a 
guerrilla was what she was. By day she fer ried materiel from depot to depot, 
often just a step ahead of the govern ing force. By night, beneath a charming 
but too -dim sconce at a too -small table in the breakfast nook, she staged 
various actions: paid bills, balanced checkbooks, attempted to decipher 
Medicare co -payment records and make sense of a threatening Third Notice 
from a medical lab that demanded immediate payment of $0.22 while 
simulta neously showing an account balance of $0.00 c arried forward and 
thus indicating that she owed nothing and in any case offering no address to 
which remittance might be made. It would happen that the First and Second 
Notices were underground somewhere, and because of the constraints under 
which Enid wa ged her campaign she had only the  
dimmest sense of where those other Notices might be on any given evening. 
She might suspect, perhaps, the family -room closet, but the governing force, 
in the person of Alfred, would be watching a network newsmaga zine at a 
volume thunderous enough to keep him awake, and he had every light in the 
family room burning, and there was a non -negligible possibility that if she 
opened the closet door a cascade of catalogues and House Eeautifuh and 
miscellaneous Merrill Lyn ch state ments would come toppling and sliding 
out, incurring Alfred's wrath. There was also the possibility that the Notices 
would not be there, since the governing force staged random raids on her 
depots, threatening to "pitch" the whole lot of it if she  didn't take care of it, 
but she was too busy dodging these raids to ever quite take care of it, and in 
the succes sion of forced migrations and deportations any lingering 
semblance of order was lost, and so the random Nordstrom shopping bag 
that was campe d behind a dust ruffle with one of its plastic handles semi -
detached would contain the whole shuffled pathos of a refugee exis tence —
non -consecutive issues of Good Housekeeping, black -and-white snapshots of 
Enid in the 1940s, brown recipes on high -acid pap er that called for wilted 
lettuce, the current month's telephone and gas bills, the detailed First Notice 
from the medical lab instructing co -payers to ignore subsequent billings for 
less than fifty cents, a complimentary cruise ship photo of Enid and Alfr ed 
wearing leis and sipping beverages from hollow coconuts, and the only extant 
copies of two of their chil dren's birth certificates, for example.  
Although Enid's ostensible foe was Alfred, what made her a guer rilla was the 
house that occupied them both.  Its furnishings were of the kind that brooked 
no clutter. There were chairs and tables by Ethan Allen. Spode and Waterford 
in the breakfront. Obligatory ficuses, obligatory Norfolk pines. Fanned copies 
of Architectural Digest on a glass -topped coffee tabl e. Touristic plunder —
enamelware from China, a Viennese music box that Enid out of a sense of 
duty and mercy every so often wound up and raised the lid of. The tune was 
"Strangers in the Night."  
Unfortunately, Enid lacked the temperament to manage such a ho use, and 
Alfred lacked the neurological wherewithal. Alfred's cries of  
K                                                                                                                            THE CORRECTIONS  
rage on discovering evidence of gu errilla actions —a Nordstrom bag surprised 
in broad daylight on the basement stairs, nearly precipitating a tumble —were 
the cries of a government that could no longer govern. He'd lately developed 
a knack for making his printing calculator spit columns of m eaningless eight -
digit figures. After he devoted the better part of an afternoon to figuring the 
cleaning woman's social security payments five different times and came up 
with four different numbers and finally just accepted the one number 
($635.78) that he'd managed to come up with twice (the correct figure was 
$70.00), Enid staged a nighttime raid on his filing cabinet and relieved it of 
all tax files, which might have improved household efficiency had the files not 
found their way into a Nordstrom bag w ith some misleadingly ancient Good 
House keepings concealing the more germane documents underneath, which 
casualty of war led to the cleaning woman's filling out the forms herself, with 
Enid merely writing the checks and Alfred shaking his head at the comp lexity 
of it all.  
It's the fate of most Ping -Pong tables in home basements eventually to serve 
the ends of other, more desperate games. After Alfred retired he 
appropriated the eastern end of the table for his banking and corre -
spondence. At the western en d was the portable color TV on which he'd 
intended to watch the local news while sitting in his great blue chair but 
which was now fully engulfed by Good Housekeepings and the seasonal 
candy tins and baroque but cheaply made candle holders that Enid never 
quite found time to transport to the Nearly New consign ment shop. The Ping -
Pong table was the one field on which the civil war raged openly. At the 
eastern end Alfred's calculator was ambushed by floral print pot -holders and 
souvenir coasters from the Epc ot Center and a device for pitting cherries 
which Enid had owned for thirty years and never used, while he, in turn, at 
the western end, for absolutely no reason that Enid could ever fathom, ripped 
to pieces a wreath made of omecones and spray -painted filb erts and brazil 
nuts.  
To the east of the Ping -Pong table was the workshop that housed Alfred's 
metallurgical lab. The workshop was now home to a colony of mute, dust -
colored crickets, which, when startled, would scatter across the room like a 
handful of dr opped marbles, some of them misfiring at  
IE CORRECTIONS  
crazy angles, others toppling over with the weight of their own copious 
protoplasm. They popped all too easily, and cleanup took more than one 
Kleenex. Enid and Alfred had many afflictions w hich they believed to be 
extraordinary, outsized —shameful —and the crickets were one of them.  
The gray dust of evil spells and the cobwebs of enchantment thickly cloaked 
the old electric arc furnace, and the jars of exotic rhodium and sinister 
cadmium and s talwart bismuth, and the hand -printed labels browned by the 
vapors from a glass -stoppered bottle of aqua regia, and the quad -ruled 
notebook in which the latest entry in Alfred's hand dated from a time, fifteen 
years ago, before the betrayals had begun. Som ething as daily and friendly as 
a pencil still occupied the random spot on the workbench where Alfred had 
laid it in a different decade; the pas sage of so many years imbued the pencil 
with a kind of enmity. Asbestos mitts hung from a nail beneath two 
certificates of U.S. patents, the frames warped and sprung by dampness. On 
the hood of a binocular microscope lay big chips of peeled paint from the 
ceiling. The only dust -free objects in the room were the wicker love seat, a 
can of Rust -Oleum and some brushe s, and a couple of Yuban coffee cans 
which de spite increasingly strong olfactory evidence Enid chose not to 
believe were filling up with her husband's urine, because what earthly reason 
could he have, with a nice little half -bathroom not twenty feet away,  for 
peeing in a Yuban can?  
To the west of the Ping -Pong table was Alfred's great blue chair. The chair 
was overstuffed, vaguely gubernatorial. It was made of leather, but it smelled 
like the inside of a Lexus. Like something mod ern and medical and 
imperm eable that you could wipe the smell of death off easily, with a damp 
cloth, before the next person sat down to die in it.  
The chair was the only major purchase Alfred had ever made with out Enid's 
approval. When he'd traveled to China to confer with Chi nese railroad 
engineers, Enid had gone along and the two of them had visited a rug factory 
to buy a rug for their family room. They were un accustomed to spending 
money on themselves, and so they chose one of the least expensive rugs, with 
a simple blue desi gn from the Book of  
Changes on a solid field of beige. A few years later, when Alfred retired from 
the Midland Pacific Railroad, he set about replacing the old cow -smelling 
black leather armchair in which he watched TV and took his naps. He wante d 
something really comfortable, of course, but after a lifetime of providing for 
others he needed more than just comfort: he needed a monument to this 
need. So he went, alone, to a non -discount furniture store and picked out a 
chair of permanence. An engin eer's chair. A chair so big that even a big man 
got lost in it; a chair designed to bear up under heavy stress. And because the 
blue of its leather vaguely matched the blue in the Chinese rug, Enid had no 
choice but to suffer its deployment in the family r oom.  
Soon, however, Alfred's hands were spilling decaffeinated coffee on the rug's 
beige expanses, and wild grandchildren were leaving berries and crayons 
underfoot, and Enid began to feel that the rug was a mis take. It seemed to her 
that in trying to sav e money in life she had made many mistakes like this. She 
reached the point of thinking it would have been better to buy no rug than to 
buy this rug. Finally, as Alfred's naps deepened toward enchantment, she 
grew bolder. Her own mother had left her a tiny  inheritance years ago. 
Interest had been added to prin cipal, certain stocks had performed rather 
well, and now she had an income of her own. She reconceived the family 
room in greens and yellows. She ordered fabrics. A paperhanger came, and 
Alfred, who w as napping temporarily in the dining room, leaped to his feet 
like a man with a bad dream.  
"You're redecorating again?"  
"It's my own money," Enid said. "This is how I'm spending it." "And what 
about the money I made? What about the work / did?" This argume nt had 
been effective in the past —it was, so to speak, the constitutional basis of the 
tyranny's legitimacy —but it didn't work now. "That rug is nearly ten years 
old, and we'll never get the coffee stains out," Enid answered.  
Alfred gestured at his blue ch air, which under the paperhanger's plastic 
dropcloths looked like something you might deliver to a power station on a 
flatbed truck. He was trembling with incredulity, unable to believe that Enid 
could have forgotten this crushing refutation of her  
 
arguments, this overwhelming impediment'to her plans. It was as if all the 
unfreedom in which he'd spent his seven decades of life were em bodied in 
this six -year -old but essentially brand -new chair. He was grin ning, his face 
aglow with the awfu l perfection of his logic.  
"And what about the chair, then?" he said. "What about the chair?' 1'' 
Enid looked at the chair. Her expression was merely pained, no more. "I 
never liked that chair."  
This was probably the most terrible thing she could have said to Al fred. The 
chair was the only sign he'd ever given of having a personal vision of the 
future. Enid's words filled him with such sorrow —he felt such pity for the 
chair, such solidarity with it, such astonished grief at its betrayal —that he 
pulled off the dropcloth and sank into its arms and fell asleep.  
(It was a way of recognizing places of enchantment: people falling asleep like 
this.)  
When it became clear that both the rug and Alfred's cha ir had to go, the rug 
was easily shed. Enid advertised in the free local paper and netted a nervous 
bird of a woman who was still making mistakes and whose fifties came out of 
her purse in a disorderly roll that she unpeeled and flattened with shaking 
fingers. 
But the chair? The chair was a monument and a symbol and could not be 
parted from Alfred. It could only be relocated, and so it went into the 
basement and Alfred followed. And so in the house of the Lamberts, as in St. 
Jude, as in the country as a who le, life came to be lived underground.  
Enid could hear Alfred upstairs now, opening and closing drawers. He 
became agitated whenever they were going to see their children. Seeing their 
children was the only thing he seemed to care about anymore.  
In the str eaklessly clean windows of the dining room there was chaos. The 
berserk wind, the negating shadows. Enid had looked every where for the 
letter from the Axon Corporation, and she couldn't find it.  
Alfred was standing in the master bedroom wondering why the drawers of his 
dresser were open, who had opened them, whether he  
10                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
had opened them himself. He couldn't help blamin g Enid for his confu sion. 
For witnessing it into existence. For existing, herself, as a person who could 
have opened these drawers.  
"Al? What are you doing?"  
He turned to the doorway where she'd appeared. He began a sen tence: "I 
am—" but when he was take n by surprise, every sentence be came an 
adventure in the woods; as soon as he could no longer see the light of the 
clearing from which he'd entered, he would realize that the crumbs he'd 
dropped for bearings had been eaten by birds, silent deft darting th ings 
which he couldn't quite see in the darkness but which were so numerous and 
swarming in their hunger that it seemed as if they were the darkness, as if the 
darkness weren't uniform, weren't an absence of light but a teeming and 
corpuscular thing, and i ndeed when as a studious teenager he'd encountered 
the word "crepuscular" in McKay's Treasury of English Verse, the corpuscles 
of biology had bled into his understanding of the word, so that for his entire 
adult life he'd seen in twilight a corpuscularity,  as of the graininess of the 
high -speed film necessary for photography under conditions of low ambient 
light, as of a kind of sinister decay; and hence the panic of a man betrayed 
deep in the woods whose darkness was the darkness of starlings blotting out 
the sunset or black ants storming a dead opossum, a darkness that didn't just 
exist but actively consumed the bearings that he'd sensibly estab lished for 
himself, lest he be lost; but in the instant of realizing he was lost, time 
became marvelously slow a nd he discovered hitherto unguessed eternities in 
the space between one word and the next, or rather he became trapped in 
that space between words and could only stand and watch as time sped on 
without him, the thoughtless boyish part of him crashing on ou t of sight 
blindly through the woods while he, trapped, the grownup Al, watched in 
oddly impersonal suspense to see if the panic -stricken little boy might, 
despite no longer knowing where he was or at what point he'd entered the 
woods of this sentence, sti ll manage to blunder into the clearing where Enid 
was waiting for him, unaware of any woods —"packing my suitcase," he heard 
himself say. This sounded right. Verb, possessive, noun. Here was a suitcase 
in front of him, an important confirmation. He'd betray ed nothing.  
v> 
But Enid had spoken again. The audiologist had said that he was mildly 
impaired. He frowned at her, not following.  
"It's Thursday" she said, louder. "We're not leaving until Saturday."  
"Saturday!" he echoed.  
She berated h im then, and for a while the crepuscular birds re treated, but 
outside the wind had blown the sun out, and it was getting very cold.  
THE CORRECTIONS  
DOWN THE LONG CONCOURSE they came unsteadily, Enid favoring her 
damaged hip, Alfred paddling at t he air with loose -hinged hands and 
slapping the airport carpeting with poorly controlled feet, both of them 
carrying Nordic Pleasurelines shoulder bags and concentrating on the floor in 
front of them, measuring out the hazardous distance three paces at a t ime. To 
anyone who saw them averting their eyes from the dark -haired New Yorkers 
careering past them, to anyone who caught a glimpse of Alfred's straw fedora 
looming at the height of Iowa corn on Labor Day, or the yellow wool of the 
slacks stretching over Enid's out -slung hip, it was obvious that they were 
midwestern and intimidated. But to Chip Lambert, who was waiting for them 
just beyond the secu rity checkpoint, they were killers.  
Chip had crossed his arms defensively and raised one hand to pull on the 
wrought -iron rivet in his ear. He worried that he might tear the rivet right out 
of his earlobe —that the maximum pain his ear's nerves could generate was 
less pain than he needed now to steady himself. From his station by the metal 
detectors he watched an azure -haired girl overtake his parents, an azure -
haired girl of college age, a very wantable stranger with pierced lips and 
eyebrows. It struck him that if he could have sex with this girl for one second 
he could face his parents confi dently, and that if he could keep on having sex 
with this girl once every minute for as long as his parents were in town he 
could survive their entire visit. Chip was a tall, gym -built man with crow's -
feet and sparse butter -yellow hair; if the girl had noticed him, she might have 
thought he was a little too old for the leather he was wearing. As she hurried 
past him, he pulled harder on his rivet to offset the pain of her depar ture 
from his life forever and to focus his attention on his father, whose face was 
brightening at t he discovery of a son among so many strangers. In the 
lunging manner of a man floundering in water, Alfred fell upon  
15 
Chip and grabbed Chip's hand and wrist as if they were a rope he'd been 
thrown. "Well!" he said. "Well!"  
Enid came limping up behind him. "Chip," she cried, "what have you done to 
your ears'?"  
"Dad, Mom," Chip murmured through his teeth, hoping the azure -haired girl 
was out of earshot. "Good to see you."  
He had time for one subversive thought about his parents' Nordic 
Pleasurelines shoulder bags —either Nordic Pleasurelines sent bags like these 
to every hooker of its cruises as a cynical means of getting inex pensive walk -
about publicity or as a practical m eans of tagging the cruise participants for 
greater ease of handling at embarkation points or as a benign means of 
building esprit de corps; or else Enid and Alfred had deliberately saved the 
bags from some previous Nordic Plea surelines cruise and, out of  a misguided 
sense of loyalty, had chosen to carry them on their upcoming cruise as well; 
and in either case Chip was appalled by his parents' willingness to make 
themselves vectors of corporate advertising —before he shouldered the bags 
himself and as sume d the burden of seeing LaGuardia Airport and New York 
City and his life and clothes and body through the disappointed eyes of his 
parents.  
He noticed, as if for the first time, the dirty linoleum, the assassin -like 
chauffeurs holding up signs with other pe ople's names on them, the snarl of 
wires dangling from a hole in the ceiling. He distinctly heard the word 
"motherfucker." Outside the big windows on the baggage level, two 
Bangladeshi men were pushing a disabled cab through rain and angry 
honking.  
"We hav e to be at the pier by four," Enid said to Chip. "And I think Dad was 
hoping to see your desk at the Wall Street Journal.'" She raised her voice. 
"Al? Al?"  
Though stooped in the neck now, Alfred was still an imposing fig ure. His hair 
was white and thick a nd sleek, like a polar bear's, and the powerful long 
muscles of his shoulders, which Chip remembered labor ing in the spanking 
of a child, usually Chip himself, still filled the gray tweed shoulders of his 
sport coat.  
"Al, didn't you say you want ed to see where Chip worked?" Enid shouted.  
Alfred shook his head. "There's no time."  
The baggage carousel circulated nothing.  
"Did you take your pill?" Enid said.  
"Yes," Alfred said. He closed his eyes and repeated slowly, "I took my pill. I 
took my pill. I took my pill."  
"Dr. Hedgpeth has him on a new medication," Enid explained to Chip, who 
was quite certain that his father had not, in fact, expressed interest in seeing 
his office. And since Chip had no association with the Wall Street Journal —
the publication to which he made unpaid contribu tions was the Warren 
Street Journal: A Monthly of the Transgressive Arts; he'd also very recently 
completed a screenplay, and  he'd been working part -time as a legal 
proofreader at Bragg Knuter & Speigh for the nearly two years since he'd lost 
his assistant professorship in Textual Ar tifacts at D ------ College, in 
Connecticut, as a result of an offense in volving a female undergr aduate which 
had fallen just short of the legally actionable and which, though his parents 
never learned of it, had inter rupted the parade of accomplishments that his 
mother could brag about, back home in St. Jude; he'd told his parents that 
he'd quit tea ching in order to pursue a career in writing, and when, more 
recently, his mother had pressed him for details, he'd mentioned the Warren 
Street Journal, the name of which his mother had misheard and instantly be -
?un to trumpet to her friends Esther Root a nd Bea Meisner and Mary Beth 
Schumpert, and though Chip in his monthly phone calls home had had many 
opportunities to disabuse her he'd instead actively fos tered the 
misunderstanding; and here things became rather complex, not only because 
the Wall Street  Journal was available in St. Jude and his mother had never 
mentioned looking for his work and failing to find it i meaning that some part 
of her knew perfectly well that he didn't write for the paper) but also because 
the author of articles like "Creative  Adultery" and "Let Us Now Praise Scuzzy 
Motels" was conspiring to preserve, in his mother, precisely the kind of 
illusion that the Warren Street Journal was dedicated to exploding, and he 
was thirty -nine years  
17 
old, and he blamed his parents f or the person he had become —he was happy 
when his mother let the subject drop.  
"His tremor's much better," Enid added in a voice inaudible to Alfred. "The 
only side effect is that he may hallucinate."  
"That's quite a side effect," Chip said.  
"Dr. Hedgpeth says that what he has is very mild and almost com pletely 
controllable with medication."  
Alfred was surveying the baggage -claim cavern while pale travelers angled for 
position at the carousel. There was a confusion of tread pat terns on the 
linoleum, gray with the pollutants that the rain had brought down. The light 
was the color of car sickness. "New York City! "Alfred said.  
Enid frowned at Chip's pants. "Those aren't leather, are they?"  
"Yes."  
"How do you wash them?"  
"They're leather. They're like a secon d skin."  
"We have to be at the pier no later than four o'clock," Enid said.  
The carousel coughed up some suitcases.  
"Chip, help me," his father said.  
Soon Chip was staggering out into the wind -blown rain with all four of his 
parents' bags. Alfred shuffled forward with the jerking mo mentum of a man 
who knew there would be trouble if he had to stop and start again. Enid 
lagged behind, intent on the pain in her hip. She'd put on weight and maybe 
lost a little height since Chip had last seen her. She'd always been a pretty 
woman, but to Chip she was so much a personality and so little anything else 
that even staring straight at her he had no idea what she really looked like.  
"What's that —wrought iron?" Alfred asked him as the taxi line crept forward.  
"Yes," Chi p said, touching his ear.  
"Looks like an old quarter -inch rivet."  
"Yes."  
"What do you do —crimp that? Hammer it?"  
"It's hammered," Chip said.  
Alfred winced and gave a low, inhaling whistle.  
18 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
"We're doing a Luxury Fall Color Cruise," Enid said when the three of them 
were in a yellow cab, speeding through Queens. "We sail up to Quebec and 
then we enjoy the changing leaves all the way back down. Dad so enjoyed the 
last cruise we were on. Didn't y ou, Al? Didn't you have a good time on that 
cruise?"  
The brick palisades of the East River waterfront were taking an an gry beating 
from the rain. Chip could have wished for a sunny day, a clear view of 
landmarks and blue water, with nothing to hide. The o nly colors on the road 
this morning were the smeared reds of brake lights.  
"This is one of the great cities of the world," Alfred said with emo tion.  
"How are you feeling these days, Dad," Chip managed to ask.  
"Any better I'd be in heaven, any worse I'd be  in hell."  
"We're excited about your new job," Enid said.  
"One of the great papers in the country," Alfred said. "The Wall Street 
Journal."  
"Does anybody smell fish, though?"  
"We're near the ocean," Chip said.  
"No, it's you." Enid leaned and buried her face in Chip's leather sleeve. "Your 
jacket smells strongly offish."  
He wrenched free of her. "Mother. Please."  
Chip's problem was a loss of confidence. Gone were the days when he could 
afford to e'pater les bourg eois. Except for his Manhattan apart ment and his 
handsome girlfriend, Julia Vrais, he now had almost noth ing to persuade 
himself that he was a functioning male adult, no accomplishments to 
compare with those of his brother, Gary, who was a banker and a f ather of 
three, or of his sister, Denise, who at the age of thirty -two was the executive 
chef at a successful new high -end restau rant in Philadelphia. Chip had hoped 
he might have sold his screenplay by now, but he hadn't finished a draft until 
after midn ight on Tuesday, and then he'd had to work three fourteen -hour 
shifts at Bragg Knuter & Speigh to raise cash to pay his August rent and 
reassure the owner of his apartment (Chip had a sublease) about his 
September and October rent, and then there was a lun ch to be shopped for 
and an apartment to be cleaned and, finally, sometime before dawn this 
morning, a long - 
 
hoarded Xanax to be swallowed. Meanwhile, nearly a week had gone by 
without his seeing Julia or speaking to her directly. In response to  the many 
nervous messages he'd left on her voice mail in the last forty -eight hours, 
asking her to meet him and his parents and Denise at his apartment at noon 
on Saturday and also, please, if possible, not to men tion to his parents that 
she was married to someone else, Julia had maintained a total phone and e -
mail silence from which even a more stable man than Chip might have drawn 
disturbing conclusions.  
It was raining so hard in Manhattan that water was streaming down fafades 
and frothing at the mouths  of sewers. Outside his building, on East Ninth 
Street, Chip took money from Enid and handed it through the cab's partition, 
and even as the turbaned driver thanked him he re - 
Ialized the tip was too small. From his own wallet he took two singles and 
dangl ed them near the driver's shoulder.  
"That's enough, that's enough," Enid squeaked, reaching for Chip's wrist. "He 
already said thank you."  
But the money was gone. Alfred was trying to open the door by pulling on the 
window crank. "Here, Dad, it's this one, " Chip said and leaned across him to 
pop the door.  
"How big a tip was that?" Enid asked Chip on the sidewalk, under his 
building's marquee, as the driver heaved luggage from the trunk.  
"About fifteen percent," Chip said.  
I                                        "More like twenty, I'd say," Enid said.  
"Let's have a fight about this, why don't we."  
"Twenty percent's too much, Chip," Alfred pronounced in a boom ing voice. 
"It's not reasonable."  
"You all have a good day now," t he taxi driver said with no apparent irony.  
"A tip is for service and comportment," Enid said. "If the service and 
comportment are especially good I might give fifteen percent. But if you 
automatically tip—" 
"I've suffered from depression all my life," Alf red said, or seemed to  
say.  
"Excuse me?" Chip said.  
20                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
"Depression years changed me. They changed the meaning of a do llar."  
"An economic depression, we're talking about."  
"Then when the service really is especially good or especially bad," Enid 
pursued, "there's no way to express it monetarily."  
"A dollar is still a lot of money," Alfred said.  
"Fifteen percent if the ser vice is exceptional, really exceptional."  
"I'm wondering why we're having this particular conversation," Chip said to 
his mother. "Why this conversation and not some other conversation."  
"We're both terribly anxious," Enid replied, "to see where you work."  
Chip's doorman, Zoroaster, hurried out to help with the luggage and installed 
the Lamberts in the building's balky elevator. Enid said, "I ran into your old 
friend Dean Driblett at the bank the other day. I never run into Dean but 
where he doesn't ask abo ut you. He was impressed with your new writing 
job."  
"Dean Driblett was a classmate, not a friend," Chip said.  
"He and his wife just had their fourth child. I told you, didn't I, they built that 
enormous house out in Paradise Valley —Al, didn't you count ei ght 
bedrooms?"  
Alfred gave her a steady, unblinking look. Chip leaned on the Door Close 
button.  
"Dad and I were at the housewarming in June," Enid said. "It was 
spectacular. They'd had it catered, and they had pyramids of shrimp. It was 
solid shrimp, in py ramids. I've never seen anything like it."  
"Pyramids of shrimp," Chip said. The elevator door had finally closed.  
"Anyway, it's a beautiful house," Enid said. "There are at least six bedrooms, 
and you know, it looks like they're going to fill them. Dean's tremendously 
successful. He started that lawn care business when he decided the mortuary 
business wasn't for him, well, you know, Dale Driblett's his stepdad, you 
know, the Driblett Chapel, and now his bill boards are everywhere and he's 
started an HMO. I saw in the paper  
 
21 
 
where it's the fastest -growing HMO in St. Jude, it's called DeeDeeCare, same 
as the lawn care business, and there are billboards for the HMO now, too. 
He's quite the entrepreneur, I'd say."  
"Slo-o-o-o-w elevator," Alfred said.  
"This is a prewar building," Chip explained in a tight voice. "An ex tremely 
desirable building."  
"But you know what he told me he's doing for his mother's birth day? It's still 
a surprise for her, but I can tell you. He's taking her to Paris for eight days. 
Two first -class tickets, e ight nights at the Ritz! That's the kind of person Dean 
is, very family -oriented. But can you be lieve that kind of birthday present? Al, 
didn't you say the house alone probably cost a million dollars? Al?"  
"It's a large house but cheaply done," Alfred sai d with sudden vigor. "The 
walls are like paper."  
"All the new houses are like that," Enid said.  
"You asked me if I was impressed with the house. I thought it was 
ostentatious. I thought the shrimp was ostentatious. It was poor."  
"It may have been frozen," Enid said.  
"People are easily impressed with things like that," Alfred said. "They'll talk 
for months about the pyramids of shrimp. Well, see for yourself," he said to 
Chip, as to a neutral bystander. "Your mother's still talking about it."  
For a moment it  seemed to Chip that his father had become a lik able old 
stranger; but he knew Alfred, underneath, to be a shouter and a punisher. 
The last time Chip had visited his parents in St. Jude, four years earlier, he'd 
taken along his then -girlfriend Ruthie, a p eroxided young Marxist from the 
North of England, who, after committing numberless offenses against Enid's 
sensibilities (she lit a cigarette in doors, laughed out loud at Enid's favorite 
watercolors of Buckingham Palace, came to dinner without a bra, and failed 
to take even one bite of the "salad" of water chestnuts and green peas and 
cheddar -cheese cubes in a thick mayonnaise sauce which Enid made for 
festive occasions), had needled and baited Alfred until he pronounced that 
"the blacks" would be the ruin ation of this country, "the blacks" were 
incapable of coexist ing with whites, they expected the government to take 
care of them,  
22                                                                                                                  THE CORREC TIONS  
 
 
they didn't know the meaning of hard work, what they lacked above all was 
discipline, it was going to end with slaughter in the streets, with slaughter in 
the streets, and he didn't give a damn what Ruthie thought of him, she was a 
visito r in his house and his country, and she had no right to criticize things 
she didn't understand; whereupon Chip, who'd al ready warned Ruthie that 
his parents were the squarest people in Amer ica, had smiled at her as if to 
say, You see? Exactly as advertis ed. When Ruthie had dumped him, not 
three weeks later, she'd remarked that he was more like his father than he 
seemed to realize.  
"Al," Enid said as the elevator lurched to a halt, "you have to admit that it was 
a very, very nice party, and that it was very nice of Dean to in vite us."  
Alfred seemed not to have heard her.  
Propped outside Chip's apartment was a clear -plastic umbrella that Chip 
recognized, with relief, as Julia Vrais's. He was herding the parental luggage 
from the elevator when his apartment door swung open and Julia herself 
stepped out. "Oh. Oh!" she said, as though flus tered. "You're early!"  
By Chip's watch it was 11:35. Julia was wearing a shapeless lavender raincoat 
and holding a DreamWorks tote bag. Her hair, which was long and the color  
of dark chocolate, was big with humidity and rain. In the tone of a person 
being friendly to large animals she said "Hi" to Alfred and "Hi," separately, to 
Enid. Alfred and Enid bayed their names at her and extended hands to shake, 
driving her back into t he apartment, where Enid began to pepper her with 
questions in which Chip, as he followed with the luggage, could hear subtexts 
and agendas.  
"Do you live in the city?" Enid said. (You're not cohabiting with our son, are 
you?) "And you work in the city, too ?" (You are gainfully em ployed? You're not 
from an alien, snobbish, moneyed eastern family?) "Did you grow up here?" (Or 
do you come from a trans -Appalachian state where people are warmhearted 
and down -to-earth and unlikely to be Jewish?) "Oh, and do you still have family 
in Ohio?" (Have your parents perhaps taken the morally dubious modern step 
of getting divorced?) "Do you have broth ers or sisters?" (Are you a spoiled only 
child or a Catholic with a zillion sib lings?)  
23 
Julia having passed t his initial examination, Enid turned her atten tion to the 
apartment. Chip, in a late crisis of confidence, had tried to make it 
presentable. He'd bought a stain -removal kit and lifted the big semen stain 
off the red chaise longue, dismantled the wall of w ine-bottle corks with which 
he'd been bricking in the niche above his fire place at a rate of half a dozen 
Merlots and Pinot Grigios a week, taken down from his bathroom wall the 
close -up photographs of male and fe male genitalia that were the flower of hi s 
art collection, and replaced them with the three diplomas that Enid had long 
ago insisted on having framed for him.  
This morning, feeling as if he'd surrendered too much of himself, he'd 
readjusted his presentation by wearing leather to the airport.  
"Thi s room is about the size of Dean Driblett's bathroom," Enid said. 
"Wouldn't you say, Al?"  
Alfred rotated his bobbing hands and examined their dorsal sides.  
"I'd never seen such an enormous bathroom."  
"Enid, you have no tact," Alfred said.  
It might have occurred to Chip that this, too, was a tactless remark, since it 
implied that his father concurred in his mother's criticism of the apartment 
and objected only to her airing of it. But Chip was unable to focus on 
anything but the hair dryer p rotruding from Julia's Dream Works tote bag. It 
was the hair dryer that she kept in his bathroom. She seemed, actually, to be 
heading out the door.  
"Dean and Trish have a whirlpool and a shower stall and a tub, all separate," 
Enid went on. "The sinks are his -and-hers."  
"Chip, I'm sorry," Julia said.  
He raised a hand to put her on hold. "We're going to have lunch here as soon 
as Denise comes," he announced to his parents. "It's a very simple lunch. Just 
mak e yourselves at home."  
"It was nice to meet you both," Julia called to Enid and Alfred. To Chip in a 
lower voice she said, "Denise will be here. You'll be fine."  
She opened the door.  
"Mom, Dad," Chip said, "just one second."  
He followed Julia out of the ap artment and let the door fall shut behind him.  
24                                                                                                                                 THE 
CORRECTIONS  
"This is really unfortunate timing," he said. "Just really, really unfortunate."  
Julia shook her hair back off her temples. "I'm feeling good about the fact 
that it's the first time in my life I've ever acted self -interestedly in a 
relationship."  
"That's nice. That's a big step." Chip made an effort to smil e. "But what about 
the script? Is Eden reading it?"  
"I think maybe this weekend sometime."  
"What about you?"  
"I read, um." Julia looked away. "Most of it."  
"My idea," Chip said, "was to have this 'hump' that the moviegoer has to get 
over. Putting something  offputting at the beginning, it's a classic modernist 
strategy. There's a lot of rich suspense toward the end."  
Julia turned toward the elevator and didn't reply.  
"Did you get to the end yet?" Chip asked.  
"Oh, Chip," she burst out miserably, "your script starts off with a six -page 
lecture about anxieties of the phallus in Tudor drama!"  
He was aware of this. Indeed, for weeks now, he'd been awakening most 
nights before dawn, his stomach churning and his teeth clenched, and had 
wrestled with the nightmarish certainty that a long academic monologue on 
Tudor drama had no place in Act I of a commercial script. Often it took him 
hours —took getting out of bed, pacing around, drinking Merlot or Pinot 
Grigio —to regain his conviction that a theory -driven opening mono logue was 
not only not a mistake but the script's most powerful selling point; and now, 
with a single glance at Julia, he could see that he was wrong.  
Nodding in heartfelt agreement with her criticism, he opened the door of his 
apartment and called to his parents, "One second, Mom, Dad. Just one 
second." As he shut the door again, however, the old ar guments came back to 
him. "You see, though," he said, "the entire story is prefigured in that 
monologue. Every single theme is there in capsule form —gender, po wer, 
identity, authenticity —and the thing is ... Wait. Wait. Julia?"  
Bowing her head sheepishly, as though she'd somehow hoped he  
wouldn't notice she was leaving, Julia turned away from the elevator and 
back toward him.  
"The thing is," he said, " the girl is sitting in the front row of the classroom 
listening to the lecture. It's a crucial image. The fact that he is controlling the 
discourse —" 
"And it's a little creepy, though," Julia said, "the way you keep talk ing about 
her breasts."  
This, too, was true. That it was true, however, seemed unfair and cruel to 
Chip, who would never have had the heart to write the script at all without 
the lure of imagining the breasts of his young female lead. "You're probably 
right," he said. "Although some of the physicality there is intentional. 
Because that's the irony, see, that she's attracted to his mind while he's 
attracted to her —" 
"But for a woman reading it," Julia said obstinately, "it's sort of like the 
poultry department. Breast, breast, breast, thigh, leg."  
"I can remove some of those references," Chip said in a low voice. "I can also 
shorten the opening lecture. The thing is, though, I want there to be a 
'hump' —" 
"Right, for the moviegoer to get over. That's a neat idea."  
"Please come and have lunch. Please. Julia?"  
The elevator door had opened at her touch.  
"I'm saying it's a tiny bit insulting to a person somehow."  
"But that's not you. It's not even based on you."  
"Oh, great. It's somebody else's breasts."  
"Jesus. Please.  One second." Chip turned back to his apartment door and 
opened it, and this time he was startled to find himself face to face with his 
father. Alfred's big hands were shaking violently.  
"Dad, hi, just another minute here."  
"Chip," Alfred said, "ask her to stay! Tell her we want her to stay!"  
Chip nodded and closed the door in the old man's face; but in the few seconds 
his back had been turned the elevator had swallowed Julia. He punched the 
call button, to no avail, and then  opened the fire door and ran down the spiral 
of the service stairwell. After a series of effulgent lectures celebrating the 
unfettered pursuit of pleasure as a strategy of subven ing the bureaucracy of 
rationalism, BILL QUAINTENCE, an attractive young  
26 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
professor of Textual Artifacts, is seduced by his beautiful and adoring 
student AIONA. Their wildly erotic affair has hardly begun, however, 'when 
they are discovered by Bill's estranged wife, HILLAIRE. In a tense 
confrontation r epre senting the clash of Therapeutic and Transgressive 
worldviews, Bill and Hillaire struggle for the soul of young Mona, who lies 
naked between them on tangled sheets. Hillaire succeeds in seducing Mona 
with her crypto -repressive rhetoric, and Mona publi cly denounces Bill. Bill 
loses his job but soon discovers e -mail records proving that Hillaire has 
given Mona money to ruin his career. As Bill is driving to see his lawyer 
with a diskette containing the incriminating  
evidence, his car is run off the road into the raging D ------ River, and the  
diskette floats free of the sunken car and is borne by ceaseless, indomitable 
currents into the raging, erotic/chaotic open sea, and the crash is ruled 
vehicular suicide, and in the film's final scenes Hillaire is hir ed to replace 
Bill on the fac ulty and is seen lecturing on the evils of unfettered pleasure to 
a classroom in which is seated her diabolical lesbian lover Mona: This was 
the one -page precis that Chip had assembled with the aid of store -bought 
screenwrit -ing manuals and had faxed, one winter morning, to a Manhattan -
based film producer named Eden Procuro. Five minutes later he'd answered 
his phone to the cool, blank voice of a young woman saying, "Please hold for 
Eden Procuro," followed by Eden Procuro herse lf crying, "I love it, love it, 
love it, love it, love it!" But now a year and a half had passed. Now the one -
page precis had become a 124 -page script called "The Academy Purple," and 
now Julia Vrais, the chocolate -haired owner of that cool, blank personal -
assistant's voice, was running away from him, and as he raced downstairs to 
intercept her, planting his feet sideways to take the steps three and four at a 
time, grabbing the newel •at each landing and reversing his trajectory with a 
jerk, all he could se e or think of was a damning entry in his nearly 
photographic mental con cordance of those 124 pages:  
3:    bee-stung lips, high round breasts, narrow hips and  
3:    over the cashmere sweater that snugly hugs her breasts  
4:    forward raptly, her perfect ad olescent breasts eagerly  
8:    (eyeing her breasts)  
9:    (eyeing her breasts)  
27 
 
9:    (his eyes drawn helplessly to her perfect breasts)  
11:    (eyeing her breasts)  
12:    (mentally fondling her perfect breasts)  
13:    (eyeing her breasts)  
15:    (eyeing and eyeing her perfect adolescent breasts)  
2 3:    (clinch, her perfect breasts surging against his  
24:    the repressive bra to unfetter her subversive breasts.)  
28:    to pinkly tongue one sweat -sheened breast.)  
29:    phallically jutting nipple of her sweat -drenched breast  
29:    I like your breasts.  
30:    absolutely adore your honeyed, heavy breasts.  
33:    (HILLAIRE 'S breasts, like twin Gestapo bullets, can be  
36:    barbed glare as if to puncture and deflate her breasts  
44:    Arcadian breasts with stern puritanical terry cloth and  
45:    cowering, ashamed, the towel clutched to her breasts.)  
76:    her guileless breasts shrouded now in militaristic  
83:    I miss your body, I miss your perfect breasts, I 
117:     drow ned headlights fading like two milk -white breasts  
And there were probably even more! More than he could remember! And the 
only two readers who mattered now were women! It seemed to Chip that 
Julia was leaving him because "The Academy Purple" had too many b reast 
references and a draggy opening, and that if he could cor rect these few 
obvious problems, both on Julia's copy of the script and, more important, on 
the copy he'd specially laser -printed on 24 -pound ivory bond paper for Eden 
Procuro, there might be hope not only for his finances but also for his 
chances of ever again unfettering and fondling Julia's own guileless, milk -
white breasts. Which by this point in the day, as by late morning of almost 
every day in recent months, was one of the last activitie s on earth in which he 
could still reasonably ex pect to take solace for his failures.  
Exiting the stairwell into the lobby, he found the elevator waiting to torment 
its next rider. Through the open street door he saw a taxi ex tinguish its roof 
light and pull away. Zoroaster was mopping up inblown  
28 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
water from the lobby's checkerboard marble. "Goodbye, Mister Chip!" he 
quipped, by no means for the first time, as Chip ran outside.  
Big raindrops beating on the sidewalk raised a fr esh, cold mist of pure 
humidity. Through the bead -curtain of water coming off the mar quee, Chip 
saw Julia's cab brake for a yellow light. Directly across the street, another cab 
had stopped to discharge a passenger, and it oc curred to Chip that he could 
take this other cab and ask the driver to follow Julia. The idea was tempting; 
but there were difficulties.  
One difficulty was that by chasing Julia he would arguably be com mitting the 
worst of the offenses for which the general counsel of  
D------ College, in a shrill, moralistic lawyer's letter, had once upon a  
time threatened to countersue him or have him prosecuted. The alleged 
offenses had included fraud, breach of contract, kidnap, Title IX sexual 
harassment, serving liquor to a student under the legal drinking age, and 
possession and sale of a controlled substance; but it was the accusa tion of 
stalking —of making "obscene" and "threatening" and "abusive" telephone 
calls and trespassing with intent to violate a young woman's privacy —that 
had really scared Chip and scared him still.  
A more immediate difficulty was that he had four dollars in his wal let, less 
than ten dollars in his checking account, no credit to speak of on any of his 
major credit cards, and no prospect of further proofrea ding work until 
Monday afternoon. Considering that the last time he'd seen Julia, six days, 
ago, she'd specifically complained that he "always" wanted to stay home and 
eat pasta and "always" be kissing her and hav ing sex (she'd said that 
sometimes she al most felt like he used sex as a kind of medication, and that 
maybe the reason he didn't just go ahead and self -medicate with crack or 
heroin instead was that sex was free and he was turning into such a 
cheapskate; she'd said that now that she was raking an  actual prescription 
medication herself she sometimes felt like she was taking it for both of them 
and that this seemed doubly unfair, because she was the one who paid for the 
medication and because the Dedication made her slightly less interested in 
sex t han she used to be; • r'd said that, if it were up to Chip, they probably 
wouldn't even go to movies anymore but would spend the whole weekend 
wallowing in bed  
29 
with the shades down and then reheating pasta), he suspected that the 
minimum price  of further conversation with her would be an overpriced 
lunch of mesquite -grilled autumn vegetables and a bottle of Sancerre for 
which he had no conceivable way of paying.  
And so he stood and did nothing as the corner traffic light turned green and 
Julia's cab drove out of sight. Rain was lashing the pavement in white, 
infected -looking drops. Across the street, a long -legged woman in tight jeans 
and excellent black boots had  climbed out of the other cab.  
That this woman was Chip's little sister, Denise —i.e., was the only attractive 
young woman on the planet whom he was neither permitted nor inclined to 
feast his eyes on and imagine having sex with —seemed to him just the lates t 
unfairness in a long morning of unfairnesses.  
Denise was carrying a black umbrella, a cone of flowers, and a pastry box tied 
with twine. She picked her way through the pools and rapids on the 
pavement and joined Chip beneath the marquee.  
"Listen," Chip s aid with a nervous smile, not looking at her. "I need to ask 
you a big favor. I need you to hold the fort for me here while I find Eden and 
get my script back. There's a major, quick set of correc tions I have to make."  
As if he were a caddie or a servant,  Denise handed him her umbrella and 
brushed water and grit from the ankles of her jeans. Denise had her mother's 
dark hair and pale complexion and her father's intimidating air of moral 
authority. She was the one who'd instructed Chip to invite his parents  to stop 
and have lunch in New York today. She'd sounded like the World Bank 
dictating terms to a Latin debtor state, because, unfor tunately, Chip owed her 
some money. He owed her whatever ten thou sand and fifty -five hundred and 
four thousand and a thous and dollars added up to.  
"See," he explained, "Eden wants to read the script this afternoon sometime, 
and financially, obviously, it's critical that we —" 
"You can't leave now," Denise said.  
"It'll take me an hour," Chip said. "An hour and a half at most."  
"Is Julia here?"  
"No, she left. She said hello and left."  
30                                                                                                                                  THE 
CORRECTIONS  
tORRECTIONS  
"You broke up?"  
"I don't kno w. She's gotten herself medicated and I don't even trust —" 
"Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Are you wanting to go to Eden's, or chasing 
Julia?"  
Chip touched the rivet in his left ear. "Ninety percent going to Eden's."  
"Oh, Chip."  
"No, but listen," he said, " she's using the word 'health' like it has some kind of 
absolute timeless meaning."  
"This is Julia?"  
"She takes pills for three months, the pills make her unbelievably obtuse, and 
the obtuseness then defines itself as mental health! It's like blindness 
denn ing itself as vision. 'Now that I'm blind, I can see there's nothing to see.' 
':                                                      , 
Denise sighed and let her cone of flowers droop to the sidewalk. "What are 
you saying? You want to follow her and take a way her medi cine?"  
"I'm saying the structure of the entire culture is flawed," Chip said. "I'm 
saying the bureaucracy has arrogated the right to define certain states of 
mind as 'diseased.' A lack of desire to spend money becomes a symptom of 
disease that  requires expensive medication. Which medica tion then destroys 
the libido, in other words destroys the appetite for the one pleasure in life 
that's free, which means the person has to spend even more money on 
compensatory pleasures. The very definition of  mental 'health' is the ability to 
participate in the consumer economy. \\~hen you buy into therapy, you're 
buying into buying. And I'm saying that I personally am losing the battle with 
a commercialized, medical -ized, totalitarian modernity right this ins tant."  
Denise closed one eye and opened the other very wide. Her open : t was like 
nearly black balsamic vinegar beading on white china. "If I grant that these 
are interesting issues," she said, "will you stop talking ibout them and come 
upstairs with me?"  
Chip shook his head, "There's a poached salmon in the fridge. A creme 
fraiche with sorrel. A salad with green beans and hazelnuts.  
31 
You'll see the wine and the baguette and the butter. It's good fresh but ter 
from Vermont."  
"Has it occurred to  you that Dad is sick?"  
"An hour is all it's going to take. Hour and a half at most."  
"I said has it occurred to you that Dad is sick?"  
Chip had a vision of his father trembling and pleading in the door way. To 
block it out, he tried to summon up an image of sex with Julia, with the 
azure -haired stranger, with Ruthie, with anyone, but all he could picture was 
a vengeful, Fury -like horde of disembodied breasts.  
"The faster I get to Eden's and make those co rrections," he said, "the sooner 
I'll be back. If you really want to help me."  
An available cab was coming down the street. He made the mistake of looking 
at it, and Denise misunderstood him.  
"I can't give you any more money," she said.  
He recoiled as if s he'd spat on him. "Jesus 1, Denise —" 
"I'd like to but I can't."  
"I wasn't asking you for money!"  
"Because where does it end?"  
He turned on his heel and walked into the downpour and marched toward 
University Place, smiling with rage. He was ankle -deep in a b oiling gray 
sidewalk -shaped lake. He was clutching Denise's umbrella in his fist without 
opening it, and still it seemed unfair to him, it seemed not his fault, that he 
was getting drenched.  
Until recently, and without ever giving the matter much thought, Chip had 
believed that it was possible to be successful in America without making lots 
of money. He'd always been a good student, and from an early age he'd 
proved unfit for any form of economic activity except buying things (this he 
could do), and so he'd  chosen to pursue a life of the mind.  
Since Alfred had once mildly but unforgettably remarked that he didn't see 
the point of literary theory, and since Enid, in the florid bi weekly letters by 
means of which she saved many dollars on long distance dialing , had 
regularly begged Chip to abandon his pursuit of an "impractical" doctorate in 
the humanities ("I see your old science fair  
32 
THE CORRECTIONS  
trophies," she wrote, "and I think of what an able young man like you could 
be giving back to soci ety as a medical doctor, but then, you see, Dad and I 
always hoped we'd raised children who thought of others, not just 
themselves"), Chip had had plenty of incentives to work hard and prove his 
parents wrong. By getting out of bed much earlier than his gr ad-school 
classmates, who slept off their Gauloise hangovers until noon or one o'clock, 
he'd piled up the prizes and fellowships and grants that were the coin of the 
academic realm.  
For the first fifteen years of his adult life, his only experience with fa ilure had 
come secondhand. His girlfriend in college and long after, Tori Timmelman, 
was a feminist theorist who'd become so enraged with the patriarchal system 
of accreditation and its phallometric yard sticks of achievement that she 
refused (or was unabl e) to finish her dis sertation. Chip had grown up 
listening to his father pontificate on the topics of Men's Work and Women's 
Work and the importance of main taining the distinction; in a spirit of 
correction, he stuck with Tori for nearly a decade. He did  all of the laundry 
and most of the cleaning and cooking and cat care in the little apartment that 
he and Tori shared. He read secondary literature for Tori and helped her 
outline and reoutline me chapters of her thesis that she was too throttled by 
rage t o write. Xot until D ------ College had offered him a five -year tenure -
track ap pointment (while Tori, still minus a degree, took a two -year 
nonrenew -able job at an agriculture school in Texas) did he fully exhaust his 
supply of male guilt and move on.  
He ar rived at D ------ , then, as an eligible and well -published thirty - 
three -year -old to whom the college's provost, Jim Leviton, had all but 
r_iranteed lifelong employment. Within a semester he was sleeping •with the 
young historian Ruthie Hamilton and had tea med up at tennis with Leviton 
and brought Leviton the faculty doubles championship mat had eluded him 
for twenty years.  
D------  College, with an elite reputation and a middling endow ment, 
depended for its survival on students whose parents could pay full tuition. To 
attract these students, the college had built a $30 million recreation center, 
three espresso bars, and a pair of hulking "residence halls" that were less like 
dorms than like vivid premonitions of the ho - 
CORRECTIONS  
33 
tels in which  the students would book rooms for themselves in their well -
remunerated futures. There were herds of leather sofas and enough 
computers to ensure that no prospective matriculant or visiting parent could 
enter a room and not see at least one available keybo ard, not even in the 
dining hall or field house.  
Junior faculty lived in semi -squalor. Chip was lucky to have a two -story unit 
in a damp cinderblock development on Tilton Ledge Lane, on the western 
edge of campus. His back patio overlooked a waterway known  to college 
administrators as Kuyper's Creek and to everybody else as Carparts Creek. 
On the far side of the creek was a marshy auto motive boneyard belonging to 
the Connecticut State Department of Corrections. The college had been suing 
in state and feder al courts for twenty years to preserve this wetland from the 
"ecodisaster" of drainage and development as a medium -security prison.  
Every month or two, for as long as things were good with Ruthie, Chip invited 
colleagues and neighbors and the occasional pr ecocious student to dinner at 
Tilton Ledge and surprised them with lan -goustines, or a rack of lamb, or 
venison with juniper berries, and retro joke desserts like chocolate fondue. 
Sometimes late at night, presiding over a table on which empty Californian 
bottles were clustered like Manhattan high -rises, Chip felt safe enough to 
laugh at himself, open up a little, and tell embarrassing stories about his 
midwestern child hood. Like how his father not only had worked long hours at 
the Mid land Pacific Railroa d and read aloud to his children and done the 
yard work and home maintenance and processed a nightly briefcaseful of ex -
ecutive paper but had also found time to operate a serious metallurgical 
laboratory in the family basement, staying up past midnight to subject 
strange alloys to electrical and chemical stresses. And how Chip at the age of 
thirteen had developed a crush on the buttery alkali metals that his father 
kept immersed in kerosene, on the blushing crystalline cobalt, the buxom 
heavy mercury, the g round -glass stopcocks and glacial acetic acid, and had 
put together his own junior lab in the shadow of his dad's. How his new 
interest in science had delighted Alfred and Enid, and how, with their 
encouragement, he'd set his young heart on winning a troph y at the regional 
St. Jude science fair. How, at the St. Jude city li - 
34                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
 
brary, he'd unearthed a plant -physiology paper Iboth obscure enough and 
simple enough to be mistaken for the work of a brilliant eighth -grader. How 
he'd built a controlled plywood environment for growing oats and had 
photographed the young seedlings meticu lously and then ignored them for 
weeks, and how, by the time he went to weigh the seedlings and determine 
the effects of gibberellic acid in concert with an unidentified chemical factor, 
the oats were dried -out blackish slime. How he'd gone ahead anyway an d 
plotted the experiment's "correct" results on graph paper, working backward 
to fabricate a list of seedling weights with some artful random scatter and 
then forward to make sure that the fictional data produced the "correct" 
results. And how, as a first -place winner at the science fair, he'd won a three -
foot -tall silver -plated YHnged Victory and the admiration of his father. And 
how, a year later, around the time his father was securing his first of two U.S. 
patents (de spite his many grievances with Alfr ed, Chip was careful to impress 
on nis dinner guests what a giant, in his own way, the old man was), Chip had 
pretended to study migratory bird populations in a park near some head 
shops and a bookstore and the house of a friend with foosball and i pool 
table. And how in a ravine at this park he'd uncovered a cache of downmarket 
porn over the weather -swollen pages of which, back home m the basement 
lab where, unlike his father, he never performed a real experiment or felt the 
faintest twinge of scientific c uriosity, he'd end lessly dry -chafed the head of 
his erection without ever figuring out that —s excruciating perpendicular 
stroke was actively suppressing orgasm hi5 dinner guests, many of them 
steeped in queer theory, took special delight in this detail),  and how, as a 
reward for his mendacity and self -abuse and general laziness, he'd won a 
second Winged Victory.  
hi the haze of dinner -party smoke, as he entertained his sympa -ic colleagues, 
Chip felt secure in the knowledge that his parents dd not have been  more 
wrong about who he was and what kind of reer he was suited to pursue. For 
two and a half years, until the fiasco  
Thanksgiving in St. Jude, he had no troubles at D ------ College. But  
-- Ruthie dumped him and a first -year female student rushed in, as it  
fill the vacuum that Ruthie left behind. Melissa Paquette was the most gifted 
student in the intro theory  
 
35 
 
course, Consuming Narratives, that he taught in his third spring at D ------ . 
Melissa was a regal, theatrical person whom other students con spicuously 
avoided sitting close to, in part because they disliked her and in part because 
she always sat in the fir st row of desks, right in front of Chip. She was long -
necked and broad -shouldered, not exactly beautiful, more like physically 
splendid. Her hair was very straight and had the cherry -wood color of new 
motor oil. She wore thrift -store clothes that tended no t to flatter her —a man's 
plaid polyester leisure suit, a paisley trapeze dress, gray Mr. Goodwrench 
coveralls with the name Randy embroidered on the left front pocket.  
Melissa had no patience with people she considered fools. At the second 
meeting of Cons uming Narratives, when an affable dreadlocked boy named 
Chad (every class at D ------ had at least one affable dread -locked boy in it) 
took a stab at summarizing the theories of Thorstein "Webern," Melissa 
began to smirk at Chip complicitly. She rolled her e yes and mouthed the 
word "Veblen" and clutched her hair. Soon Chip was paying more attention to 
her distress than to Chad's discourse.  
"Chad, sorry," she interrupted finally. "The name is Veblen?"  
"Vebern. Veblern. That's what I'm saying."  
"No, you were sa ying Webern. It's Veblen."  
"Veblern. OK. Thank you very much, Melissa."  
Melissa tossed her hair and faced Chip again, her mission accom plished. She 
paid no attention to the dirty looks that came her way from Chad's friends 
and sympathizers. But Chip drift ed to a far corner of the classroom to 
dissociate himself from her, and he encouraged Chad to continue with his 
summary.  
That evening, outside the student cinema in Hillard Wroth Hall, Melissa 
came pushing and squeezing through a crowd and told Chip that s he was 
loving Walter Benjamin. She stood, he thought, too close to him. She stood 
too close to him at a reception for Marjorie Garber a few days later. She came 
galloping across the Lucent Technologies Lawn (formerly the South Lawn) to 
press into his hands  one of the weekly short papers that Consuming 
Narratives required. She mate rialized beside him in a parking lot that a foot 
of snow had buried, and with her mittened hands and considerable wingspan 
she helped him  
36 
THE CORRECTIONS  
dig out his car. She kicked a path clear with her fur -trimmed boots. She 
wouldn't stop chipping at the underlayer of ice on his windshield until he 
took hold of her wrist and removed the scraper from her hand.  
Chip had co -chaired the committee that drafted the college 's strin gent new 
policy on faculty -student contacts. Nothing in the policy pre vented a student 
from helping a professor clear snow off his car; and since he was also sure of 
his self -discipline, he had nothing to be afraid of. And yet, before long, he wa s 
ducking out of sight whenever he saw Melissa on campus. He didn't want her 
to gallop over and stand too close to him. And when he caught himself 
wondering if the color of her hair was from a bottle, he made himself stop 
wondering. He never asked her if s he was the one who'd left roses outside his 
office door on Valentine's Day, or the chocolate statuette of Michael Jackson 
on Easter weekend.  
In class he called on Melissa slightly less often than he called on other 
students; he lavished particular attentio n on her nemesis, Chad. He sensed, 
without looking, that Melissa was nodding in comprehen sion and solidarity 
when he unpacked a difficult passage of Marcuse or Baudrillard. She 
generally ignored her classmates, except to turn on them in sudden hot 
disagre ement or cool correction; her classmates, for their part, yawned 
audibly when she raised her hand.  
One warm Friday night near the end of the semester, Chip came home from 
his weekly grocery run and discovered that someone had vandalized his front 
door. Thr ee of the four utility lights at Tilton Ledge had burned out, and the 
college was apparently waiting for the fourth to burn out before investing in 
replacements. In the poor light, Chip could see that somebody had poked 
flowers and foliage —tulips, ivy —thro ugh the holes in his rotting screen door. 
"What is this?" he said. "Melissa, you are jailbait."  
Possibly he said other things before he realized that his stoop was strewn 
with torn -up tulips and ivy, a vandalism still in progress, and that he was not 
alone . The holly bush by his door had produced two gig gling young people. 
"Sorry, sorry!" Melissa said. "You were talking to yourself!"  
Chip wanted to believe she hadn't heard what he said, but the holly  
37 
 
wasn't three feet away. He set the groceries inside his house and turned a 
light on. Standing beside Melissa was the dreadlocked Chad.  
"Professor Lambert, hello," Chad said earnestly. He was wearing Melissa's 
Mr. Goodwrench coveralls, and Melissa was weari ng a Free Mumia T-shirt 
that might have belonged to Chad. She'd slung an arm around Chad's neck 
and fitted a hip over his. She was flushed and sweaty and lit up on something.  
"We were decorating your door," she said.  
"Actually, Melissa, it looks pretty hor rible," Chad said as he exam ined it in 
the light. Beat -up tulips were hanging down at every angle. The ivy runners 
had clods of dirt in their hairy feet. "Kind of a stretch to say 'decorating.'''  
"Well, you can't see down here," she said. "Where's the light?"  
"There is no light," Chip said. "This is the Ghetto in the Woods. This is where 
your teachers live."  
"Dude, that ivy is pathetic."  
"Whose tulips are these?" Chip asked.  
"College tulips," Melissa said.  
"Dude, I'm not even sure why we were doing this." Chad turned to allow 
Melissa to put her mouth on his nose and suck it, which didn't seem to bother 
him, although he drew his head back. "Wouldn't you say this was sort of more 
your idea than mine?"  
"Our tuition pays for these tulips," Melissa said, pivotin g to press her body 
more frontally into Chad. She hadn't looked at Chip since he turned the 
outdoor light on.  
"So then Hansel and Gretel came and found my screen door."  
"We'll clean it up," Chad said.  
"Leave it," Chip said. "I'll see you on Tuesday." And h e went inside and shut 
the door and played some angry music from his college years.  
For the last meeting of Consuming Narratives the weather turned hot. The 
sun was blazing in a pollen -filled sky, all the angiosperms in the newly 
rechristened Viacom Arbore tum blooming hard. To Chip the air felt 
disagreeably intimate, like a warm spot in a swimming pool. He'd already 
cued up the video player and lowered the classroom shades when Melissa and 
Chad strolled in and took seats in a rear cor - 
38 
THE CORRECTIONS  
ner. Chip reminded the class to sit up straight like active critics rather than 
be passive consumers, and the students sat up enough to acknowl edge his 
request without actually complying with it. Melissa, usually the one fully 
upright critic, to day slumped especially low and draped an arm across Chad's 
legs.  
To test his students' mastery of the critical perspectives to which he'd 
introduced them, Chip was showing a video of a six -part ad cam paign called 
"You Go, Girl." The campaign was the work of an agency,  
Beat Psychology, that had also created "Howl with Rage" for G ------  
Electric, "Do Me Dirty" for C ------ Jeans, "Total F***ing Anarchy!" for  
the W ------ Network, "Radical Psychedelic Underground" for E ------  
.com, and "Love & Work" for M ------ Pharmaceuticals. "You Go, Girl"  
had had its first airing the previous fall, one episode per week, on a prime -
time hospital drama. The style was black -and-white cinema ver -ite; the 
content, according to analyses in the Times and the Wall Street Journal, was 
"revolutionary."  
The plot was this: Four women in a small office —one sweet young African 
American, one middle -aged technophobic blonde, one tough and savvy 
beauty named Chelsea, and one radiantly benignant gray -haired Boss —dish 
together and banter together and, by and by, struggle together with Chelsea's 
stunning announcement, at the end of Episode 2, that for nearly a year she's 
had a lump in her breast that she's too scared to see a doctor about. In 
Episode 3 the Boss and the sweet young  
African American d azzle the technophobic blonde by using the W ------  
Corporation's Global Desktop Version 5.0 to get up -to-the-minute can cer 
information and to hook Chelsea into support networks and the very best 
local health care providers. The blonde, who is fast learnin g to love 
technology, marvels but objects: "There's no way Chelsea can af ford all this." 
To which the angelic Boss replies: "I'm paying every cent of it." By the middle 
of Episode 5, however —and this was the cam paign's revolutionary 
inspiration —it's clea r that Chelsea will not survive her breast cancer. Tear -
jerking scenes of brave jokes and tight hugs fol low. In the final episode the 
action returns to the office, where the Boss is scanning a snapshot of the 
departed Chelsea, and the now rabidly technoph iliac blonde is expertly 
utilizing the W -----  Corporation's  
39 
Global Desktop Version 5.0, and around the world, in rapid montage, women 
of all ages and races are smiling and dabbing away tears at the image of 
Chelsea on their own Global Desktops. Spectral Chelsea in a digital video clip 
pleads: "Help us Fight for the  Cure." The episode  
ends with the information, offered in a sober typeface, that the W -----  
Corporation has given more than $10,000,000.00 to the American Can cer 
Society to help it Fight for the Cure . . .  
The slick production values of a campaign like "Y ou Go, Girl" could seduce 
first -year students before they'd acquired the critical tools of resistance and 
analysis. Chip was curious, and somewhat afraid, to see how far his students 
had progressed. With the exception of Melissa, whose papers were written 
with force and clarity, none of them had per suaded him that they were doing 
more than parroting the weekly jar gon. Each year, it seemed, the incoming 
freshmen were a little more resistant to hardcore theory than they'd been the 
year before. Each year the  moment of enlightenment, of critical mass, came a 
little later. Now the end of a semester was at hand, and Chip still wasn't sure 
that anyone besides Melissa really got how to criticize mass culture.  
The weather wasn't doing him any favors. He raised the shades and beach 
light poured into the classroom. Summerlust came wafting off the bared arms 
and legs of boys and girls alike.  
A petite young woman named Hilton, a chihuahua -like person, of fered that it 
was "brave" and "really interesting" that Chelsea ha d died of cancer instead of 
surviving like you might have expected in a com mercial.  
Chip waited for someone to observe that it was precisely this self consciously 
"revolutionary" plot twist that had generated publicity for the ad. Normally 
Melissa, from h er seat in the front row, could be counted on to make a point 
like this. But today she was sitting by Chad with her cheek on her desk. 
Normally, when students napped in class, Chip called on them immediately. 
But today he was reluctant to say Melissa's nam e. He was afraid that his voice 
might shake.  
Finally, with a tight smile, he said, "In case any of you were visiting a 
different planet last fall, let's review what happened with these ads. 
Remember that Nielsen Media Research took the 'revolutionary' step  
40 
THE CORRECTIONS  
of giving Episode Six its own weekly rating. The first fating ever given to an 
ad. And once Nielsen rated it, the campaign was all but guaran teed an 
enormous audience for its rebroadcast during the November sweeps. Also 
remem ber that the Nielsen rating followed a week of print and broadcast 
news coverage of the 'revolutionary' plot twist of Chelsea's death, plus the 
Internet rumor about Chelsea's being a real person who'd really died. Which, 
incredibly, several hundred thousan d people actually believed. Beat 
Psychology, remember, having fabricated her medical records and her 
personal history and posted them on the Web. So my question for Hilton 
would be, how 'brave' is it to engineer a surefire publicity coup for your ad 
campai gn?"  
"It was still a risk," Hilton said. "I mean, death is a downer. It could have 
backfired."  
Again Chip waited for someone, anyone, to take his side of the argument. No 
one did. "So a wholly cynical strategy," he said, "if there's a financial risk 
attach ed, becomes an act of artistic bravery?"  
A brigade of college lawn mowers descended on the lawn outside the 
classroom, smothering discussion in a blanket of noise. The sun shine was 
bright.  
Chip soldiered on. Did it seem realistic that a small -business own er would 
spend her own money on special health care options for an em ployee?  
One student averred that the boss she'd had at her last summer job had been 
generous and totally great.  
Chad was silently fighting off the tickling hand of Melissa while, with hi s free 
hand, he counterattacked the naked skin of her midriff.  
"Chad?" Chip said.  
Chad, impressively, was able to answer the question without having it 
repeated. "Like, that was just one office," he said. "Maybe another boss 
wouldn't have been so great. Bu t that boss was great. I mean, no body's 
pretending that's an average office, right?"  
Here Chip tried to raise the question of art's responsibilities vis -avis the 
Typical; but this discussion, too, was DOA.  
"So, bottom line," he said, "we like this campai gn. We think these ads are 
good for the culture and good for the country. Yes?"  
41 
There were shrugs and nods in the sun -heated room.  
"Melissa," Chip said. "We haven't heard from you."  
Melissa raised her head from her desk, shifted her attention from Chad, and 
looked at Chip with narrowed eyes. "Yes," she said.  
"Yes what?"  
"Yes, these ads are good for the culture and good for the country."  
Chip took a deep breath, because this hurt. "Great, OK," he said. "Thank you 
for your opinion."  
"As if you care about my opinion," Melissa said.  
"I beg your pardon?"  
"As if you care about any of our opinions unless they're the same as yours."  
"This is not about opinions," Chip said. "This is about learning to apply 
critical methods to textual artifac ts. Which is what I'm here to teach you."  
"I don't think it is, though," Melissa said. "I think you're here to teach us to 
hate the same things you hate. I mean, you hate these ads, right? I can hear it 
in every word you say. You totally hate them."  
The ot her students were listening raptly now. Melissa's connection with Chad 
might have depressed Chad's stock more than it had raised her own, but she 
was attacking Chip like an angry equal, not a student, and the class ate it up.  
"I do hate these ads," Chip ad mitted. "But that's not —" 
"Yes it is," Melissa said.  
"Why do you hate them?" Chad called out.  
"Tell us why you hate them," the little Hilton yipped.  
Chip looked at the wall clock. There were six minutes left of the semester. He 
pushed a hand through his ha ir and cast his eyes around the room as if he 
might find an ally somewhere, but the students had him on the run now, and 
they knew it.  
"The W ----- Corporation," he said, "is currently defending three  
separate lawsuits for antitrust violations. Its revenues last year exceeded the 
gross domestic product of Italy. And now, to wring dollars out of the one 
demographic that it doesn't yet dominate, it's running a campaign  
42 
THE CORRECTIONS  
that exploits a woman's fear of breast cancer and her sympathy w ith its 
victims. Yes, Melissa?"  
"It's not cynical."  
"What is it, if not cynical?"  
"It's celebrating women in the workplace," Melissa said. "It's raising money 
for cancer research. It's encouraging us to do our self -examinations and get 
the help we need. It 's helping women feel like we own this technology, like it's 
not just a guy thing."  
"OK, good," Chip said. "But the question is not whether we care about breast 
cancer, it's what breast cancer has to do with selling office equipment."  
Chad took up the cudg els for Melissa. "That's the whole point of the ad, 
though. That if you have access to information, it can save your life."  
"So if Pizza Hut puts a little sign about testicular self -exams by the hot -
pepper flakes, it can advertise itself as part of the glo rious and courageous 
fight against cancer?"  
"Why not? "Chad said.  
"Does anybody see anything wrong with that?"  
Not one student did. Melissa was slouching with her arms crossed and 
unhappy amusement on her face. Unfairly or not, Chip felt as if she'd 
destro yed in five minutes a semester's worth of careful teaching.  
"Well, consider," he said, "that 'You Go, Girl' would not have been  
produced if W ------ had not had a product to sell. And consider that the  
goal of the people who wor k at W ------ is to exercise their stock options  
and retire at thirty -two, and that the goal of the people who own  
W------  stock" (Chip's brother and sister -in-law, Gary and Caroline,  
owned a great deal of W ----- stock) "is to build bigger houses and buy  
bigg er SUVs and consume even more of the world's finite resources."  
"What's wrong with making a living?" Melissa said. "Why is it inherently evil 
to make money?"  
"Baudrillard might argue," Chip said, "that the evil of a campaign like 'You 
Go, Girl' consists i n the detachment of the signifier from the signified. That a 
woman weeping no longer just signifies sadness. It  
43 
now also signifies: 'Desire office equipment.' It signifies: 'Our bosses care 
about us deeply.' '' 
The wall clock showed two -thirty. Chip paused and waited for the bell to ring 
and the semester to end.  
"Excuse me," Melissa said, "but that is just such bullshit."  
"What is bullshit?" Chip said.  
"This whole class," she said. "It's just bullshit every week.  It's one critic after 
another wringing their hands about the state of criticism. Nobody can ever 
quite say what's wrong exactly. But they all know it's evil. They all know 
'corporate' is a dirty word. And if somebody's hav ing fun or getting rich —
disgusti ng! Evil! And it's always the death of this and the death of that. And 
people who think they're free aren't 'really' free. And people who think they're 
happy aren't 'really' happy. And it's impossible to radically critique society 
anymore, although what's so radically wrong with society that we need such a 
radical cri tique, nobody can say exactly. It is so typical and perfect that you 
hate those ads!" she said to Chip as, throughout Wroth Hall, bells finally 
rang. "Here things are getting better and better  for women and people of 
color, and gay men and lesbians, more and more integrated and open, and all 
you can think about is some stupid, lame problem with signifiers and 
signifieds. Like, the only way you can make something bad out of an ad that's 
great fo r women —which you have to do, because there has to be something 
wrong with everything —is to say it's evil to be rich and evil to work for a 
corporation, and yes, I know the bell rang." She closed her notebook.  
"OK," Chip said. "On that note. You've now sat isfied your Cultural Studies 
core requirement. Have a great summer."  
He was powerless to keep the bitterness out of his voice. He bent over the 
video player and gave his attention to rewinding and re -cuing "You Go, Girl" 
and touching buttons for the sake o f touching buttons. He sensed a few 
students lingering behind him, as if they wanted to thank him for teaching 
his heart out or to tell him they'd enjoyed the class, but he didn't look up 
from the video player until the room was empty. Then he went home to  
Tilton Ledge and started drinking.  
Melissa's accusations had cut him to the quick. He'd never quite re - 
 
44 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
alized how seriously he'd taken his father's injunction to do work that was 
"useful" to society. Criticizing a sick cul ture, even if the criticism 
accomplished nothing, had always felt like useful work. But if the sup posed 
sickness wasn't a sickness at all —if the great Materialist Order of technology 
and consumer appetite and medical science really was improving the live s of 
the formerly oppressed; if it was only straight white males like Chip who had 
a problem with this order —then there was no longer even the most abstract 
utility to his criticism. It was all, in Melissa's word, bullshit.  
Lacking the spirit to work on hi s new book, as he'd planned to do all summer, 
Chip bought an overpriced ticket to London and hitch hiked to Edinburgh and 
overstayed his welcome with a Scottish per formance artist who had lectured 
and performed at D ------ the previous  
winter. Eventually th e woman's boyfriend said, "Time to be off now, laddie," 
and Chip hit the road with a backpack full of Heidegger and \\lttgenstein that 
he was too lonely to read. He hated to think of him self as a man who couldn't 
live without a woman, but he hadn't been l aid since Ruthie dumped him. He 
was the only male professor in  
D------ history to have taught Theory of Feminism, and he understood  
how important it was for women not to equate "success" with "having a — an" 
and "failure" wit h "lacking a man," but he was a lonely straight —ale, and a 
lonely straight male had no equivalently forgiving Theory :: Masculinism to 
help him out of this bind, this key to all misogynies:  
f    To feel as if he couldn't survive without a woman made a man  feel weak;  
And yet, without a woman in his life, a man lost the sense of irency and 
difference that, for better or worse, was the founda tion of his manhood.  
iany a morning, in green Scottish places splashed with rain, Chip ose to 
escaping this spurious b ind and regaining a sense of self and <se. only to find 
himself at four in the afternoon drinking beer at a station, eating chips and 
mayonnaise, and hitting on Yankee col - 
45 
 
lege girls. As a seducer, he was hampered by ambivalence and by his l ack of 
the Glaswegian accent that made American girls go weak in the knees. He 
scored exactly once, with a young hippie from Oregon who had ketchup 
stains on her chemise and a scalpy smell so overpowering that he spent much 
of the night breathing through h is mouth.  
His failures seemed more funny than squalid, though, when he came home to 
Connecticut and regaled his misfit friends with stories at his own expense. He 
wondered if somehow his Scottish depression had been the product of a 
greasy diet. His stomac h heaved when he remem bered the glistening wedges 
of browned whateverfish, the glaucous arcs of lipidy chips, the smell of scalp 
and deep -fry, or even just the words "Firth of Forth."  
At the weekly farmers' market near D ------ he loaded up on heir loom 
tom atoes, white eggplants, and thin -skinned golden plums. He ate arugula 
("rocket," the old farmers called it) so strong it made his eyes water, like a 
paragraph of Thoreau. As he remembered the Good and the Healthful, he 
began to recover his self -discipline.  He weaned himself off alcohol, got better 
sleep, drank less coffee, and went to the college gym twice a week. He read 
the damned Heidegger and did his crunches every morning. Other pieces of 
the self -improvement puzzle fell into place, and for a while, as  cool working 
weather returned to the Carparts Creek valley, he experienced an almost 
Thoreauvian well -being. Between sets on the tennis court, Jim Leviton 
assured him that his tenure review would be a mere formality —that he 
shouldn't worry about competing  with the department's other young theorist, 
Vendla O'Fallon. Chip's fall course load consisted of Renaissance Poetry and 
Shakespeare, neither of which required him to rethink his critical per -
spectives. As he girded himself for the last stage of his ascen t of Mount 
Tenure, he was relieved to be traveling light; almost happy, after all, not to 
have a woman in his life.  
He was at home on a Friday in September, making himself a dinner of 
broccoli rabe and acorn squash and fresh haddock and looking for ward to  a 
night of grading papers, when a pair of legs sashayed past his kitchen 
window. He knew this sashay. He knew the way Melissa walked. She couldn't 
pass a picket fence without trailing her fingertips against it.  
46 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
She stopped in  hallways to do dance steps or hopscotch. She went back wards 
or sideways, or skipped, or loped.  
Her knock on his screen door was not apologetic. Through the screen he saw 
that she had a plate of cupcakes with pink frosting.  
"Yeah, what's up?" he said.  
Melissa raised the plate on upturned palms. "Cupcakes," she said. "Thought 
you might be needing some cupcakes in your life right around now."  
Not being theatrical, Chip felt disadvantaged around people who were. "Why 
are you bringing me cupcakes?" he said.  
Melissa knelt and set the plate on his doormat among the pulver ized remains 
of ivy and dead tulips. "I'll just leave them here," she said, "and you can do 
whatever you want with them. Goodbye!" She spread her arms and 
pirouetted off the doorstep and ran up the flagstone path on tiptoe.  
Chip went back to wrestling with the haddock filet, through the center of 
which ran a blood -brown fault of gristle that he was deter mined to cut out. 
But the fish had a starchy grain and was hard to get a grip on. "Fuck you, 
little girl," he said as he threw the knife into the  
The cupcakes were full of butter and frosted with a butter frosting.  
liter he'd washed his hands and opened a bottle of Chardonnay he ate  
:~:<ur of them and put the uncooked fish in the refrigerator. The  skins of  
ne overbaked squash were like inner -tube rubber. Cent Am de Cinema  
Eratique, an edifying video that had sat on a shelf for months without  
making a peep, suddenly demanded his immediate and full attention.  
He lowered the blinds and drank the wine, and brought himself off  
4£ain and again, and ate two more cupcakes, detecting peppermint in  
Kan, a faint buttery peppermint, before he slept.  
The next morning he was up at seven and did  four hundred crunches. He 
immersed Cent Am de Cinema Erotique in dishwater and rendered it, so to 
speak, non -combustible. (He'd done this with many a faf\ of cigarettes while 
kicking the habit.) He had no idea what he'd meant when he'd thrown the 
knife in to the sink. His voice had sounded • like him.  
 
I 
He went to his office in Wroth Hall and graded papers. He wrote in a margin: 
Cressida's character may inform Toyota's choice of product name; that 
Toyota's Cressida informs the Shakespearean text requires more argument 
than you present here. He added an exclamation point to soften his criti cism. 
Sometimes, when ripping apart especially feeble student work, he drew 
smiley faces.  
Spell -check! he exhorted a student who'd written "Trolius" for "Troilu s" 
throughout her eight -page paper.  
And the ever -softening question mark. Beside the sentence "Here 
Shakespeare proves Foucault all too right about the historicity of morals," 
Chip wrote: Rephrase? Perhaps: "Here the Shakespearean text seems almost 
to anti cipate Foucault (better: Nietzsche?) . . ."?  
He was still grading papers five weeks later, ten or fifteen thousand student 
errors later, on a windy night just after Halloween, when he heard a 
scrabbling outside his office door. Opening the door, he found a  dime -store 
trick -or-treat bag hanging from the hall -side doorknob. The leaver of this gift, 
Melissa Paquette, was backpedaling up the hall.  
"What are you doing?" he said.  
"Just trying to be friends," she said.  
"Well, thanks," he said. "I don't get it."  
Melissa came back down the hall. She was wearing white painter's overalls, a 
long -sleeve thermal undershirt, and hot -pink socks. "I went trick -or-
treating," she said. "This was like one -fifth of my haul."  
She stepped closer to Chip and he backed away. She fo llowed him into his 
office and circled it on tiptoe, reading titles on his shelves. Chip leaned 
against his desk and folded his arms tightly.  
"So I'm taking Theory of Feminism with Vendla," Melissa said.  
"That would be the logical next step. Now that you'v e rejected the nostalgic 
patriarchal tradition of critical theory."  
"Exactly my thinking," Melissa said. "Unfortunately, her class is so bad. 
People who took it with you last year said it was great. But Vendla's idea is 
that we should sit around and talk a bout our feelings. Because the Old Theory 
was about the head, see. And therefore the New True Theory has to be about 
the heart. I'm not convinced she's even read all the stuff she assigns us."  
48 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
Through his open door Chip could see the door of Vendla O'Fal -lon's office. It 
was papered with healthful images and adages —Betty Friedan in 1965, 
beaming Guatemalan peasant women, a triumphant female soccer star, a 
Bass Ale poster of Virginia Woolf, SUBVERT THE DOMINANT 
PARADIGM —that rem inded him, in a dreary way, of his old girlfriend Tori 
Timmelman. His feeling about decorating doors was: What are we, high -
school kids? Are these our bedrooms?  
"So basically," he said, "even though you thought my class was bull shit, it 
now seems like a s uperior brand of bullshit because you're taking hers."  
Melissa blushed. "Basically! Except you're a much better teacher. I mean, I 
learned a ton from you. That's what I wanted to tell you."  
"Consider me told."  
"See, my mom and dad split up in April." Melis sa flung herself down on 
Chip's college -issue leather sofa and assumed the full thera peutic position. 
"For a while it was kind of great that you were being so anti -corporate, and 
then suddenly it really, really irritated me. Like, my parents have a lot of  
money, and they're not evil people, although my dad did just move in with 
this character named Vicki who's like four years older than me. But he still 
loves my mom. I know he does. As soon as I was out of the house, things 
deteriorated a little, but I kno w he still loves her."  
"The college has a lot of services," Chip said, arms folded, "for stu dents going 
through these things."  
"Thanks. On the whole I'm doing brilliantly, except for having been rude to 
you in class that time." Melissa hooked her heels on  the arm of the sofa, pried 
her shoes off, and let them drop to the floor. Soft curves in thermal knitwear 
spilled out to either side of her overalls' bib, Chip noticed.  
"I had an excellent childhood," she said. "My parents have always been my 
best friends. They homeschooled me till seventh grade. My mom was in med 
school in New Haven and my dad had this punk band, the Nomatics, that was 
touring, and at my mom's first ever  punk show she went out with my dad and 
ended up in his hotel room. She quit school, he quit the Nomatics, and they 
were never apart after that. To - 
tally romantic. See, and my dad had some money from a trust fund, and it 
was really brilliant wha t they did then. There were all these new IPOs, and 
my mom was up on all the biotech and reading JAMA, and Tom —my dad —
could vet the numbers part of it, and they just made re ally great investments. 
Clair —my mom —stayed home with me and we hung out all day, you know, 
and I learned my times tables, et cetera, and it was always just the three of us. 
They were so, so in love. And parties every weekend. And finally it occurred 
to us, we know everybody, and we're really good investors, so why not start a 
mutual fu nd? Which we did. And it was incredible. It's still a great fund. It's 
called the Westport -folio Biofund Forty? We started some other funds, too, 
when the cli mate got more competitive. You kind of have to offer a full array 
of services. That's what the in stitutional investors were telling Tom, at any 
rate. So he started these other funds, which unfortunately have pretty much 
tanked. I think that's the big problem between him and Clair. Because her 
fund, the Biofund Forty, where she makes the picks, is stil l doing great. And 
now she's heartbroken and depressed. She's holed up in our house and she 
never goes out. Meanwhile Tom wants me to meet this Vicki person, who he 
says is 'lots of fun' and a roller blader. The thing is, we all know my mom and 
dad are made for each other. They complement each other perfectly. And I 
just think if you knew how cool it is to start a company, and how great it is 
when the money starts com ing in, and how romantic it can be, you wouldn't 
be so harsh."  
"Possibly," Chip said.  
"Anyway, I thought you'd be somebody I could talk to. On the whole I'm 
coping brilliantly, but I could kind of use a friend."  
"How's Chad?" Chip said.  
"A sweet boy. Good for about three weekends." Melissa swung a leg off the 
sofa and planted a stockinged fo ot on Chip's leg, close to his hip. "It's hard to 
imagine two people less long -term compatible than him and me."  
Through his jeans Chip could feel the deliberate flexing of her toes. He was 
trapped against his desk, and so, to escape, he had to take hold o f her ankle 
and swing her leg back onto the sofa. Her pink feet imme diately grasped his 
wrist and pulled him toward her. It was all very play - 
50 
THE CORRECTIONS  
CORRECTIONS  
ful, but his door was open, and his lights were oh, and his blinds were  raised, 
and somebody was in the hall. "Code," he said, pulling free. "There's a code."  
Melissa rolled off the sofa, stood up, and came closer. "It's a stupid code," she 
said. "If you care about somebody."  
Chip retreated to the doorway. Up the hall, by the  department of fice, a tiny 
blue -uniformed woman with a Toltec face was vacuuming. "There are good 
reasons to have it," he said.  
"So I can't even give you a hug now."  
"That's right."  
"It's stupid." Melissa stepped into her shoes and joined Chip in the door way. 
She kissed him on the cheek, near his ear. "So there."  
He watched her slide -step and pirouette down the hall and out of sight. He 
heard a fire door bang shut. He carefully examined every word he'd said, and 
he gave himself an A for correctness. But wh en he returned to Tilton Ledge, 
where the last of the utility lights had burned out, he was swamped by 
loneliness. To erase the tactile memory of Melissa's kiss, and her lively warm 
feet, he phoned an old college friend hi New York and made a date for lunc h 
the next day. He took Cent Ans jV Cinema Erotique from the cabinet where, 
in expectation of a night like this, he'd stashed it after soaking it. The tape 
was still playable. The im -a°re was snowy, though, and during the first really 
hot bit, a hotel -room  scene with a wanton chambermaid, the snow thickened 
to a blizzard and the screen went blue. The VCR made a dry, thin choking 
sound. Air, need air, it seemed to say. Tape had leaked out and wound itself 
around the machine's endoskeleton. Chip extracted the  cassette and sev eral 
handrals of Mylar, but then something broke and the machine spat up a 
plastic spool. Which, all right, these things happened. But the trip to Scotland 
had been a financial Waterloo, and he couldn't afford a new VCR.  
Nor was New York City, on a cold rainy Saturday, the treat he needed. Every 
sidewalk in lower Manhattan was dotted with the metal lic squared spirals of 
antitheft badges. The badges were bonded to the wet pavement with the 
world's strongest glue, and after Chip had bought some imported cheeses (he 
did this every time he visited New  
51 
 
York to be sure of accomplishing at least'one thing before returning to 
Connecticut, and yet it felt a little sad to buy the same baby Gruyere and 
Fourme d'Ambert at the same store;  it brought him up against the more 
general failure of consumerism as an approach to human happi ness), and 
after he'd lunched with his college friend (who had recently quit teaching 
anthropology and hired himself out to Silicon Alley as a "marketing 
psych ologist" and who advised Chip, now, to wake up and do the same), he 
returned to his car and discovered that each of his plastic -wrapped cheeses 
was protected by its own antitheft badge and that, indeed, a fragment of 
antitheft badge had stuck to the bottom  of his left shoe.  
Tilton Ledge was glazed with ice and very dark. In the mail Chip found an 
envelope containing a short note from Enid lamenting Alfred's moral failures 
("he sits in that chair all day, every day") and a lengthy profile of Denise, 
clipped from Philadelphia magazine, with a slavering review of her 
restaurant, Mare Scuro, and a full -page glamour photo of the young chef. 
Denise in the photo was wearing jeans and a tank top and was all muscled 
shoulders and satiny pecs ("Very young and very goo d: Lambert in her 
kitchen," the caption read), and this was just the kind of girl -as-object 
horseshit, Chip thought bitterly, that sold maga zines. A few years ago Enid's 
letters had reliably contained a paragraph of despair about Denise and 
Denise's faili ng marriage, with phrases like he is too OLD for her! double -
underlined, and a paragraph festooned  
with thrilleds and prouds apropos of Chip's hiring by D ------ College,  
and although he knew that Enid was skilled at playing her children off 
against each oth er and that her praise was usually double -edged, he was j 
dismayed that a woman as smart and principled as Denise had used her body 
for marketing purposes. He threw the clipping in the trash. He opened the 
Saturday half of the Sunday Times and—yes, he was contra dicting himself, 
yes, he was aware of this —paged through the Magazine in search of ads for 
lingerie or swimwear to rest his weary eyes on. Finding none, he began to 
read the Book Review, where a memoir called Daddy's Girl, by Vendla 
O'Fallon, was de clared "astonishing" and "courageous" and "deeply 
satisfying" on page 11. The name Vendla O'Fallon was rather unusual, but 
Chip had been so completely unaware  
52 
THE CORRECTIOtSl  
that Vendla was publishing a book that he refused to' believe she'd writ ten 
Daddy's Girl until, near the end of the review, he encountered a sen tence that 
began: "O'Fallon, who teaches at D ------ College . . ."  
He closed the Book Review and opened a bottle.  
In theory both he and Vendla were in line for tenure in Textual Ar tifacts, but 
in practice the department was already overtenured. That Yendla commuted 
to work from New York (thus flouting the college's infor mal requirement that 
faculty live in town), and that she skipped important meetings and taught 
every gut she could, had been steady sources of comfort to Chip. He still had 
the edge in scholarly publica tions, student evaluations, and support from Jim 
Levi ton; but he found that two glasses of wine had no effect on him.  
He was pouring himself his fourth when his telephone rang. It was Jim 
Leviton's wife, Jackie. "I just wanted you to know," Jackie said, "that Jim's 
going to be OK."  
"Was something wrong?" Chi p said.  
"Well, he's resting fine. We're over at St. Mary's."  
"What happened?"  
"Chip, I asked him if he thought he could play tennis, and do you know what? 
He nodded! I said I was going to call you, and he nodded, yes, he was good 
for tennis. His motor skil ls appear to be fully normal. Fully —normal. And 
he's lucid, that is the important thing. That is the really good news here, Chip. 
His eyes are bright. He's the same old Jim."  
"Jackie, did he have a stroke?"  
"There'll be some rehabilitation," Jackie said. " Obviously today will be his 
effective retirement date, which, Chip, as far as I'm concerned, is an absolute 
blessing. We can make some changes now, and in three years —well, it's not 
going to take any three years for him to rehabili tate. When all is said a nd 
done, we're going to be ahead of this game. His eyes are so bright, Chip. He's 
the same old Jim!"  
Chip rested his forehead against his kitchen window and turned his head so 
that he could open one eye directly against the cold, damp glass. He knew 
what h e was going to do.  
"The same old lovable Jim!" Jackie said.  
 
The following Thursday, Chip made dinner for Melissa and had sex with her 
on his red chaise longue. He'd taken a fancy to the chaise back in the days 
when dropping eight hundred dollars  on an antique -store impulse was 
somewhat less suicidal financially. The chaise's backrest was angled in erotic 
invitation, its padded shoulders thrown back, its spine arching; the plush of 
its chest and belly looked ready to burst the fabric buttons that crisscrossed 
it. Breaking his initial clinch with Melissa, Chip excused himself for one 
second to turn off lights in the kitchen and stop in the bathroom. When he 
returned to the living room, he found her stretched out on the chaise wearing 
only the pants half of her plaid polyester leisure suit. In the dim light she 
could have been a hairless, heavy -titted man. Chip, who much preferred 
queer the ory to queer practice, basically hated the suit and wished she hadn't 
worn it. Even after she'd taken off the pa nts there was a residue of gen der 
confusion on her body, not to mention the rank b.o. that was the bane of 
synthetic fabrics. But from her underpants, which to his relief were delicate 
and sheer —distinctly gendered —an affectionate warm rabbit came springi ng, 
a kicking wet autonomous warm animal. It was j almost more than he could 
handle. He hadn't slept two hours in the previous two nights, and he had a 
head full of wine and a gut full of gas (he couldn't remember why he'd made a 
cassoulet for dinner; poss ibly for no good reason), and he worried that he 
hadn't locked the front door —that there was a gap in the blinds somewhere, 
that one of his neighbors would drop by and try the door and find it unlocked 
or peer in through the window and see him flagrantly v iolating Sections I, II. 
and VI of a code that he himself had helped draft. Altogether for him it was a 
night of anxiety and effortful concentration, punctuated by little I stabs of 
throttled pleasure, but at least Melissa seemed to find it exciting and 
romantic. Hour after hour, she wore a big crinkled U of a smile.  
It was Chip's proposal, after a second extremely stressful tryst atl Tilton   
Ledge,   that   he   and   Melissa   leave   campus   for   the   week -long 
Thanksgiving break and find a cottage o n Cape Cod where they I wouldn't 
feel observed and judged; and it was Melissa's proposal, as they | departed 
through D ------ 's little -used eastern gate under cover of dark - 
54 
THE CORRECTIONS \ 
ness, that they stop in Middletown and buy drugs fro m a high -school friend 
of hers at Wesleyan. Chip waited in front of Wesleyan's impres sively 
weatherproofed Ecology House and drummed on the steering wheel of his 
Nissan, drummed so hard his fingers throbbed, because it was important not 
to think about wha t he was doing. He'd left behind mountains of ungraded 
papers and exams, and he had not yet managed 10 visit Jim Leviton in the 
rehab unit. That Jim had lost his powers of speech and now impotently 
strained his jaw and lips to form words — that he'd become,  according to 
reports from colleagues who'd visited him, an angry man —made Chip all the 
more reluctant to visit. He was m the mode now of avoiding anything that 
might make him experience an emotion. He beat on the steering wheel until 
his fingers were stif f ind burning and Melissa came out of the Ecology House. 
She brought into the car a smell of woodsmoke and frozen flower beds, the 
smell of an affair in late autumn. She put into Chip's palm a golden caplet 
marked with what appeared to be the old Midland P acific Railroad logo — 
 
without the text. "Take this," she told him, closing the door.  
"This is? Some kind of Ecstasy?"  
"No. Mexican A."  
Chip felt culturally anxious. Not long ago, there had been no drugs he hadn't 
heard of. "What does it do?"  
"Nothing and everything," she said, swallowing one herself. "You'll  :. = ."  
"How much do I owe you for this?"  
"Never mind that."  
For a while the drug did seem, as promised, to do nothing. But on  
55 
 
the industrial outskirts of Norwich, still twtf or three hours from the Cape, he 
turned down the trip hop that Melissa was playing on his stereo and said, 
"We have to stop immediately and fuck."  
She laughed. "I guess so." 
"Why don't I pull over," he said.  
She laughed again. "No, let's find a room."  
They stopped at a Comfort Inn that had lost its franchise and now called itself 
the Comfort Valley Lodge. The night clerk was obese and her computer was 
down. She manually registered Chip with the labored breathi ng of someone 
lately stranded by a systems malfunction. Chip put his hand on Melissa's 
belly and was about to reach into her pants when it occurred to him that 
fingering a woman in public was inappro priate and might cause trouble. For 
similar, purely rati onal reasons he suppressed the impulse to pull his dick out 
of his pants and show it to the wheezing, perspiring clerk. But he did think 
the clerk would be in terested in seeing it.  
He took Melissa down on the cigarette -divoted carpeting of Room 23 without  
even shutting the door.  
"It is so much better like this!" Melissa said, kicking the door shut. She 
yanked her pants down and practically wailed with delight, "This is so much 
better!"  
He didn't dress all weekend. The towel he was wearing when he took delivery 
of a pizza fell open before the delivery man could turn away. "Hey, love, it's 
me," Melissa said into her cell phone while Chip lay down behind her and 
went at her. She kept her ph one arm free and made supportive filial noises. 
"Uh-huh . . . Uh -huh . . . Sure, sure . . . No, that's hard, Mom . . . No, you're 
right, that is hard . . . Sure . . . Sure . . . Uh -huh . . . Sure . . . That's really, 
really hard," she said, with a twinkle in her voice, as Chip sought leverage for 
an extra sweet half inch of penetration while he shot. On Monday and 
Tuesday he dictated large chunks of a term paper on Carol Gilligan which 
Melissa was too annoyed with Vendla O'Fallon to write by herself. His ne ar-
photographic recall of Gilligan's arguments, his total mastery of theory, got 
him so excited that he began to tease Melissa's hair with his erec tion. He ran 
the head of it up and down the keyboard of her computer  
56 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
 
and app lied a gleaming smudge to the liquid -crystal screen. "Darling," she 
said, "don't come on my computer." He nudged her cheeks and ears and 
tickled her armpits and finally backed her up against the bathroom door 
while she bathed him in her cherry -red smile.  
Each night around dinnertime, for four nights running, she went to her 
luggage and got two more golden caplets. Then on Wednesday Chip took her 
to a cineplex and they sneaked into an extra movie and a half for the price of 
the original matinee bargain. Back  at the Comfort Valley Lodge, after a late 
pancake dinner, Melissa called her mother and spoke at such length that Chip 
fell asleep without swallowing a caplet.  
He awoke on Thanksgiving in the gray light of his undrugged self. For a 
while, as he lay listen ing to the sparse holiday traffic on Route 2, he couldn't 
place what was different. Something about the body beside him was making 
him uneasy. He considered turning and burying his face in Melissa's back, 
but it seemed to him she must be sick of him. He co uld hardly believe she 
hadn't minded his attacks on her, all his push ing and pawing and poking. 
That she didn't feel like a piece of meat that he'd been using.  
In a matter of seconds, like a market inundated by a wave of panic selling, he 
was plunged into  shame and self -consciousness. He couldn't bear to stay in 
bed a moment longer. He pulled on his shorts and snagged Melissa's 
toiletries kit and locked himself in the bathroom.  
His problem consisted of a burning wish not to have done the things he'd 
done. And his body, its chemistry, had a clear instinctive un derstanding of 
what he had to do to make this burning wish go away. He had to swallow 
another Mexican A.  
He searched the toiletries kit exhaustively. He wouldn't have thought it 
possible to feel depen dent on a drug with no hedonic kick, a drug that on the 
evening of his fifth and final dose he hadn't even craved. He uncapped 
Melissa's lipsticks and removed twin tampons from their pink plastic holder 
and probed with a bobby pin down through her jar of s kin cleanser. Nothing.  
He took the kit back out to the main room, which was fully light now, and 
whispered Melissa's name. Receiving no answer, he dropped to his knees and 
rifled her canvas travel bag. Paddled his fingers in the  
57 
empty cups of bras. Squeezed her sock balls. Touched the various pri vate 
pouches and compartments of the bag. This new and different vio lation of 
Melissa was sensationally painful to him. In the orange light of his shame he 
felt as if he were abusing her internal orga ns. He felt like a surgeon 
atrociously fondling her youthful lungs, defiling her kidneys, sticking his 
finger in her perfect, tender pancreas. The sweetness of her little socks, and 
the thought of the even littler socks of her all too prox imate girlhood, and the 
image of a hopeful bright romantic sophomore packing clothes for a trip with 
her esteemed professor —each sentimen tal association added fuel to his 
shame, each image recalled him to the unfunny raw comedy of what he'd 
done to her. The jismic grunti ng butt -oink. The jiggling frantic nut -swing.  
By now his shame was boiling so furiously it felt liable to burst things in his 
brain. Nevertheless, while keeping a close eye on Melissa's sleeping form, he 
managed to paw her clothing a second time. Only af ter he'd resqueezed and 
rehandled each piece of it did he conclude that the Mexican A was in the big 
zippered outer pocket of her bag. This zipper he eased open tooth by tooth, 
clenching his own teeth to survive the noise of it. He'd worked the pocket 
open  just far enough to push his hand through it (and the stress of this latest 
of his penetrations released fresh gusts of flammable memory; he felt 
mortified by each of the man ual liberties he'd taken with Melissa here in 
Room 23, by the insatiable lewd avi dity of his fingers; he wished he could 
have left her alone) when the cell phone on the nightstand tinkled and with a 
groan she came awake.  
He snatched his hand from the forbidden place, ran to the bath room, and 
took a long shower. By the time he came out , Melissa was dressed and had 
repacked her bag. She looked utterly uncarnal in the morning light. She was 
whistling a happy tune.  
"Darling, a change of plans," she said. "My father, who really is a lovely man, 
is coming out to Westport for the day. I want to go be with them."  
Chip wished he could fail to feel the shame that she was failing to feel; but to 
beg for another pill was acutely embarrassing. "What about our dinner?" he 
said.  
58 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"I'm sorry. It's just really important that I be there."  
"So it's not enough to be on the phone with them for a couple of hours every 
day."  
"Chip, I'm sorry. But we're talking about my best friends."  
Chip had never liked the sound of Tom Paquette: a dilettante rocker and 
trust -fund baby who ditched his family for a roller blader. And in the last few 
days Glair's boundless capacity to yak about herself while Melissa listened 
had turned Chip against her, too.  
"Great," he said. "I'll take you to Westport."  
Melissa flipped her hair so that it fanned acro ss her back. "Darling? Don't be 
mad."  
"If you don't want to go to the Cape, you don't want to go to the Cape. I'll take 
you to Westport."  
"Good. Are you going to get dressed?"  
"It's just that, Melissa, you know, there's something a little sick about being 
so close to your parents."  
She seemed not to have heard him. She went to the mirror and ap plied 
mascara. She put on lipstick. Chip stood in the middle of the  
room with a towel around nis waist. Me relt warty and egregious. Me felt that 
Melissa was right t o be disgusted by him. And yet he wanted to be clear.  
"Do you understand what I'm saying?"  
"Darling. Chip." She pressed her painted lips together. "Get dressed."  
"I'm saying, Melissa, that children are not supposed to get along ith their 
parents. Your pare nts are not supposed to be your best friends. There's 
supposed to be some element of rebellion. That's how you define yourself as a 
person."  
"Maybe it's how you define yourself," she said. "But then you're not exactly 
an advertisement for happy adulthood."  
He grinned and bore this.  
"I like myself," she said. "But you don't seem to like yourself so much."  
"Your parents seem very fond of themselves, too," he said. "You seem very 
fond of yourselves as a family."  
59 
He'd never seen Melissa really angry. "I love myself," she said. "What's wrong 
with that?"  
He was unable to say what was wrong with it. He was unable to say what was 
wrong with anything about Melissa —her self -adoring parents, her 
theatricality and confiden ce, her infatuation with capitalism, her lack of good 
friends her own age. The feeling he'd had on the last day of Consuming 
Narratives, the feeling that he was mistaken about every thing, that there was 
nothing wrong with the world and nothing wrong with being happy in it, that 
the problem was his and his alone, returned with such force that he had to sit 
down on the bed.  
"What's our drug situation?"  
"We're out," Melissa said.  
"OK."  
"I got six of them and you've had five."  
"What?"  
"And it was a big mistake, evidently, not to give you all six."  
"What have you been taking?"  
"Advil, darling." Her tone with this endearment had moved beyond the arch 
to the outright ironic. "For saddle soreness?"  
"I never asked you to get that drug," he s aid. 
"Not in so many words," she said.  
"What do you mean by that?"  
"Well, a fat lot of fun we were going to have without it."  
Chip didn't ask her to explain. He was afraid she meant he'd been a lousy, 
anxious lover until he took Mexican A. He had, of cours e, been a lousy, 
anxious lover; but he'd allowed himself to hope she hadn't noticed. Under the 
weight of this fresh shame, and with no drug left in the room to alleviate it, he 
bowed his head and pressed his hands into his face. Shame was pushing 
down and rage was boiling up.  
"Are you going to drive me to Westport?" Melissa said. He nodded, but she 
must not have been looking at him, because he heard her flipping through a 
phone book. He heard her tell a dispatcher she needed a ride to New London. 
He heard h er say: "The Comfort Valley Lodge. Room twenty -three." "I'll drive 
you to Westport," he said.  
BO 
THE CORRECTIONS  
She shut the phone. "No, this is fine."  
"Melissa. Cancel the cab. I'll drive you."  
She parted the room's rear curtains, exposing a vi sta of Cyclone fencing, 
stick -straight maples, and the back side of a recycling plant. Eight or ten 
snowflakes drifted dismally. In the eastern sky was a raw patch where the 
cloud cover was abraded, the white sun wearing through. Chip dressed 
quickly while  Melissa's back was turned. If he hadn't been so strangely full of 
shame, he might have gone to the win dow and put his hands on her, and she 
might have turned and forgiven him. But his hands felt predatory. He 
imagined her recoiling, and he wasn't entirel y convinced that some dark 
percentage of his being didn't really want to rape her, to make her pay for 
liking herself in a way he couldn't like himself. How he hated and how he 
loved the lilt in her voice, the bounce in her step, the serenity of her amour 
propre! She got to be her and he didn't. And he could see that he was 
ruined —that he didn't like her but would miss her disastrously.  
She dialed another number. "Hey, love," she said into her cell phone. "I'm on 
my way to New London. I'll take the first tr ain that comes . . . No, I just want 
to be with you guys . . . Totally . . . Yes, totally . . OK, kiss kiss, I'll see you 
when I see you . . . Yep."  
A car honked outside the door.  
"There's my cab," she told her mother. "Right, OK. Kiss kiss. Bye."  
She shru gged into her jacket, lifted her bag, and waltzed across the room. At 
the door she announced in a general way that she was leaving. Til see you 
later," she said, almost looking at Chip.  
He couldn't figure out if she was immensely well adjusted or seri -: _sly 
messed up. He heard a cab door slam, an engine rumble. He went BO the 
front window and got a glimpse of her cherrywood hair through the rear 
window of a red -and-white cab. He decided, after five years •s -thout, that the 
time had come to buy some cigaret tes. 
He put on a jacket and crossed expanses of cold asphalt indifferent 
pedestrians. He pushed money through a slot in the bulletproof glass :: -- 
minimart.  
It was the morning of Thanksgiving. The flurries had stopped and nie sun 
was halfway out. A gull's  wings rattled and clacked. The breeze  
I 
had a ruffly quality, it didn't quite seem to touch the ground. Chip sat on a 
freezing guardrail and smoked and took comfort in the sturdy mediocrity of 
American commerce, the unpretending metal and plastic roadside hardware. 
The thunk of a gas -pump nozzle  halting when a tank was filled, the humility 
and promptness of its service. And a 99( Big Gulp banner swelling with wind 
and sailing nowhere, its nylon ropes whipping and pinging on a galvanized 
standard. And the black sanserif numerals of gasoline prices , the company of 
so many 9s. And American sedans moving down the access road at nearly 
stationary speeds like thirty. And orange and yellow plastic pennants 
shivering overhead on guys.  
"Dad fell down the basement stairs again," Enid said while the rain cam e 
down in New York City. "He was carrying a big box of pecans to the basement 
and he didn't hold the railing and he fell. Well, you can imagine how many 
pecans are in a twelve -pound box. Those nuts rolled everywhere. Denise, I 
spent half a day on my hands and knees. And I'm still finding them. They're 
the same color as those crickets we can't get rid of. I reach down to pick up a 
pecan, and it jumps in my face!"  
Denise was trimming the stems of the sunflowers she'd brought. "Why was 
Dad carrying twelve poun ds of pecans down the basement stairs?"  
"He wanted a project he could work on in his chair. He was going to shell 
them." Enid hovered at Denise's shoulder. "Is there something I can do 
here?"  
"You can find me a vase."  
The first cabinet that Enid opened contained a carton of wine -bottle corks 
and nothing else. "I don't understand why Chip invited us here if he wasn't 
even going to eat lunch with us."  
"Conceivably," Denise said, "he didn't plan on getting dumped this morn ing." 
Denise's tone of voice was forever informing Enid that she was stu pid. Denise 
was not, Enid felt, a very warm or giving person. However. Denise was a 
daughter, and a few weeks ago Enid had done a shameful  
62 
THE CORRECTIONS  
thing that she was now in serious need of confessing to somebody, and she 
hoped Denise might be that person.  
"Gary wants us to sell the house and move to Philadelphia," she said. "Gary 
thinks Philadelphia makes sense because he's there and you're there and 
Chip's in New York. I said to Gary, I love my children, but St. Jude is where 
I'm comfortable. Denise, I'm a midwesterner. I'd be lost in Philadelphia. Gary 
wants us to sign up for assisted living. He doesn't understand that it's already 
too late. Those places won't let  you in if you have a condition like Dad's."  
"But if Dad keeps falling down the stairs."  
"Denise, he doesn't hold the railing! He refuses to accept that he shouldn't be 
carrying things on the stairs."  
Underneath the sink Enid found a vase behind a stack of  framed 
photographs, four pictures of pinkish furry things, some sort of kooky art or 
medical photos. She tried to reach past them quietly, but she knocked over an 
asparagus steamer that she'd given Chip for Christ mas once. As soon as 
Denise looked down, Enid could not pretend she hadn't seen the pictures. 
"What on earth?" she said, scowling. "Denise, what are these?"  
"What do you mean, 'what are these?'?"  
"Some sort of kooky thing of Chip's, I guess."  
Denise had an "amused" expression that drove Enid craz y. "Obvi ously you 
know what they are, though."  
"No. I don't."  
"You don't know what they are?"  
Enid took the vase out and closed the cabinet. "I don't want to know," she 
said.  
"Well, that's something else entirely."  
In the living room, Alfred was summoning  the courage to sit down on Chip's 
chaise longue. Not ten minutes ago, he'd sat down on it with out incident. But 
now, instead of simply doing it again, he'd stopped to think. He'd realized 
only recently that at the center of the act of sitting down was a loss of control, 
a blind backwards free fall. His excellent blue chair in St. Jude was like a first 
baseman's glove that gently gath - 
:ns 
ered in whatever body was flung its way, at whatever glancing angle, with 
whatever violence; it had big help ful ursine arms to support him while he 
performed the crucial blind pivot. But Chip's chaise was a low -riding, 
impractical antique. Alfred stood facing away from it and hesi tated, his knees 
bent to the rather small degree that his neuropathic lower legs p ermitted, his 
hands scooping and groping in the air behind him. He was afraid to take the 
plunge. And yet there was something ob scene about standing half -crouched 
and quaking, some association with the men's room, some essential 
vulnerability which felt t o him at once so poignant and degraded that, simply 
to put an end to it, he shut his eyes and let go. He landed heavily on his 
bottom and continued on over backwards, coming to rest with his knees in 
the air above him.  
"Al, are you all right?" Enid called.  
"I don't understand this furniture," he said, struggling to sit up and sound 
powerful. "Is this meant to be a sofa?"  
Den ise came out and put a vase of three sunflowers on the spindly table by 
the chaise. "It's like a sofa," she said. "You can put your legs up and be a 
French philosophe. You can talk about Schopenhauer."  
Alfred shook his head.  
Enid enunciated from the kitche n doorway, "Dr. Hedgpeth says you should 
only sit in high, straight -backed chairs."  
Since Alfred showed no interest in these instructions, Enid repeated them to 
Denise when she returned to the kitchen. "High, straight -backed chairs 
only," she said. "But Da d won't listen. He insists on sitting in his leather 
chair. Then he shouts for me to come and help him get up. But if I hurt my 
back, then where are we? I put one of those nice old ladder -back chairs by the 
TV downstairs and told him sit here. But he'd rat her sit in his leather chair, 
and then to get out of it he slides down the cush ion until he's on the floor. 
Then he crawls on the floor to the Ping -Pong table and uses the Ping -Pong 
table to hoist himself up."  
"That's actually pretty resourceful," Denise said as she took an arm load of 
food from the refrigerator.  
"Denise, he's crawling across the floor. Rather than sit in a nice, com fortable 
straight -backed chair which the doctor says it's important that he sit in, he 
crawls across the floor. He shouldn't  be sitting so much to be - 
B4                                                                                                                            THE CORRECTIOHS  
' 
gin with. Dr. Hedgpeth says his condition is n ot at all severe if he would just 
get out and do a little. Use it or lose it, that's what every doctor says. Dave 
Schumpert has had ten times more health problems than Dad, he's had a 
colostomy for fifteen years, he's got one lung and a pace maker, and loo k at all 
the things that he and Mary Beth are doing. They just got back from 
snorkeling in Fiji! And Dave never complains, never complains. You 
probably don't remember Gene Grillo, Dad's old friend from Hephaestus, but 
he has bad Parkinson's —much, much wor se than Dad's. He's still at home in 
Fort Wayne but in a wheelchair now. He's really in awful shape, but, Denise, 
he's interested in things. He can't write anymore but he sent us an 'audio 
letter' on a cassette tape, really thoughtful, where he talks about  each of his 
grandchildren in detail, be cause he knows his grandkids and takes an interest 
in them, and about how he's started to teach himself Cambodian, which he 
calls Khmer, from listening to a tape and watching the Cambodian (or 
Khmer, I guess) TV cha nnel in Fort Wayne, because their youngest son is 
mar ried to a Cambodian woman, or Khmer, I guess, and her parents don't 
speak any English and Gene wants to be able to talk to them a little. Can you 
believe? Here Gene is in a wheelchair, completely crippl ed, and he's still 
thinking about what he can do for somebody else! While Dad, who can walk, 
and write, and dress himself, does nothing all day but sit in his chair."  
"Mother, he's depressed," Denise said in a low voice, slicing bread.  
"That's what Gary an d Caroline say, too. They say he's depressed and he 
should take a medication. They say he was a workaholic and that work was a 
drug which when he couldn't have it anymore he got de pressed."  
"So drug him and forget him. A convenient theory."  
"That's not fa ir to Gary."  
"Don't get me started on Gary and Caroline."  
''Golly, Denise, the way you throw that knife around I don't see how TOU 
haven't lost a finger."  
From the end of a French loaf Denise had made three little crust -rottomed 
vehicles. On one she set sh avings of butter curved like sails toll of wind, into 
another she loaded Parmesan shards packed in an ex - 
••!OHS  
B5 
celsior of shredded arugula, and the third she paved with minced olive meat 
and olive oil and covered with a thick red tarp of pep per.  
Enid spoke —"Mm, don't those look nice" —as she reached, cat -quick, for the 
plate on which Denise had arranged the snacks. But the plate eluded Enid.  
"These are for Dad."  
"Just a corner of one."  
"I'll make some more for you."  
"No, I just want one corner  of his."  
But Denise left the kitchen and took the plate to Alfred, for whom the 
problem of existence was this: that, in the manner of a wheat seedling 
thrusting itself up out of the earth, the world moved forward in time by 
adding cell after cell to its l eading edge, piling moment on mo ment, and that 
to grasp the world even in its freshest, youngest moment provided no 
guarantee that you'd be able to grasp it again a moment later. By the time 
he'd established that his daughter, Denise, was hand ing him a p late of snacks 
in his son Chip's living room, the next moment in time was already budding 
itself into a pristinely ungrasped existence in which he couldn't absolutely 
rule out the possibility, for example, that his wife, Enid, was handing him a 
plate of fe ces in the parlor of a brothel; and no sooner had he reconfirmed 
Denise and the snacks and Chip's living room than the leading edge of time 
added yet another layer of new cells, so that he again faced a new and 
ungrasped world; which was why, rather than e xhaust himself playing catch -
up, he pre ferred more and more to spend his days down among the 
unchanging historical roots of things.  
"Something to tide you while I get lunch," Denise said.  
Alfred gazed with gratitude at the snacks, which were holding about  ninety 
percent steady as food, nickering only occasionally into objects of similar size 
and shape.  
"Maybe you'd like a glass of wine?"  
"Not necessary," he said. As the gratitude spread outward from his heart —as 
he was moved —his clasped hands and lower arms began to bounce more 
freely on his lap. He tried to find something in the room  
THE CORRECTIONS  
that didn't move him, something he could rest his eyes on safely; but because 
the room was Chip's and because Denise w as standing in it, every fixture and 
every surface —even a radiator knob, even a thigh -level expanse of faintly 
scuffed wall —was a reminder of the separate, eastern worlds in which his 
children led their lives and hence of the var ious vast distances that s eparated 
him from them; which made his hands shake all the more.  
That the daughter whose attentions most aggravated his affliction was the 
person he least wanted to be seen by in the grip of this affliction was the sort 
of Devil's logic that confirmed a ma n's pessimism.  
"I'll leave you alone for a minute," Denise said, "while I get the lunch going."  
He closed his eyes and thanked her. As if waiting for a break in a downpour 
so that he could run from his car into a grocery store, he waited for a lull in 
his tremor so that he could reach out and safely eat what she'd brought him.  
His affliction offended his sense of ownership. These shaking hands belonged 
to nobody but him, and yet they refused to obey him. They were like bad 
children. Unreasoning two -year -olds in a tantrum of self ish misery. The more 
sternly he gave orders, the less they listened and the more miserable and out 
of control they got. He'd always been vulnerable to a child's recalcitrance and 
refusal to behave like an adult. Irresponsibility and undiscipline were the 
bane of his existence, and it was another instance of that Devil's logic that his 
own untimely afflic tion should consist of his body's refusal to obey him.  
If thy right hand offend thee, Jesus said, cut it off.  
As he waited for the t remor to abate —as he watched his hands' jerking 
rowing motions impotently, as if he were in a nursery with screaming 
misbehaving infants and had lost his voice and couldn't make them quiet 
down —Alfred took pleasure in the imagination of chopping his hand o ff with 
a hatchet: of letting the transgressing limb know how deeply he was angry 
with it, how little he loved it if it insisted on dis obeying him. It brought a kind 
of ecstasy to imagine the first deep bite of the hatchet's blade in the bone and 
muscle o f his offending wrist; but  
•US 
67 
along with the ecstasy, right beside it, was an inclination to weep for this 
hand that was his, that he loved and wished the best for, that he'd known all 
its life.  
He was thinking about Chip again without noticing it.  
He wondered where Chip had gone. How he'd driven Chip away again.  
Denise's voice and Enid's voice in the kitchen were like a larger bee and a 
smaller bee trapped behind a window screen. And his moment c ame, the lull 
that he'd been waiting for. Leaning forward and steadying his taking hand 
with his supporting hand, he grasped the butter -sailed schooner and got it off 
the plate, bore it aloft without capsizing it, and then, as it floated and bobbed, 
he ope ned his mouth and chased it down and got it. Got it. Got it. The crust 
cut his gums, but he kept the whole thing in his mouth and chewed carefully, 
giving his sluggish tongue wide berth. The sweet butter melting, the feminine 
softness of baked leavened whe at. There were chapters in Hedgpeth's 
booklets that even Alfred, fatalist and man of discipline that he was, couldn't 
bring himself to read. Chapters devoted to the problems of swallowing; to the 
late torments of the tongue; to the final breakdown of the s ignal system . . .  
The betrayal had begun in Signals.  
The Midland Pacific Railroad, where for the last decade of his career he'd run 
the Engineering Department (and where, when he'd given an order, it was 
carried out, Mr. Lambert, right away, sir), had ser ved hundreds of one -
elevator towns in west Kansas and west and central Nebraska, towns of the 
kind that Alfred and his fellow execu tives had grown up in or near, towns that 
in their old age seemed the sicker for the excellent health of the Midpac 
tracks r unning through them. Although the railroad's first responsibility was 
to its stockholders, its Kansan and Missourian officers (including Mark 
Jamborets, the cor poration counsel) had persuaded the Board of Managers 
that because a railroad was a pure monopo ly in many hinterland towns, it 
had a civic duty to maintain service on its branches and spurs. Alfred 
personally had no illusions about the economic future of prairie towns where 
the median age was fifty -plus, but he believed in rail and he hated trucks,  
68 
THE CORRECTIONS  
and he knew firsthand what scheduled service meant to a town's civic pride, 
how the whistle of a train could raise the spirits on a February morning at 
41°N 101 °W; and in his battles with the EPA and various DOTs he'd learned 
to appreciate rural state legislators who could inter cede on your behalf when 
you needed more time to clean up your waste -oil tanks in the Kansas City 
yards, or when some goddamned bu reaucrat was insisting that you pay for 
forty percent of a needless gra de-separation project at Country Road H. Years 
after the Soo Line and Great Northern and Rock Island had stranded dead 
and dying towns all across the northern Plains, then, the Midpac had 
persisted in running short semiweekly or even biweekly trains throug h places 
like Alvin and Pisgah Creek, New Chartres and West Centerville.  
Unfortunately, this program had attracted predators. In the early 1980s, as 
Alfred neared retirement, the Midpac was known as a regional carrier that 
despite outstanding management an d lush profit margins on its long -haul 
lines had very ordinary earnings. The Midpac had already repulsed one 
unwelcome suitor when it came under the acquisitive gaze of Hillard and 
Chauncy Wroth, fraternal twin brothers from Oak Ridge, Tennessee, who had 
expanded a family meat -packing business into an empire of the dollar. Their 
company, the Orfic Group, included a chain of hotels, a bank in Atlanta, an 
oil company, and the Arkansas Southern Railroad. The Wroths had lopsided 
faces and dirty hair and no disc ernible desires or interests apart from making 
money; Oak Ridge Raiders, the financial press called them. At an early 
exploratory meeting that Alfred attended, Chauncy Wroth persisted in 
addressing the Mid -pac's CEO as "Dad": Pm well aware it don't seem li ke 
"fair play" to you, DAD . . . Well, DAD, why don 'tyou and your lawyers go 
ahead and have that little chat right now . . . Gosh, and here Hillard and 
myself was under the im pression, DAD, that you 're operating a business, 
not a chanty . . . This kind of anti -paternalism played well with the railroad's 
unionized workforce, which after months of arduous negotiations voted to 
offer the Wroths a package of wage and work -rule concessions worth almost 
$200 million; with these prospective savings in hand, plu s twenty -seven 
percent of the railroad's stock, plus limitless junk financing, the Wroths made 
an irre - 
sistible tender offer and bought the railroad outright. A former Ten nessee 
highway commissioner, Fenton Creel, was hired to merge the railroa d with 
the Arkansas Southern. Creel shut down the Midpac's headquarters in St. 
Jude, fired or retired a third of its employees, and moved the rest to Little 
Rock.  
Alfred retired two months before his sixty -fifth birthday. He was at home 
watching Good Morni ng America in his new blue chair when Mark 
Jamborets, the Midpac's retired corporation counsel, called with the news 
that a sheriff in New Chartres (pronounced "Charters"), Kansas, had had 
himself arrested for shooting an employee of Orfic Midland. "The sh eriff's 
name is Bryce Halstrom," Jamborets told Alfred. "He got a call that some 
roughnecks were trashing Midpac signal wires. He went over to the siding 
and saw three fellows ripping down the wire, smashing signal boxes, coiling 
up anything copper. One of  them took a county bullet in his hip before the 
others made Halstrom understand they were working for the Midpac. Hired 
for copper salvage at sixty cents a pound."  
"But that's a good new system," Alfred said. "It's not three years since we 
upgraded the wh ole New Chartres spur."  
"The Wroths are scrapping everything but the trunk lines," Jam borets said. 
"They're junking the Glendora cutoff! You think the Atchi -son, Topeka 
wouldn't make a bid on that?"  
"Well," Alfred said.  
"It's a Baptist morality gone sour," said Jamborets. "The Wroths can't abide 
that we admitted any principle but the ruthless pursuit of profit. I'm telling 
you: they hate what they can't comprehend. And now they're sowing salt in 
the fields. Close down hea dquarters in St. Jude? When we're twice the size of 
Arkansas Southern? They're punishing St. Jude for being the home of the 
Midland Pacific. And Creel's punishing the towns like New Chartres for being 
Midpac towns. He's sowing salt in the fields of the fin ancially unrighteous."  
"Well," Alfred said again, his eyes drawn to his new blue chair and its 
delicious potential as a sleep site. "Not my concern any more."  
^^ 
70 
THE CORRECTIONS  
But he'd worked for thirty years to make the Midland Pacific a st rong system, 
and Jamborets continued to call him and send him news reports of fresh 
Kansan outrages, and it all made him very sleepy. Soon hardly a branch or 
spur in Midpac's western district remained in service, but apparently Fenton 
Creel was satisfied w ith pulling down the signal wires and gutting the boxes. 
Five years after the takeover, the rails were still in place, the right -of-way was 
undisposed of. Only the copper nervous system, in an act of corporate self -
vandalism, had been dis mantled.  
"And now  I'm worried about our health insurance," Enid told Denise. "Orfic 
Midland is switching all the old Midpac employees to managed care no later 
than April. I have to find an HMO that has some of Dad's and my doctors on 
their list. I'm deluged with prospectus es, where the differences are all in the 
fine print, and honestly, Denise, I don't think I can handle this."  
As if to forestall being asked for help, Denise quickly said: "What plans does 
Hedgpeth accept?"  
"Well, except for his old fee -for-service patients , like Dad, he's ex clusive now 
with Dean Driblett's HMO," Enid said. "I told you about the big party at 
Dean's gorgeous, huge new house. Dean and Trish really are about the nicest 
young couple I know, but golly, Denise, I called his company last year afte r 
Dad fell down on the lawn mower, and you know what they wanted for 
cutting our little lawn? Fifty -five dollars a week! I'm not opposed to profit, I 
think it's 'wonderful that Dean's suc cessful, I told you about his trip to Paris 
with Honey, I'm not sayi ng anything against him. But fifty -five dollars a 
week!"  
Denise sampled Chip's green -bean salad and reached for the olive oil. "What 
would it cost to stay with fee -for-service?"  
"Denise, hundreds of dollars a month extra. Not one of our good friends has 
managed care, everybody has fee -for-service, but I don't see how we can 
afford it. Dad was so conservative with his investments, we're lucky to have 
any cushion for emergencies. And this is something else I'm very, very, very, 
very worried about." Enid lower ed her voice. "One of Dad's old patents is 
finally paying off, and I need your advice."  
71 
She stepped out of the kitchen and made sure that Alfred couldn't  
hear. "Al, how are you doing?" she shouted.  
He was cradling his second hors d'oeuvre, the little green boxcar,  
below his chin. As if he'd captured a small animal that might escape  
again, he shook his head without looking up.  
Enid returned to the kitchen with her purse.  "He finally has a  
chance to m ake some money, and he's not interested. Gary talked to  
him on the phone last month and tried to get him to be a little more  
aggressive, but Dad blew up."  
Denise stiffened. "What was Gary wanting you to do?"  
"Just be a little more aggressive. Here, I'll sh ow you the letter."  
"Mother, those patents are Dad's. You have to let him handle it  
however he wants."  
Enid hoped that the envelope at the bottom of her purse might be  
the missing Registered letter from the Axon Corporation. In her purse,  
as in her house, lost objects did sometimes marvelously resurface. But  
the envelope she found was the original Certified letter, which had  
never been lost.  
"Read this," she said, "and see if you agree with Gary."  
Denise set down the can of cayenne pepper w ith which she'd dusted  
Chip's salad. Enid stood at her shoulder and reread the letter to make  
sure it still said what she remembered.  
Dear Dr. Lambert:  
On behalf of the Axon Corporation, 24 East Industrial Ser pentine, 
Schwenksville, Pennsylvania, I'm writ ing to offer you a lump sum payment of 
five thousand dollars ($5000.00) for the full, exclusive, and irrevocable right 
to United States Patent #4,934,417 (THERAPEUTIC FERROACE TATE -GEL 
ELECTRO -POLYMERIZATION ), for which you are original and sole holder of 
license.  
The management of Axon regrets that it cannot offer you a larger fee. The 
company's own product is in the earliest stages of testing, and there is no 
guarantee that its investment will bear fruit.  
72 
THE CORRECTIOHS  
If the terms outlined in the attached Licensing Agreement are acceptable, 
please sign and have notarized all three copies and return them to me no 
later than September 30.  
Sincerely yours,  
Joseph K. Prager Senior Associate Partner Bragg Knuter & Speigh  
When this letter had arri ved in the mail in August and Enid had awakened 
Alfred in the basement, he'd shrugged and said, "Five thou sand dollars won't 
change the way we live." Enid had suggested that they write to the Axon 
Corporation and ask for a larger fee, but Alfred shook his  head. "We'll have 
soon spent five thousand dollars on a lawyer," he said, "and then where are 
we?" It didn't hurt to ask, though, Enid said. "I will not ask," Alfred said. But 
if he just wrote back, Enid said, and asked for ten thousand . . . She fell sil ent 
as Alfred fixed her with a look. She might as well have proposed that they 
make love.  
Denise had taken a bottle of wine from the refrigerator, as if to un derline her 
indifference to a matter of consequence to Enid. Sometimes Enid believed 
that Denise had disdain for every last thing she cared about. The sexual 
tightness of Denise's blue jeans, as she bumped a drawer shut with her hip, 
sent this message. The assurance with which she drove a corkscrew into the 
cork sent this message. "Do you want some wi ne?"  
Enid shuddered. "It's so early in the day."  
Denise drank it like water. "Knowing Gary," she said, "I'm guessing he said 
try to gouge them."  
"No, well, see —" Enid reached toward the bottle with both hands. "Just a tiny 
drop, pour me just a swallow, hon estly, I never drink this early in the day, 
never —you see, but Gary wonders why the company is even bothering with 
the patent if they're still so early in their develop ment. I guess the usual thing 
is just to infringe on the other person's patent. —That's  too much! Denise, I 
don't like so much wine! Because,  
JUS 
73 
 
see, the patent expires in six years, so Gary thinks the company must stand to 
make a lot of money soon."  
"Did Dad sign the agreement?"  
"Oh, yeah. He went over to the Schumperts' and had Dave notarize it."  
"Then you have to respect his decision."  
"Denise, he's being stubborn and unreasonable. I can't —" 
"Are you saying this is an issue of competency?"  
"No. No. This is fully in character. I just can't — 
"If he already signed the agreement," Denise said, "what is Gary imagining 
you're going to do?"  
"Nothing, I guess."  
"So what's the point here?"  
"Nothing. You're right," Enid said. "There's nothing we can d o," although in 
fact there was. If Denise had been a little less partisan in her support of 
Alfred, Enid might have confessed that after Alfred had given her the 
notarized agreement to mail at the post office on her way to the bank, she'd 
hidden the agreem ent in the glove compartment of their car, and had let the 
envelope sit and radiate guilt for several days; and that later, while Alfred was 
napping, she'd hidden the envelope more securely at the back of a laundry -
room cabinet containing jars of undesirab le jams and spreads going gray with 
age (kumquat -raisin, brandy -pumpkin, Korean barfleberry) and vases and 
baskets and cubes of florist's clay too good to throw away but not good 
enough to use; and that, as a result of this dishonest act, she and Alfred co uld 
still extract a big licensing fee from Axon, and that it was therefore crucial 
that she locate the second, Registered letter from Axon and hide it before 
Alfred found out that she'd deceived and disobeyed him. "Oh, but that re -
minds me," she said, empt ying her glass, "there's something else I really need 
your help with."  
Denise hesitated before replying with a polite and cordial "Yes?" This 
hesitation confirmed Enid's long -held belief that she and Alfred had taken a 
wrong turn somewhere in Denise's upbr inging. Had failed to instill in their 
youngest child the proper spirit of generosity and cheerful service.  
74 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"Well, as you know," Enid said, "we've gone to Philadelphia for the last eight 
Christmases in a row, and Gary's boys ar e old enough now that they might 
like to have a memory of Christmas at their grand parents' house, and so I 
thought —" 
"Damn!" came a cry from the living room.  
Enid set down her glass and hurried from the kitchen. Alfred was sitting on 
the edge of the chais e in a somehow penal posture, his knees high and his 
back a little hunched, and was surveying the crash site of his third hors 
d'oeuvre. The gondola of bread had slipped from his fin gers on its approach 
to his mouth and plunged to his knee, scattering wre ckage and tumbling to 
the floor and finally coming to rest beneath the chaise. A wet pelt of roasted 
red pepper had adhered to the chaise's flank. Shadows of oil -soak were 
forming around each clump of olive morsels on the upholstery. The emptied 
gondola la y on its side with its yellow -soaked, brown -stained white interior 
showing.  
Denise squeezed past Enid with a damp sponge and went and knelt by Alfred. 
"Oh, Dad," she said, "these are hard to handle, I should have realized."  
"Just get me a rag and I'll clea n it up."  
"No, here," Denise said. Cupping one hand for a receptacle, she brushed the 
bits of olive from his knees and thighs. His hands shook in the air near her 
head as if he might have to push her away, but she did her work quickly, and 
soon she'd spong ed the bits of olive up from the floor and was carrying the 
dirtied food back to the kitchen, where Enid had wanted a tiny extra splash of 
wine and in her hurry not to be con spicuous had poured a rather substantial 
tiny splash and downed it quickly.  
"Anyw ay," she said, "I thought that if you and Chip were interested, we could 
all have one last Christmas in St. Jude. What do you think of that idea?"  
"I'll be wherever you and Dad want to be," Denise said.  
"No, I'm asking you, though. I want to know if it's s omething you're 
especially interested in doing. If you'd especially like to have one last 
Christmas in the house you grew up in. Does it sound like it might be fun for 
you?"  
75 
"I can tell you right now," Denise said, "there's no way Caroline's l eaving 
Philly. It's a fantasy to think otherwise. So if you want to see your grandkids, 
you'll have to come east."  
"Denise, I'm asking what you want. Gary says he and Caroline haven't ruled it 
out. I need to know if a Christmas in St. Jude is some thing th at you really, 
really want for yourself. Because if all the rest of us are agreed that it's 
important to be together as a family in St. Jude one last time —" 
"Mother, it's fine with me, if you think you can handle it."  
"I'll need a little help in the kitche n is all."  
"I can help you in the kitchen. But I can only come for a few days."  
"You can't take a week?"  
"No."  
"Why not?"  
"Mother."  
"Damn!" Alfred cried again from the living room as something vitreous, 
maybe a vase containing sunflowers, hit the floor with a cracking -open 
sound, a gulp of breakage. "Damn! Damn!"  
Enid's own nerves were so splintery she almost dropped her wine glass, and 
yet a part of her was grateful for this second mishap, whatever it was, because 
it gave Denise a small taste of what she had to put up with every day, around 
the clock, at home in St. Jude.  
The night of Alfred's seventy -fifth birthday had found Chip alone at Tilton 
Ledge pursuing sexual congress with his red chaise longue.  
It was early January and the woods around Carparts Creek werr soggy with 
melting snow. Only the shopping -center sky above central Connecticut and 
the digital readouts of his home electronics ca st light on his carnal labors. He 
was kneeling at the feet of his chaise and sniff ing its plush minutely, inch by 
inch, in hopes that some vaginal tang might still be lingering eight weeks 
after Melissa Paquette had lain here. Ordinarily distinct and iden tifiable 
smells —dust, sweat, urine, the dayroom reek of cigarette smoke, the fugitive 
afterscent of quim —became abstract and indistinguishable from 
oversmelling, and so he had to pause again and again to refresh his nostrils. 
He worked his lips dowr.  
76                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
into the chaise's buttoned navels and kissed the lint and  grit and crumbs and 
hairs that had collected in them. None of the three spots where he thought he 
smelled Melissa was unambiguously tangy, but after exhaus tive comparison 
he was able to settle on the least questionable of the three spots, near a 
button j ust south of the backrest, and give it his full nasal attention. He 
fingered other buttons with both hands, the cool plush chafing his nether 
parts in a poor approximation of Melissa's skin, until finally he achieved 
sufficient belief in the smell's realit y—sufficient faith that he still possessed 
some relic of Melissa —to consummate the act. Then he rolled off his 
compliant antique and slumped on the floor with his pants undone and his 
head on the cushion, an hour closer to having failed to call his father on his 
birthday.  
He smoked two cigarettes, lighting the second off the first. He turned on his 
television to a cable channel that was running a marathon of old Warner 
Bros, cartoons. At the edge of the pool of tubal glow he could see the mail that 
for near ly a week he'd been dropping, unopened, on the floor. Three letters 
from the college's new acting provost were in the pile, also something 
ominous from the teachers' retirement fund, also a letter from the college 
housing office with the words NOTICE OF EV ICTION on the front of the 
envelope.  
Earlier in the day, while killing some hours by circling in blue ball point ink 
every uppercase M in the front section of a month -old New York Times, Chip 
had concluded that he was behaving like a depressed person. Now,  as his 
telephone began to ring, it occurred to him that a depressed person ought to 
continue staring at the TV and ignore the ringing —ought to light another 
cigarette and, with no trace of emo tional affect, watch another cartoon while 
his machine took wh oever's message.  
That his impulse, instead, was to jump to his feet and answer the phone —that 
he could so casually betray the arduous wasting of a day — cast doubt on the 
authenticity of his suffering. He felt as if he lacked the ability to lose all 
volitio n and connection with reality the way depressed people did in books 
and movies. It seemed to him, as he silenced the TV and hurried into his 
kitchen, that he was failing even at the miser able task of falling properly 
apart.  
77 
He zipped up his p ants, turned on a light, and lifted the receiver. "Hello?"  
"What's going on there, Chip?" Denise said without preliminaries. "I just 
talked to Dad and he said he hadn't heard from you."  
"Denise. Denise. Why are you shouting?"  
"I'm shouting," she said, "bec ause I'm upset because it's Dad's seventy -fifth 
birthday and you haven't called him and you didn't send him a card. I'm 
upset because I've been working for twelve hours and I just called Dad and 
he's worried about you. What's going on there?"  
Chip surprise d himself by laughing. "What's going on is that I've lost my job."  
"You didn't get tenure?"  
"No, I was fired," he said. "They didn't even let me teach the last two weeks of 
classes. Somebody else had to give my exams. And I can't appeal the decision 
withou t calling a witness. And if I try to talk to my witness it's just further 
evidence of my crime."  
"Who's the witness? Witness to what?"  
Chip took a bottle from the recycling bin, double -checked its emptiness, and 
returned it to the bin. "A former student of  mine says I'm obsessed with her. 
She says I had a relationship with her and wrote her a term paper in a motel 
room. And unless I get a lawyer, which I can't afford to do because they've cut 
my pay off, I'm not allowed to speak to this student. If I try to  see her, it's 
considered stalking."  
"Is she lying?" Denise said.  
"Not that this is anything Mom and Dad need to know about."  
"Chip, is she lying?"  
Spread open on Chip's kitchen counter was the section of the Times in which 
he'd circled all the uppercase A fs. Rediscovering this artifact now, hours later, 
would have been like remembering a dream except that a remembered dream 
didn't have the power to pull a waking person back into it, whereas the sight 
of a heavily marked story about severe new curtailments in Medicare and 
Medicaid benefits induced in Chip the same feeling of unease and unrealized 
lust, the same longing for un consciousness, that had sent him to the chaise to 
sniff and grope. He  
78 
THE CORRECTIOHS  
had to struggle now to remind himself that he'd already gone to the chaise, 
he'd already taken that route to comfort and forgetfulness.  
He folded the Times and dropped it on top of his heaping trash can.  
" 'I never had sexual relations with that woman,' " he said.  
"You know I'm judgmental about a lot of things," Denise said, "but not about 
things like this."  
"I said I didn't sleep with her."  
"I'm stressing, though," Denise said, "that this is one area where absolutely 
anything you say to me will fall on sym pathetic ears." And she cleared her 
throat pointedly.  
If Chip had wanted to come clean to someone in his family, his lit tle sister 
would have been the obvious choice. Having dropped out of college and 
having married badly, Denise at least had some acquain tance with darkness 
and disappointment. Nobody but Enid, however, had ever mistaken Denise 
for a failure. The college she'd dropped out of was better than the one that 
Chip had graduated from, and her early marriage and more recent divorce 
had given her a n emotional maturity that Chip was all too aware of lacking 
himself, and he suspected that even though Denise was working eighty hours 
a week she still managed to read more books than he did. In the last month, 
since he'd embarked on projects like digitall y scanning Melissa Paquette's 
face from a fresh man facebook and suturing her head to obscene downloaded 
images and tinkering with these images pixel by pixel (and the hours did fly 
by when you were tinkering with pixels), he'd read no books at all.  
"There  was a misunderstanding," he told Denise dully. "And then it was like 
they could hardly wait to fire me. And now I'm being denied due process."  
"Frankly," Denise said, "it's hard to see being fired as a bad thing. Colleges 
are nasty."  
"This was the one pla ce in the world I thought I fit in."  
"I'm saying it's very much to your credit that you don't. Although what are 
you surviving on, financially?"  
"Who said I was surviving?"  
"Do you need a loan?"  
79 
\ 
 
 
"Denise, you don't have any money."  
"Yes I do. I'm also thinking you should talk to my friend Julia. She's the one 
in film development. I told her about that idea you had for an East Village 
Troilus and Cressida. She said you should call her if you're interested in 
writing."  
Chip shook his h ead as if Denise were with him in the kitchen and could see 
him. They'd talked on the phone, months ago, about mod ernizing some of 
Shakespeare's less famous plays, and he couldn't bear that Denise had taken 
that conversation seriously; that she still beli eved in him.  
"What about Dad, though?" she said. "Did you forget it's his birth day?"  
"I lost track of time here."  
"I wouldn't push you," Denise said, "except that I was the person who opened 
your Christmas box."  
"Christmas was a bad scene, no question."  
"Which package went to whom was pretty much guesswork."  
Outside, a wind from the south had picked up, a thawing wind that quickened 
the patter of snowmelt on the back patio. The sense that Chip had had when 
the phone rang —that his misery was optional —had left him again.  
"So are you going to call him?" Denise said.  
He replaced the receiver in its cradle without answering her, turned off the 
ringer, and pressed his face into the doorframe. He'd solved the problem of 
family Christmas gifts on the last pos sible mailing day, when, in a great rush, 
he'd pulled old bargains and remainders off his bookshelves and wrapped 
them in aluminum foil and tied them up with red ribbon and refused to 
imagine how his nine -year -old nephew Caleb, for example, might react to an 
Oxford annotated edition of Ivanhoe whose main qualification as a gift was 
that it was still in its original shrink -wrap. The corners of the books had 
immediately poked through the aluminum foil, and the foil he'd added to 
cover up the holes hadn't adhe red well to the underlying layers, and the 
result had been a soft and peely kind of effect, like onion skin or phyllo 
dough, which he'd tried to mitigate by plastering each package with the 
National Abortion Rights  
80 
THE CORRECTIONS  
Action Leagu e holiday stickers that he'd received in his annual mem bership 
kit. His handiwork had looked so clumsy and childish, so men tally  
unbalanced   really,   that  he   tossed   the  packages   into   an   old grapefruit 
carton just to get them out of sight. Then he FedExed the carton down to 
Gary's house in Philadelphia. He felt as if he'd taken an enormous dump, as 
if, no matter how smeary and disagreeable it had been, he at least was 
emptied out now and would not be back in this po sition soon. But three da ys 
later, returning home late on Christmas night after a twelve -hour vigil at the 
Dunkin' Donuts in Norwalk, Con necticut, he faced the problem of opening 
the gifts his family had sent him: two boxes from St. Jude, a padded mailer 
from Denise, and a box fr om Gary. He decided that he would open the 
packages in bed and that the way he would get them up to his bedroom would 
be to kick them up the stairs. Which proved to be a challenge, because oblong 
objects had a tendency not to roll up a staircase but to cat ch on the steps and 
tum ble back down. Also, if the contents of a padded mailer were too light to 
offer inertial resistance, it was difficult to get any lift when you kicked it. But 
Chip had had such a frustrating and demoralizing Christmas — he'd left a 
message on Melissa's college voice mail, asking her to call him at the pay 
phone at the Dunkin' Donuts or, better yet, to come over in person from her 
parents' house in nearby Westport, and not un til midnight had exhaustion 
compelled him to accept that Meli ssa prob ably wasn't going to call him and 
certainly wasn't going to come and see him —that he was now psychically 
capable neither of breaking the rules of the  game he'd invented nor of 
quitting the  game before he'd achieved its object. And it was clear t o him that 
the rules permitted only genuine sharp kicks (prohibited, in particular, 
working his foot under the padded mailer and advancing it with any sort of 
pushing or lofting motion), and so he was obliged to kick his Christmas 
package from Denise  with   escalating  savagery until  it tore  open  and  
spilled  its ground -newsprint stuffing and he succeeded in catching its ripped 
sheathing with the toe of his boot and launching the gift in a long clean arc 
that landed it one step shy of the second floor. From there, however, the 
mailer refused to be budged up over the lip of the final step. Chip trampled 
and kicked and shredded the mailer with his heels. Inside was  
81 
 
a mess of red paper and green silk. He broke his own rule and scraped the 
mess  up over the last step, kicked it down the hall, and left it by his bed while 
he went down for the other boxes. These, too, he pretty well destroyed before 
he developed a method of bouncing them off a low step and then, while they 
were airborne, punting th em all the way up stairs. When he punted the box 
from Gary it exploded in a cloud of white Styrofoam saucers. A bubble -
wrapped bottle fell out and rolled down the stairs. It was a bottle of vintage 
Californian port. Chip carried it up to his bed and worked  out a rhythm 
whereby he swallowed one large mouthful of port for each gift that he 
succeeded in unwrapping. From his mother, who was under the impression 
that he still hung a stocking by his fireplace, he'd received a box marked 
Stocking Stuffers containi ng small individually wrapped items: a package of 
cough drops, a miniature second -grade school photo of himself in a tarnished 
brass frame, plastic bottles of shampoo and conditioner and hand lotion from 
a Hong Kong hotel where Enid and Alfred had stayed e n route to China 
eleven years earlier, and two carved wooden elves with sentimen tally 
exaggerated smiles and loops of silver string that penetrated their little 
craniums so they could be hung from a tree. For placement under this 
presumptive tree, Enid ha d sent a second box of larger gifts wrapped in 
Santa -faced red paper: an asparagus steamer, three pairs of white Jockey 
underwear, a jumbo candy cane, and two calico throw pil lows. From Gary 
and his wife, in addition to the port, Chip received a clever va cuum -pump 
system for preserving leftover wine from oxida tion, as if leftover wine were a 
problem Chip had ever had. From Denise, to whom he'd given The Selected 
Letters of Andre Gide after eras ing from the flyleaf the evidence that he'd 
paid one dollar f or this par ticularly tone -deaf translation, he received a 
beautiful lime -green silk shirt, and from his father a hundred -dollar check 
with the handwritten instruction to buy himself something he liked.  
Except for the shirt, which he'd worn, and the check,  which he'd cashed, and 
the bottle of port, which he'd killed in bed on Christmas night, the gifts from 
his family were still on the floor of his bedroom. Stuffing from Denise's 
mailer had drifted into the kitchen and mixed  
82                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
 
with splashed dishwater to form a mud that he'd tracked all over. Flocks of 
sheep -white Styrofoam pebbles had collected in sheltered places.  
It w as nearly ten -thirty in the Midwest.  
Hello, Dad. Happy seventy -fifth. Things are going well here. How are things 
in St. Jude?  
Chip felt he couldn't make the call without some kind of pick -me-up or treat. 
Some kind of energizer. But TV caused him such criti cal and political anguish 
that he could no longer watch even cartoons with out smoking cigarettes, and 
he now had a lung -sized region of pain in his chest, and there was no 
intoxicant of any sort in his house, not even cooking sherry, not even cough 
syrup,  and after the labor of taking his pleasure with the chaise his 
endorphins had gone home to the four cor ners of his brain like war -weary 
troops, so spent by the demands he'd made of them in the last five weeks that 
nothing, except possibly Melissa in the flesh, could marshal them again. He 
needed a little morale -booster, a little pick -me-up, but he had nothing better 
than the month -old Times, and he felt that he'd circled quite enough 
uppercase _ \fs for one day, he could circle no more.  
He went to his dini ng table and confirmed the absence of dregs in the wine 
botdes on it. He'd used the last $220 of credit on his Visa card to buy eight 
bottles of a rather tasty Fronsac, and on Saturday night he'd thrown one last 
dinner party to rally his supporters on the faculty.  
A few years ago, after D ------ 's drama department had fired a popular  
young professor, Cali Lopez, for having claimed to have a degree she didn't 
have, outraged students and junior faculty had organized boy cotts and 
candlelight vigils that had forced the college not only to rehire Lopez but to 
promote her to full professor. Granted, Chip was neither i lesbian nor a 
Filipina, as Lopez was, but he'd taught Theory of Femi nism, and he had a 
hundred -percent voti ng record with the Queer Bloc, and he routinely packed 
his syllabi with non -Western writers, and all -e'd really done in Room 23 of 
the Comfort Valley Lodge was put into practice certain theories (the myth of 
authorship; the resistant con sumerism of trans gressive sexual 
(trans)act(ion)s) that the college had rjjed him to teach. Unfortunately, the 
theories sounded somewhat lame  
83 
when he wasn't lecturing to impressionable adolescents. Of the eight 
colleagues who'd accepted his invitation for dinn er on Saturday, only four 
had shown up. And despite his efforts to steer the conversation around to his 
predicament, the only collective action his friends had taken on his behalf 
had been to serenade him, as they killed the eighth bottle of wine, with an a 
capella rendition of "Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien."  
He hadn't had the strength to clear the table in the intervening days. He 
considered the blackened red leaf lettuce, the skin of con gealed grease on an 
uneaten lamb chop, the mess of corks and ashes. The shame and disorder in 
his house were like the shame and disorder in his head. Cali Lopez was now 
the college's acting provost, Jim Levi -ton's replacement.  
Tell me about your relationship with your student Melissa Paquette.  
My former student?  
Your former st udent.  
I'm friendly with her. We've had dinner. I spent some time with her at the beginning 
of Thanksgiving break. She's a brilliant student.  
Did you give Melissa any help with a paper she wrote last week for Vendla O'Fallon?  
We talked about the paper in a general way. She had some areas of confu sion that I 
was able to help her clear up.  
Is your relationship with her sexual?  
No. 
Chip, what I think we'll do is suspend you with pay until we can have a full hearing. 
That's what w e'll do. We'll have a hearing early next week, and in the meantime you 
should probably get a lawyer and talk to your union rep. I also have to insist that 
you not speak to Melissa Paquette.  
What does she say? That I wrote that paper?  
Melissa violated the h onor code by handing in work that was not her own. She's 
facing a one -semester suspension, but we understand that there are miti gating 
factors. For example, your grossly inappropriate sexual relationship with her.  
That's what she says?  
My personal advice,  Chip, is resign now.  
84                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
 
t 
That's what she says?  
You have no chance.  
The snowmelt was raining down harder on his pat io. He lit a ciga rette on the 
front burner of his stove, took two painful drags, and pressed the coal into 
the palm of his hand. He groaned through clenched teeth and opened his 
freezer and put his palm to its floor and stood for a minute smelling flesh 
smoke. Then, holding an ice cube, he went to the phone and dialed the 
ancient area code, the ancient number.  
While the phone rang in St. Jude, he planted a foot on the section of Times in 
his trash and mashed it down deeper, got it out of sight.  
"Oh, Chip,"  Enid cried, "he's already gone to bed!"  
"Don't wake him," Chip said. "Just tell him —" 
But Enid set the phone down and shouted All All at volumes that diminished 
as she moved farther from the phone and up the stairs to ward the bedrooms. 
Chip heard her sho ut, It's Chip! He heard their up stairs extension click into 
action. He heard Enid instructing Alfred, "Don't just say hello and hang up. 
Visit with him a little."  
There was a rustling transfer of the receiver.  
"Yes," Alfred said.  
"Hey, Dad, happy birthday ," Chip said.  
"Yes," Alfred said again in exactly the same flat voice.  
"I'm sorry to call so late."  
"I was not asleep," Alfred said.  
"I was afraid I woke you up."  
"Yes."  
"Well, so happy seventy -fifth."  
"Yes."  
Chip hoped that Enid was motoring back down to the kitchen as fast as she 
could, ailing hip and all, to bail him out. "I guess you're tired and it's late," he 
said. "We don't have to talk."  
"Thank you for the call," Alfred said.  
Enid was back on the line. "I'm going to finish these dishes," she said. "We 
had a party here tonight! Al, tell Chip about the party we had! I'm getting off 
the phone now."  
85 
 
She hung up. Chip said, "You had a party."  
"Yes. The Roots were here for dinner and bridge."  
"Did you have a cake?"  
"Your mother made a cake."  
The cigarette had made a hole in Chip's body through which, he felt, painful 
harms could enter and vital factors painfully escape. Melt ing ice was leaking 
through his fingers. "How was the bridge?"  
"My typica l terrible cards."  
"That doesn't seem fair on your birthday."  
"I imagine," Alfred said, "that you are gearing up for another semester."  
"Right. Right. Although actually not. Actually I'm deciding not to teach at all 
this semester."  
"I didn't hear."  
Chip ra ised his voice. "I said I've decided not to teach this semester. I'm going 
to take the semester off and work on my writing."  
"My recollection is that you are due for tenure soon."  
"Right. In April."  
"It seems to me that a person hoping to be offered tenure  would be advised to 
stay and teach."  
"Right."  
"If they see you working hard, they will have no reason not to offer you 
tenure."  
"Right. Right." Chip nodded. "At the same time, I have to prepare for the 
possibility that I won't get it. And I've got a, uh. A very attractive offer from a 
Hollywood producer. A college friend of Denise's who pro duces movies. 
Potentially very lucrative."  
"A great worker is almost impossible to fire," Alfred said.  
"The process can get very political, though. I have to have alter natives."  
"As you wish," Alfred said. "However, I've found that it's usually best to 
choose one plan and stick with it. If you don't succeed here, you can always 
do something else. But you've worked many years to reach this point. One 
more semester's hard  work won't hurt you."  
"Right."  
86                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
 
"You can relax when you have tenure. Then you're safe." "Right."  
"Well, thank you for the call." "Right. Happy birthday, Dad."  
Chip dropped the phone, left the kitchen, and took a Fronsac bottle by the 
neck and brought its body down hard on the edge of his dining table. He 
broke a second bottle. The remaining six he sma shed two at a time, a neck in 
each fist.  
Anger carried him through the difficult weeks that followed. He borrowed ten 
thousand dollars from Denise and hired a lawyer to  
threaten to sue D ------ College for wrongful termination of his contract.  
This was a was te of money, but it felt good. He went to New York and ponied 
up four thousand dollars in fees and deposits for a sublet on Ninth Street. He 
bought leather clothes and had his ears pierced. He borrowed more money 
from Denise and reconnected with a college friend who edited the Warren 
Street Journal. He conceived revenge in the form of a screenplay that would 
expose the narcissism and treachery of Melissa Paquette and the hypocrisy of 
his colleagues; he wanted the people who'd hurt him to see the movie, 
recognize themselves, and suf fer. He flirted wit h Julia Vrais and asked her on 
a date, and soon he was spending two or three hundred dollars a week to feed 
and entertain her. He borrowed more money from Denise. He hung 
cigarettes on his lower lip and banged out a draft of a script. Julia in the back 
seat of cabs pressed her face against his chest and clutched his collar. He 
tipped waiters and cabbies thirty and forty percent. He quoted Shakespeare 
and Byron in funny contexts. He borrowed more money from Denise and 
decided that she was right, that getting  fired was the best thing that had ever 
happened to him.  
He wasn't so naive, of course, as to take Eden Procuro's profes sional 
effusions at face value. But the more he saw of Eden socially, the more 
confident he became that his script would get a sympathe tic read ing. For one 
thing, Eden was like a mother to Julia. She was only five years older, but 
she'd undertaken a wholesale recalibration and im provement of her personal 
assistant. Although Chip never quite shook the feeling that Eden was hoping 
to cast  someone else in the role of  
87 
 
Julia's love interest (she habitually referred to Chip as Julia's "escort," not 
her "boyfriend," and when she talked about Julia's "untapped poten tial" and 
her "lack of confidence" he suspected that mate selectio n was one area in 
which she hoped to see improvement in Julia), Julia assured him that Eden 
thought he was "really dear" and "extremely smart." Certainly Eden's 
husband, Doug O'Brien, was on his side. Doug was a mergers -and-
acquisitions specialist at Bragg  Knuter & Speigh. He'd set Chip up with a 
flextime proofreading job and had seen to it that Chip was paid the top hourly 
wage. Whenever Chip tried to thank him for this favor, Doug made pshawing 
motions with his hand. "You're the man with the Ph.D.," he sa id. "That book 
of yours is scary smart stuff." Chip had soon become a frequent guest at the 
O'Brien -Procuros' din ner parties in Tribeca and their weekend house parties 
in Quogue. Drinking their liquor and eating their catered food, he had a 
foretaste of a  success a hundred times sweeter than tenure. He felt that he 
was really living.  
Then one night Julia sat him down and said there was an important fact that 
she hadn't mentioned earlier, and would he promise not to be too mad at 
her? The important fact was  that she sort of had a husband. The deputy 
prime minister of Lithuania —a small Baltic country —was a man named 
Gitanas Misevicius? Well, the fact was that Julia had mar ried him a couple of 
years ago, and she hoped Chip wouldn't be too mad at her.  
Her prob lem with men, she said, was that she'd grown up without. Her father 
was a manic -depressive boat salesman whom she remem bered meeting once 
and wished she'd never met at all. Her mother, a cosmetics -company 
executive, had fobbed Julia off on her own mother,  who'd enrolled her in a 
Catholic girls' school. Julia's first significant ex perience with men was at 
college. Then she moved to New York and embarked on the long process of 
sleeping with every dishonest, casually sadistic, terminally uncommitted 
really g orgeous guy in the borough of Manhattan. By the age of twenty -eight, 
she had little to feel good about except her looks, her apartment, and her 
steady job (which mainly con sisted, however, of answering the phone). So 
when she met Gitanas at a club and Git anas took her seriously, and by and by 
produced an actual  
 
THE CORRECTIONS  
not-small diamond in a white -gold setting, and seemed to love her (and the 
guy was, after all, an honest -to-God ambassador to the United Na tions; she'd 
gone and heard him  do his Baltic thundering at the General Assembly), she 
did her level best to repay his kindness. She was As Agreeable As Humanly 
Possible. She refused to disappoint Gitanas even though, in hindsight, it 
probably would have been better to disap point him. Gitanas was quite a bit 
older and fairly attentive in bed (not like Chip, Julia hastened to say, but not, 
you know, terrible), and he seemed to know what he was doing with the 
marriage thing, and so one day she went to City Hall with him. She might 
even ha ve gone by "Mrs. Misevicius" if it had sounded less idiotic. Once she 
was married, she re alized that the marble floors and black lacquer furniture 
and heavy modern smoked -glass fixtures of the ambassador's apartment on 
the East River weren't as entertaini ngly campy as she'd thought. They were 
more like unbearably depressing. She made Gitanas sell the place (the chief 
of the Paraguayan delegation was delighted to get it) and buy a smaller, nicer 
place on Hudson Street near some good clubs. She found a compe tent 
hairstylist for Gitanas and taught him how to pick out clothes with natural 
fibers. Things seemed to be going great. But some where she and Gitanas 
must have misunderstood each other, because when   his   party   (the   
VIPPPAKJRIINPB17:   the   One   True   Party Unswervingly Dedicated to the 
Revanchist Ideals of Kazimieras Jara -maitis and the "Independent" Plebiscite 
of April Seventeen) lost a Sep tember election and recalled him to Vilnius to 
join the parliamentary opposition, he took it for granted  that Julia would 
come along with him. And Julia understood the concept of one flesh, wife 
cleaving to husband, and so forth; but Gitanas in his descriptions of post -
Soviet Vilnius had painted a picture of chronic coal and electricity shortages, 
freezing d rizzles,  drive -by shootings, and heavy dietary reliance on 
horsemeat. And so she did a really terrible thing to Gitanas, definitely the 
worst thing she'd ever done to anybody. She agreed to go and live in Vilnius, 
and she sort of got on the plane with Git anas and sat down in first class and 
then sneaked off the plane and sort of changed their home phone number 
and had Eden tell Gitanas, when he called, that she had disappeared. Six 
months later Gitanas returned to New York for a  
 
weekend and made  Julia feel really, really guilty. And, yes, no argument, 
she'd disgraced herself. But Gitanas proceeded to call her certain rough 
names and he slapped her pretty hard. The upshot of which was that they 
couldn't be together anymore, but she continued to us e their apartment on 
Hudson Street in exchange for staying married in case Gitanas needed quick 
asylum in the United States, because apparently things were going from bad 
to worse in Lithuania.  
Anyway, that was the story of her and Gitanas, and she hoped t hat Chip 
wouldn't be too mad at her.  
And Chip was not. Indeed, at first he not only didn't mind that Julia was 
married, he adored the fact. He was fascinated by her rings; he talked her 
into wearing them in bed. Down at the offices of the Warren Street Jou rnal, 
where he sometimes felt insufficiently transgres -sive, as if his innermost self 
were still a nice midwestern boy, he took pleasure in alluding to the 
European statesman he was "cuckolding." In his doctoral thesis ("Doubtful It 
Stood: Anxieties of the  Phallus in Tudor Drama") he'd written extensively 
about cuckolds, and under the cloak of his reproving modern scholarship 
he'd been excited by the idea of marriage as a property right, of adultery as 
theft.  
Before long, though, the thrill of poaching on t he diplomat's pre serve gave 
way to bourgeois fantasies in which Chip himself was Julia's husband —her 
lord, her liege. He became spasmodically jealous of Gitanas Misevicius, who, 
though Lithuanian, and a slapper, was a suc cessful politician whose name 
Julia now pronounced with guilt and wistfulness. On New Year's Eve Chip 
asked her point -blank if she ever thought about divorce. She replied that she 
liked her apartment ("Can't beat the rent!") and she didn't want to look for 
another one right now.  
After New  Year's, Chip returned to his rough draft of "The Acad emy Purple," 
which he'd completed in a euphoric twenty -page blaze of keyboard -pounding, 
and discovered that it had a lot of problems. It looked, in fact, like incoherent 
hackwork. During the month that  he'd spent expensively celebrating its 
completion, he'd imagined that he could remove certain hackneyed plot 
elements —the conspiracy, the car crash, the evil lesbians —and still tell a good 
story. Without these hack neyed plot elements, however, he seemed to have 
no story at all.  
90                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
 
In order to salvage his artistic and intellectual ambitions, he added a long 
theoretical opening monologue. But this monologue was so un readable that 
every time he turned on his computer he had to go and tinker with it. Soon he 
was spending the bulk of ea ch work session com pulsively honing the 
monologue. And when he despaired of shortening it any further without 
sacrificing important thematic material, he started fussing with the margins 
and hyphenation to make the mono logue end at the bottom of page 6 r ather 
than the top of page 7. He re placed the word "continue" with "go on" to save 
three spaces, thus allowing the word "(trans)act(ion)s" to be hyphenated after 
the second t, which triggered a whole cascade of longer lines and more 
efficient hy phenation s. Then he decided that "go on" had the wrong rhythm 
and that "(trans)act(ion)s" should not be hyphenated under any circum -
stances, and so he scoured the text for other longish words to replace with 
shorter synonyms, all the while struggling to believe tha t stars and producers 
in Prada jackets would enjoy reading six pages (but not seven!) of turgid 
academic theorizing.  
Once, when he was a boy, there was a total eclipse of the sun in the Midwest, 
and a girl in one of the poky towns across the river from St.  Jude had sat 
outside and, in defiance of myriad warnings, studied the dwindling crescent 
of the sun until her retinas combusted.  
"It didn't hurt at all," the blinded girl had told the St. Jude Chroni cle. "It felt 
like nothing."  
Each day that Chip spent g rooming the corpse of a dramatically dead 
monologue was a day in which his rent and food and entertain ment expenses 
were paid for, in large part, with his little sister's money. And yet as long as 
the money lasted, his pain was not acute. One day led to a nother. He rarely 
got out of bed before noon. He enjoyed his food and his wine, he dressed well 
enough to persuade himself that he was not a quivering gelatinous mess, and 
he managed, on four out of five evenings, to hide the worst of his anxiety and 
foreb oding and enjoy himself with Julia. Because the sum he owed Denise 
was large in com parison to his proofreading wage but small by Hollywood 
standards, he worked less and less at Bragg Knuter & Speigh. His only real 
complaint was with his health. On a summe r day when his work session 
consisted  
91 
I 
of rereading Act I, being struck afresh by its irredeemable badness, and 
hurrying outside to get some air, he might walk down Broadway and sit on a 
bench at Battery Park City and let the breeze off the H udson flow under his 
collar, and listen to the ceaseless fut -fut of copter traffic and the distant 
shouts of millionaire Tribeca toddlers, and be overcome with guilt. To be so 
vigorous and healthy and yet so nothing: neither taking advantage of his 
good ni ght's sleep and his successful avoidance of a cold to get some work 
done, nor yet fully entering into the vacation spirit and flirting with strangers 
and knocking back margaritas. It would have been better, he thought, to do 
his getting sick and dying now,  while he was failing, and save his health and 
vitality for some later date when, unimaginable though the prospect was, he 
would perhaps no longer be failing. Of all the things he was wasting —
Denise's money, Julia's goodwill, his own abilities and educatio n, the 
opportunities afforded by the longest sustained economic boom in American 
history —his sheer physical well -being, there in the sunlight by the river, hurt 
the worst.  
He ran out of money on a Friday in July. Facing a weekend with Julia, who 
could cos t him fifteen dollars at a cinema refreshments counter, he purged 
the Marxists from his bookshelves and took them to the Strand in two 
extremely heavy bags. The books were in their origi nal jackets and had an 
aggregate list price of $3,900. A buyer at the  Strand appraised them casually 
and delivered his verdict: "Sixty -five."  
Chip laughed in a breathy way, willing himself not to argue; but his U.K. 
edition of Jiirgen Habermas's Reason and the Rationalization of Soci ety, 
which he'd found too difficult to r ead, let alone annotate, was in mint 
condition and had cost him £95.00. He couldn't help pointing this out by way 
of example.  
"Try somewhere else, if you like," the buyer said, his hand hesitat ing above 
the cash register.  
"No, no, you're right," Chip said . "Sixty -five is great."  
It was pathetically obvious that he'd believed his books would fetch him 
hundreds of dollars. He turned away from their reproachful spines, 
remembering how each of them had called out in a bookstore with a promise 
of a radical crit ique of late -capitalist society, and how happy  
92 
THE CORRECTIONS  
he'd been to take them home. But Jiirgen Habermas didn't have Julia's long, 
cool, pear -tree limbs, Theodor Adorno didn't have Julia's grapy smell of 
lecherous pliability, Fred Jameson didn't have Julia's artful tongue. By the 
beginning of October, when Chi p sent his finished script to Eden Procure, 
he'd sold his feminists, his formalists, his structural ists, his 
poststructuralists, his Freudians, and his queers. To raise money for lunch for 
his parents and Denise, all he had left was his beloved cul tural historians and 
his complete hardcover Arden Shakespeare; and be cause a kind of magic 
resided in the Shakespeare —the uniform volumes in their pale blue jackets 
were like an archipelago of safe retreats —he piled his Foucault and 
Greenblatt and hooks and Poo vey into shopping bags and sold them all for 
$115.  
He spent sixty dollars on a haircut, some candy, a stain -removal kit, and two 
drinks at the Cedar Tavern. Back in August, when he'd invited his parents, 
he'd hoped that Eden Procure might have read his scr ipt and advanced him 
money before they arrived, but now the only accom plishment and the only 
gift he had to offer was a home -cooked meal. He went to an East Village deli 
that sold reliably excellent tortellini and crusty bread. He was envisioning a 
rustic  and affordable Italian lunch. But the deli appeared to have gone out of 
business, and he didn't feel like walking ten blocks to a bakery that he was 
certain had good bread, and so he wandered the East Village randomly, 
trudging in and out of meretricious food stores, hefting cheeses, rejecting 
breads, examining inferior tortellini. Finally he abandoned the Italian idea 
altogether and fixed on the only other lunch he could think of —a salad of wild 
rice, avocado, and smoked turkey breast. The problem then wa s to find ripe 
avocados. In store after store he found either no avocados or walnut -hard 
avocados. He found ripe avocados that were the size of limes and cost $3.89 
apiece. He stood holding five of them and considered what to do. He put 
them down and picke d them up and put them down and couldn't pull the 
trigger. He weathered a spasm of hatred of Denise for having guilted him into 
inviting his parents to lunch. He had the feeling that he'd never eaten 
anything in his life but wild -rice salad and tortellini,  so blank was his culinary 
imagination.  
Around eight o'clock he ended up outside the new Nightmare of  
93 
Consumption ("Everything —for a Price!") on Grand Street. A humid ity had 
stolen over the sky, a sulfurous uneasy wind from Rahway and Bayonne . The 
supergentry of SoHo and Tribeca were streaming through the Nightmare's 
brushed -steel portals. The men came in vari ous shapes and sizes, but all the 
women were slim and thirty -six; many were both slim and pregnant. Chip 
had a collar rash from his hai rcut and felt unready to be seen by so many 
perfect women. But right inside the Nightmare's door he glimpsed a box of 
greens marked SORREL from Belize $0.99.  
He entered the Nightmare, snagged a basket, and put one bunch of sorrel in it. 
Ninety -nine cents. Installed above the Nightmare's coffee bar was a screen that gave 
running ironic tallies of TODAY'S GROSS RE CEIPTS and TODAY 'S PROFIT and 
PROJECTED QUARTERLY PER -SHARE DIV IDEND (Unofficial Non -Binding Estimate Based on 
Past Quarterly Performances / This Information Provided for Entertainment 
Purposes Only), and COFFEE SALES THIS STATION. Chip  
wove among strollers and cell phone antennae to the fish counter, where, as 
in a dream, he found WILD NORWEGIAN SALMON, LINE CAUGHT on sale at 
a reasonable price. He  pointed at a midsize filet, and to the fishman's 
question, "What else?" he replied in a crisp tone, al most a smug tone, "That'll 
do it."  
The price on the beautiful paper -wrapped filet that he was handed was 
$78.40. Luckily, this discovery knocked the win d out of him, other wise he 
might have lodged a protest before realizing, as he did now, that the prices at 
the Nightmare were per quarter pound. Two years ago, two months ago, he 
would not have made a mistake like this.  
"Ha, ha!" he said, palming the seve nty-eight -dollar filet like a catcher's mitt. 
He dropped to one knee and touched his bootlaces and took the salmon right 
up inside his leather jacket and underneath his sweater and tucked the 
sweater into his pants and stood up again.  
"Daddy, I want swordf ish," a little voice behind him said.  
Chip took two steps, and the salmon, which was quite heavy, es caped from 
his sweater and covered his groin, for one unstable moment, like a codpiece.  
"Daddy! Swordfish!"  
Chip put his hand to his crotch. The dangling filet felt like a cool,  
94                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
loaded diaper. He repositioned it against hi s abs and tucked in the sweater 
more securely, zipped his jacket to the neck, and strode pur posefully toward 
the whatever. Toward the dairy wall. Here he found a selection of French 
cremes fraiches at prices implying transport via SST. The less unaffordab le 
domestic creme fraiche was blocked by a man in a Yankees cap who was 
shouting into his cell phone while a child, apparently his, peeled back the foil 
tops of half -liters of French yogurt. She'd peeled back five or six already. Chip 
leaned to reach be hind the man, but his fish belly sagged. "Excuse me," he 
said.  
Like a sleepwalker the man on the phone shuffled aside. "I said fuck him. 
Fuck him! Fuck that asshole! We never closed. There's no ink on the line. I'll 
take that asshole down another thirty, you  watch me. Honey, don't tear those, 
if we tear those we have to pay for them. I said it is a fucking buyer's ball as of 
yesterday. We close on nuffin till this diing bottoms out. Nuffin! Nuffin! 
Nuffin! Nuffin!"  
Chip was approaching the checkout lanes with  four plausible items in his 
basket when he caught sight of a head of hair so new -penny bright it could 
only belong to Eden Procuro. Who was, herself, slim and thirty -six and 
hectic. Eden's little son, Anthony, was seated on the upper level of a shopping 
cart with his back to a four -figure avalanche of shellfish, cheeses, meats, and 
caviars. Eden was leaning over Anthony and letting him pull on the taupe 
lapels of her Italian suit and suck on her blouse while, behind his back, she 
turned the pages of a scri pt that Chip could only pray was not his own. The 
line-caught Norwegian salmon was soaking through its wrapping, his body 
heat melting the fats that had given the filet a degree of rigidity. He wanted to 
escape the Nightmare, but he wasn't prepared to disc uss "The Academy 
Purple"  
er the current circumstances. He veered down a frosty aisle where lk selati 
came in plain white cartons with small black lettering. A man m a suit was 
crouching beside a little girl with hair like copper in sun shine. The girl was 
Eden's daughter, April. The man was Eden's hus band, Doug O'Brien.  
"Chip Lambert, what's happening?" Doug said.  
There seemed to be no ways but girly ways for Chip to hold his rrocery basket 
while he shook Doug's square hand.  
"April's picking out her treat for after dinner," Doug said.  
"Three treats," April said.  
"Her three treats, right."  
"What's that one?" April said, pointing.  
"That is a grenadine -nasturtium sorbetto, sugar bunny."  
"Do I like it?"  
"That I can't tell you."  
Doug, who was younger and shorter than Chip, so persistently claimed to be 
in awe of Chip's intellect and so consistently tested free of any irony or 
condescension that Chip had finally accepted that Doug really did admire 
him. This admiration was more gru eling than belittle -ment.  
"Eden tells me you finished the script," Doug said, restacking some gelati that 
April had upset. "Man, I am psyched. This project sounds phenomenal."  
April was cradling three rimed cartons against her corduroy jumper.  
"What kind d id you get?" Chip asked her.  
April shrugged extremely, a beginner's shrug.  
"Sugar bunny, run those up to Mommy. I'm going to talk to Chip."  
As April ran back up the aisle Chip wondered what it would be like to father a 
child, to always be needed instead of  always needing.  
"Something I wanted to ask you," Doug said. "Do you have a sec ond? Say 
somebody offered you a new personality: would you take it? Say somebody 
said to you, / will permanently rewire your mental hardware in whatever 
way you want. Would you  pay to have that done?"  
The salmon paper was sweat -bonded to Chip's skin and tearing open at the 
bottom. This was not the ideal time to be providing Doug with the intellectual 
companionship he seemed to crave, but Chip wanted Doug to keep thinking 
highly of him and encourage Eden to buy his script. He asked why Doug 
asked.  
"A lot of crazy stuff crosses my desk," Doug said. "Especially now with all the 
money coming home from overseas. All the dot -corn issues, of course. We're 
still trying our very hardest t o persuade the average American to happily 
engineer his own financial ruin. But the biotech is fascinating. I've been 
reading whole prospectuses about genetically al - 
96 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
tered squash. Apparently people in this country are eating a lot more squash 
than I was aware of, and squashes are prone to more diseases than you'd 
infer from their robust exterior. Either that or ... Southern Cucumtech is 
seriously overvalued at thirty -five a share. Whatever. But Chip, this brain 
thing, man, it caught my eye. Bizarre fact number one is that I'm allowed to 
talk about it. It's all public knowledge. Is this bizarre?"  
Chip was trying to keep his eyes focused on Doug in an interested manner, 
but his eyes were like children, they wanted to skip up and down the aisles. 
He was ready, basically, to jump out of his skin. "Yeah. Bizarre."  
"The idea," Doug said, "is your basic gut cerebral rehab. Leave the shell and 
roof, replace the walls and plumbin g. Design away that useless dining nook. 
Put a modern circuit breaker in."  
"Uh huh."  
"You get to keep your handsome fafade," Doug said. "You still look serious 
and intellectual, a little Nordic, on the outside. Sober, bookish. But inside 
you're more livabl e. A big family room with an entertain ment console. A 
kitchen that's roomier and handier. You've got your In -Sink -Erator, your 
convection oven. An ice -cube dispenser on the refrigerator door."  
"Do I still recognize myself?"  
"Do you want to? Everybody else  still will —at least, the outside of you."  
The big glowing tally for TODAY 'S GROSS RECEIPTS paused for a moment at 
$444,447.41 and then went higher.  
"My furnishings are my personality," Chip said.  
"Say it's a gradual rehab. Say the workmen are very tidy. T he brain's cleaned 
up every night when you get home from work, and nobody can bother you on 
the weekend, per local ordinance and the usual covenan -tal restrictions. The 
whole thing happens in stages —you grow into it. Or it grows into you, so to 
speak. Nobo dy's making you buy new furni ture."  
"You're asking hypothetically."  
Doug raised a finger. "The only thing is there might be some metal  
97 
 
involved. It's possible you'd set off alarms at the airport. I'm imagining you 
might get some unwanted tal k radio, too, on certain frequencies. Gatorade 
and other high -electrolyte drinks might be a problem. But what do you say?"  
"You're joking, right?"  
"Check out the Web site. I'll give you the address. 'The implications are 
disturbing, but there's no stopping  this powerful new technology.'' That 
could be the motto for our age, don't you think?"  
That a salmon filet was now spreading down into Chip's underpants like a 
wide, warm slug did seem to have everything to do with his brain and with a 
number of poor deci sions that this brain had made. Ration ally Chip knew 
that Doug would let him go soon and that eventually he might even escape 
the Nightmare of Consumption and find a restaurant bathroom where he 
could take the filet out and regain his full critical facult ies—that there would 
come a moment when he was no longer standing amid pricey gelati with 
lukewarm fish in his pants, and that this future moment would be a moment 
of extraordinary relief —but for now he still inhabited an earlier, much less 
pleasant moment  from the vantage point of which a new brain looked like 
just the ticket.  
"The desserts were a foot tall!" Enid said, her instincts having told her that 
Denise didn't care about pyramids of shrimp. "It was elegant elegant. Have 
you ever seen anything like that?"  
"I'm sure it was very nice," Denise said.  
"The Dribletts really do things super -deluxe. I'd never seen a dessert that tall. 
Have you?"  
The subtle signs that Denise was exercising patience —the slightly deeper 
breaths she took, the soundless way she s et her fork down on her plate and 
took a sip of wine and set the glass back down —were more hurtful to Enid 
than a violent explosion.  
"I've seen tall desserts," Denise said.  
"Are they tremendously difficult to make?"  
Denise folded her hands in her lap and exhaled slowly. "It sounds like a great 
party. I'm glad you had fun."  
Enid had, true enough, had fun at Dean and Trish's party, and she'd  
98                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
wished that Denise had been there to see for herself'how elegant it was. At 
the same time, she was afraid that Denise would not have found the party 
elegant at all, that Denise would have picked apart its specialness until there 
was nothing left but ordinariness. Her daughter's taste was a dark spot in 
Enid's vision, a hole in her experience through which her own pleasures were 
forever threatening to leak and dissipate.  
"I guess there's no accounting for tastes," she said.  
"That's true," Denise said. "Although some tastes are better than others."  
Alfred had bent low over his plate to ensure that any salmon or haricots verts 
that fell fro m his fork would land on china. But he was lis tening. He said, 
"Enough."  
"That's what everybody thinks," Enid said. "Everybody thinks their taste is 
the best."  
"But most people are wrong," Denise said.  
"Everybody's entitled to their own taste," Enid said.  "Everybody gets one vote 
in this country."  
"Unfortunately!"  
"Enough," Alfred said to Denise. "You'll never win."  
"You sound like a snob," Enid said.  
"Mother, you're always telling me how much you like a good home -cooked 
meal. Well, that's what I like, too . I think there's a kind of Disney vulgarity in 
a foot -tall dessert. You are a better cook than —" 
"Oh, no. No." Enid shook her head. "I'm a nothing cook."  
"That's not true at all! Where do you think I —" 
"Not from me," Enid interrupted. "I don't know where my children got their 
talents. But not from me. I'm a nothing as a cook. A big noth ing." (How 
strangely good it felt to say this! It was like putting scalding water on a 
poison -ivy rash.)  
Denise straightened her back and raised her glass. Enid, who all he r life had 
been helpless not to observe the goings -on on other people's plates, had 
watched Denise take a three -bite portion of salmon, a small helping of salad, 
and a crust of bread. The size of each was a reproach to the size of each of 
Enid's. Now Denis e's plate was empty and she hadn't taken seconds of 
anything.  
 
IP 
I 
"Is that all you're going to eat?" Enid said.  
"Yes. That was my lunch."  
"You've lost weight."  
"In fact not."  
"Well, don't lose any more," Enid said with the skimpy laugh with whi ch she 
tried to hide large feelings.  
Alfred was guiding a forkful of salmon and sorrel sauce to his mouth. The 
food dropped off his fork and broke into violently shaped pieces.  
"I think Chip did a good job with this," Enid said. "Don't you think? The 
salmo n is very tender and good."  
"Chip has always been a good cook," Denise said.  
"Al, are you enjoying this? Al?"  
Alfred's grip on his fork had slackened. There was a sag in his lower lip, a 
sullen suspicion in his eyes.  
"Are you enjoying the lunch?" Enid said.  
He took his left hand in his right and squeezed it. The mated hands continued 
their oscillation together while he stared at the sunflowers in the middle of 
the table. He seemed to swallow the sour set of his mouth, to choke back the 
paranoia.  
"Chip made all this?" he said.  
"Yes."  
He shook his head as though Chip's having cooked, Chip's absence now, 
overwhelmed him. "I am increasingly bothered by my affliction," he said.  
"What you have is very mild," Enid said. "We just need to get the medication 
adjusted."  
He shook his head. "Hedgpeth said it's unpredictable."  
"The important thing is to keep doing things," Enid said, "to keep active, to 
always just go."  
"No. You were not listening. Hedgpeth was very careful not to promise 
anything."  
"According to what I read —" 
"I don't give a damn what your magazine article said. I am not well, and 
Hedgpeth admitted as much."  
100  
THE CORRECTIONS  
Denise set her wine down with a st iff, fully extended arm.  
"So what do you think about Chip's new job?" Enid asked her brightly.  
"His —?" 
"Well, at the Wall Street Journal"  
Denise studied the tabletop. "I have no opinion about it."  
"It's exciting, don't you think?"  
"I have no opinion about it." 
"Do you think he works there full -time?"  
"No."  
"I don't understand what kind of job it is."  
"Mother, I know nothing about it."  
"Is he still doing law?"  
"You mean proofreading? Yes."  
"So he's still at the firm."  
"He's not a lawyer, Mother."  
"I know he's not a lawyer."  
"Well, when you say, 'doing law,' or 'at the firm' —is that what you tell your 
friends?"  
"I say he works at a law firm. That's all I say. A New York City law firm. And 
it's the truth. He does work there."  
"It's misleading and you  know it," Alfred said.  
"I guess I should just never say anything."  
"Just say things that are true," Denise said.  
"Well, I think he should be in law," Enid said. "I think the law would be 
perfect for Chip. He needs the stability of a profession. He needs s tructure in 
his life. Dad always thought he'd make an excellent lawyer. I used to think 
doctor, because he was interested in science, but Dad al ways saw him as a 
lawyer. Didn't you, Al? Didn't you think Chip could be an excellent lawyer? 
He's so quick wit h words."  
"Enid, it's too late."  
"I thought maybe working for the firm he'd get interested and go back to 
school."  
"Far too late."  
"The thing is, Denise, there are so many things you can do with law.  
You can be a company president. You can be a j udge! You can teach. You can 
be a journalist. There are so many directions Chip could go in."  
"Chip will do what he wants to do," Alfred said. "I've never under stood it, but 
he is not going to change now."  
He marched two blocks in the rain before he found  a dial tone. At the first 
twin phone bank he came to, one instrument was castrated, with colored 
tassels at the end of its cord, and all that remained of the other was four bolt 
holes. The phone at the next intersection had chewing gum in its coin slot, 
and the line of its companion was completely dead. The standard way for a 
man in Chip's position to vent his rage was to smash the handset on the box 
and leave the plastic shards in the gutter, but Chip was in too much of a hurry 
for this. At the corner of Fifth Av enue, he tried a phone that had a dial tone 
but did not respond when he touched the keypad and did not return his 
quarter when he hung up nicely or when he picked the handset up and 
slammed it down. The other phone had a dial tone and took his mon ey, but a 
Baby Bell voice claimed not to understand what he'd dialed and did not 
return the money. He tried a second time and lost his last quarter.  
He smiled at the SUVs crawling by in ready -to-brake bad -weather 
automotive postures. The doormen in this ne ighborhood hosed the sidewalks 
twice a day, and sanitation trucks with brushes like the mus taches of city 
cops scoured the streets three times a week, but in New York City you never 
had to go far to find filth and rage. A nearby street sign seemed to read  Filth 
Avenue. Things cellular were killing public phones. But unlike Denise, who 
considered cell phones the vulgar ac cessories of vulgar people, and unlike 
Gary, who not only didn't hate them but had bought one for each of his three 
boys, Chip hated cell  phones mainly because he didn't have one.  
Under the scant protection of Denise's umbrella, he crossed back to a deli on 
University Place. Brown cardboard had been laid over the scuff rug at the 
door for traction, but the cardboard was soaked and trampled,  its shreds 
resembling washed -up kelp. Headlines in wire bas kets by the door reported 
yesterday's tanking of two more economies in South America and fresh 
plunges in key Far Eastern markets. Behind  
102  
THE CORRECTIONS  
the cash register was a lottery poster: It's not about winning. It's about 
fun.™  
With two of the four dollars in his wallet Chip bought some of the all -natural 
licorice that he liked. For his third dollar the deli clerk gave him four quarters 
in change. "I 'll take a Lucky Leprechaun, too," Chip said.  
The three -leaf clover, wooden harp, and pot of gold that he uncov ered 
weren't a winning, or fun, combination.  
"Is there a pay phone around here that works?" "No pay phone," the clerk 
said. "I'm saying, is ther e one close to here that works?" "No pay phone!" The 
clerk reached under the counter and held up a cell phone. "This phone!"  
"Can I make one quick call with that?"  
"Too late for broker now. Should have call yesterday. Should have buy 
American."  
The clerk laughed in a way that was the more insulting for being  
good -humored. But then, Chip had reason to be sensitive. Since D ------  
College had fired him, the market capitalization of publicly traded U.S. 
companies had increased by thirty -five percent.  In these same twenty -two 
months, Chip had liquidated a retirement fund, sold a good car, worked half -
time at an eightieth -percentile wage, and still ended up on the brink of 
Chapter 11. These were years in America when it was nearly impossible not to 
make  money, years when receptionists wrote MasterCard checks to their 
brokers at 13.9% APR and still cleared a profit, years of Buy, years of Call, 
and Chip had missed the boat. In his bones he knew that if he ever did sell 
"The Academy Purple," the mar kets w ould all have peaked the week before 
and any money he invested he would lose.  
Judging from Julia's negative response to his script, the American economy 
was safe for a while yet.  
Up the street, at the Cedar Tavern, he found a working pay phone. Years 
seeme d to have passed since he'd had two drinks here the night before. He 
dialed Eden Procuro's office and hung up when her voice mail kicked in, hut 
the quarter had already dropped. Directory assis - 
103 
tance had a residential listing for Doug O'Brie n, and Doug actually an swered, 
but he was changing a diaper. Several minutes passed before Chip was able to 
ask him if Eden had read the script yet.  
"Phenomenal. Phenomenal -sounding project," Doug said. "I think she had it 
with her when she went out."  
"Do you know where she went?"  
"Chip, you know I can't tell people where she is. You know that."  
"I think the situation qualifies as urgent."  
Please deposit —eighty cents —-for the next —two minutes — 
"My God, a pay phone," Doug said. "Is that a pay phone?"  
Chip f ed the phone his last two quarters. "I need to get the script back before 
she reads it. There's a correction I —" 
"This isn't about tits, is it? Eden said Julia had a problem with too many tits. 
I wouldn't worry about that. Generally there's no such thing a s too many. 
Julia's having a really intense week."  
Please deposit —an additional —thirty cents —now — 
"you what," Doug said.  
for the next —two minutes —now — 
"most obvious place you —" 
or your call will be terminated —now — 
"Doug?" Chip said. "Doug? I missed that."  
We 're sorry — 
"Yeah, I'm here. I'm saying, why don't you —" 
Goodbye, the company voice said, and the phone went dead, the wasted 
quarters clanking in its gut. The text on its faceplate had Baby Bell coloration, 
but it read: ORFIC TELECOM , 3 MINUTES 25tf, EACHADDX  MIN. 40c.  
The most obvious place to look for Eden was at her office in Tribeca. Chip 
stepped up to the bar wondering if the new bartender, a streaky blonde who 
looked like she might front the kind of band that played at proms, 
remembered him well enough from the night before to take his driver's 
license as surety on a twenty -buck loan. She and two unrelated drinkers were 
watching murky football somewhere, Nittany Lion action, brown squiggling 
figures in a chalky pond. And near Chip's arm, oh, not s ix inches away, was a 
nest of singles. Just lying there. He  
104                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
•-• 
 
considered how a tacit transaction (pocketing the cash, never showing his 
face in here again, anonymously mailing reimbursement to the woman later) 
might be safer than asking for a loan: might be, indeed, the transgression that 
saved his sanity. He crumple d the cash into a ball and moved closer to the 
really rather pretty bartender, but the strug gling brown round -headed men 
continued to hold her gaze, and so he turned and left the tavern.  
In the back of a cab, watching the wet businesses drift by, he stuff ed licorice 
into his mouth. If he couldn't get Julia back, he wanted in the worst way to 
have sex with the bartender. Who looked about thirty -nine herself. He 
wanted to fill his hands with her smoky hair. He imag ined that she lived in a 
rehabbed tenement on East Fifth, he imagined that she drank a beer at 
bedtime and slept in faded sleeveless tops and gym shorts, that her posture 
was weary, her navel unassumingly pierced, her pussy like a seasoned 
baseball glove, her toenails painted the plainest basic red . He wanted to feel 
her legs across his back, he wanted to hear the story of her forty -odd years. 
He wondered if she really might sing rock and roll at weddings and bar 
mitzvahs.  
Through the window of the cab he read GAP ATHLETIC as GAL PATHETIC. 
He read Empire Realty as Vampire Reality.  
He was half in love with a person he could never see again. He'd stolen nine 
dollars from a hardworking woman who enjoyed college football. Even if he 
went back later and reimbursed her and apologized, he would always be th e 
man who ripped her off when her back was turned. She was gone from his life 
forever, he could never run his fin gers through her hair, and it was not a good 
sign that this latest loss was making him hyperventilate. That he was too 
wrecked by pain to swal low more licorice.  
He read Cross Pens as Cross Penises, he read ALTERATIONS as ALTER -
CATIONS.  
An optometrist's window offered: HEADS EXAMINED.  
The problem was money and the indignities of life without it. Every stroller, 
cell phone, Yankees cap, and SUV h e saw was a torment. He wasn't covetous, 
he wasn't envious. But without money he was hardly a man.  
105 
How he'd changed since D ------ College fired him! He no longer  
wanted to live in a different world; he just wanted to be a man with dig nity in 
this world. And maybe Doug was right, maybe the breasts in his script 
didn't matter. But he finally understood —he finally got it —that he could 
simply cut the opening theoretical monologue in its entirety. He could do this 
correction in ten minutes at Eden' s office.  
In front of her building he gave the cabby all nine stolen dollars. Around the 
corner, a six -trailer crew was filming on a cobbled street, kliegs ablaze, 
generators stinking in the rain. Chip knew the security codes to Eden's 
building, and the el evator was unlocked. He prayed that Eden hadn't read the 
script yet. The newly corrected version in his head was the one true script; 
but the old opening monologue still unhappily existed on the ivory bond 
paper of the copy Eden had.  
Through the glass oute r door on the fifth floor he saw lights in Eden's office. 
That his socks were soaked and his jacket smelled like a wet cow at the 
seashore and he had no way to dry his hands or hair was certainly 
unpleasant, but he was still enjoying not having two pounds of Norwegian 
salmon in his pants. By comparison, he felt fairly well put together.  
He knocked on the glass until Eden emerged from her office and peered out 
at him. Eden had high cheekbones and big watery blue eyes and thin 
translucent skin. Any extra calo ries she ate at lunch in L.A. or drank as 
martinis in Manhattan got burned on her home treadmill or at her private 
swim club or in the general madness of being Eden Procure. She was 
ordinarily electric and flaming, a bundle of hot copper wire; but her 
expr ession now, as she approached the door, was tentative or flustered. She 
kept looking back at her office.  
Chip gestured that he wanted in.  
"She's not here," Eden said through the glass.  
Chip gestured again. Eden opened the door and put her hand on her heart . 
"Chip, I'm so sorry about you and Julia —" 
"I'm looking for my script. Have you read it?"  
"I—? Very hastily. I need to read it again. Need to take some notes!" Eden 
made a scribbling motion near her temple and laughed.  
106 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"That opening monologue," Chip said. "I've cut it."  
"Oh, good, I love a willingness to cut. Love it." She looked back at her office.  
"Do you think, though, that without the monologue —" 
"Chip, do you need money?"  
Eden smiled up at him with such odd merry fr ankness that he felt as if he'd 
caught her drunk or with her pants down.  
"Well, I'm not flat broke," he said.  
"No, no, of course. But still."  
"Why?"  
"And how are you with the Web?" she said. "Do you know any Java? HTML?"  
"God, no."  
"Well, just, come back to my office for a second. Do you mind? Come on 
back."  
Chip followed Eden past Julia's desk, where the only visible Julian artifact 
was a stuffed toy frog on the computer monitor.  
"Now that you two have broken up," Eden said, "there' s really no reason you 
can't —" 
"Eden, it's not a breakup."  
"No, no, trust me, it's over," Eden said. "It is absolutely over. And I'm 
thinking you might enjoy a little change of scenery, so you can start setting 
over it —" 
"Eden, listen, Julia and I are havi ng a momentary —" 
"No, Chip, sorry, not momentary: permanent." Eden laughed again. "Julia 
may not be blunt, but I am. And so, when I think about it, there's really no 
reason for you not to meet..." She led Chip into her office. "Gitanas? 
Incredible stroke o f luck here. I have, here, the perfect man for the job."  
Reclining in a chair by Eden's desk was a man about Chip's age in a red 
ribbed leather jacket and tight white jeans. His face was broad and baby -
cheeked, his hair a sculpted blond shell.  
Eden was pra ctically climaxing with enthusiasm. "Here I've been racking my 
brain, Gitanas, I can't think of anyone to help you, and  
707 
 
probably the best -qualified man in New York City is knocking at the door! 
Chip Lambert, you know my assistant Julia?" She  winked at Chip. "Well, this 
is Julia's husband, Gitanas Misevicius."  
In almost every respect —coloration, shape of head, height and build, and 
especially the wary, shame -faced smile that he was wearing — Gitanas looked 
more like Chip than anybody Chip could  remember meeting. He was like 
Chip with bad posture and crooked teeth. He nodded nervously without 
standing up or extending a hand. "How's it going," he said.  
It was safe to say, Chip thought, that Julia had a type.  
Eden patted the seat of an unoccupied c hair. "Sit sit sit," she told him.  
Her daughter, April, was on the leather sofa by the windows with a mess of 
crayons and a sheaf of paper.  
"April, hey," Chip said. "How were those desserts?"  
The question seemed not to April's liking.  
"She'll try those ton ight," Eden said. "Somebody was testing limits last night."  
"I was not testing limits," April said.  
The paper on April's lap was ivory -colored and had text on its reverse.  
"Sit! Sit!" Eden exhorted as she retreated to her birch -laminate desk. The big 
windo w behind her was lensed with rain. There was fog on the Hudson. 
Blackish smudges suggestive of New Jersey. Eden's trophies, on the walls, 
were movie -ad images of Kevin Kline, Chloe Sevigny, Matt Damon, Winona 
Ryder.  
"Chip Lambert," she told Gitanas, "is a brilliant writer, with a script in 
development with me right now, and he's got a Ph.D. in En glish, and, for the 
last two years, he's been working with my husband doing mergers and 
acquisitions, and he's brilliant with all the Internet stuff, we were just now 
talking about Java and HTML, and, as you see, he cuts a very impressive, 
uh—" Here Eden for the first time actually gave her attention to Chip's 
appearance. Her eyes widened. "It must be raining cats and dogs out there. 
Chip's not, well, ordinarily qui te so wet. (My dear, you are very wet.) In all 
honesty, Gitanas, you won't find a  
108                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
 
 
better man. And Chip, I'm just —delighted —that you'came by. (Al though you 
are very wet.)"  
A man by himself could weather Eden's enthusiasm, but two men together 
had to gaze at the floor to preserve their dignity in the face of it.  
"I, unfortunately," Eden said, "am slightly pressed for time. Gitanas having 
dropped in somewhat unexpectedly. What I would love is if the two of you 
could go and use my conference room and work things out, and take as long 
as you like."  
Gitanas crossed hi s arms in the wound -up European style, his fists jammed 
in his armpits. He didn't look at Chip but asked him: "Are you an actor?"  
"No."  
"Well, Chip," Eden said, "that's not strictly true."  
"Yes, it is. I've never acted in my life."  
"Ha-ha-ha!" Eden said. " Chip is being modest."  
Gitanas shook his head and looked at the ceiling.  
April's sheaf of paper was definitely a screenplay.  
"What are we talking about?" Chip said.  
"Gitanas is looking to hire someone —" 
"An American actor," Gitanas said with disgust.  
"To d o, uh, corporate PR for him. And for more than an hour now" —Eden 
glanced at her watch and let her eyes and mouth distend in exaggerated 
shock —"I've been trying to explain that the actors I work with are more 
interested in film and stage than in, say, inter national investment schemes. 
And tend, also, to have wildly inflated no tions of their own literacy. And what 
I'm trying to explain to Gitanas is that you, Chip, not only have an excellent 
command of language and irgon, but you don't have to pretend to be  an 
investment expert. You jre an investment expert."  
"I'm a part -time legal proofreader," Chip said.  
"An expert in the language. A gifted screenwriter."  
Chip and Gitanas traded glances. Something about Chip's person, perhaps 
the shared physical traits, se emed to interest the Lithuanian. "Are you 
looking for work?" Gitanas said.  
109 
"Possibly."  
"Are you a drug addict?"  
"No."  
"I've got to go to the bathroom," Eden said. "April, honey, come along. Bring 
your drawings."  
April obediently hopped off the sofa and went to Eden.  
"Bring your drawings, though, honey. Here." Eden gathered up the ivory 
pages and led April to the door. "You men talk."  
Gitanas put a hand to his face and squeezed his round cheeks, scratched his 
blond  stubble. He looked out the window.  
"You're in government," Chip said.  
Gitanas tilted his head. "Yes and no. I was for many years. But my party is 
kaput, I'm an entrepreneur now. Sort of a governmental entre preneur, let's 
say."  
One of April's drawings had  fallen to the floor between the window and the 
sofa. Chip extended a toe and pulled the page toward him.  
"We have so many elections," Gitanas said, "nobody reports them 
internationally anymore. We have three or four elections a year. Elec tions are 
our bi ggest industry. We have the highest annual per capita output of 
elections of any country in the world. Higher than Italy, even."  
April had drawn a portrait of a man with a regular body of sticks and blobs 
and oblongs, but for a head he had a black and blue  snarled vortex, a ratty 
scrabble, a scribbled mess. Through the ivory bond, Chip could see faint 
blocks of dialogue and action on the other side.  
"Do you believe in America?" Gitanas said.  
"Jesus, where to begin," Chip said.  
"Your country which saved us a lso ruined us."  
With his toe Chip lifted one corner of April's drawing and identi fied the 
words — 
MONA  
(cradling the revolver)  
What's wrong with being in love with myself? Why is that a 
problem?  
HO                                                                                                   THE CORRECTIONS  
—but the page had grown very heavy or his toe very weak. He let the page lie 
flat again. He pushed it underneath the sofa. His extr emities had gone cool 
and a little bit numb. He couldn't see well.  
"Russia went bankrupt in August," Gitanas said. "Maybe you heard? Unlike 
our elections, this was widely reported. This was economic news. This 
mattered to the investor. It also mattered to Lithuania. Our main trading 
partner now has crippling hard -currency debts and a worthless ruble. One 
guess which they use, dollars or rubles, to buy our hens' eggs. And to buy our 
truck undercarriages from our truck -undercarriage plant, which is the one 
good plant we have: well, it would be rubles. But the rest of the truck is made 
in Volgograd, and that plant closed. So we can't even get rubles."  
Chip was having trouble feeling disappointed about "The Academy Purple." 
Never to look at the script again, nev er to show it to a soul: this might be a 
relief even greater than his relief in the men's room of Fanelli's where he'd 
taken the salmon from his pants.  
From an enchantment of breasts and hyphens and one -inch mar gins he felt 
himself awakening to a rich and  varied world to which he'd been dead for 
who knew how long. Years.  
"I'm interested in what you're telling me," he told Gitanas.  
"It's interesting. It is interesting," Gitanas agreed, still hugging himself 
tensely. "Brodsky said, 'Fresh fish always smells,  frozen smells only when it 
thaws.' So, and after the big thaw, when all the little fish came out of the 
freezer, we were passionate about this and that. I was part of it. Very much 
part of it. But the economy was mismanaged. I had my fun in New York, but 
back home —there was a depression, all right. Then, too late, 1995, we pegged 
the litas to the dollar and started privatizing, way too fast. It wasn't my 
decision, but I might have done the same. The World Bank had money that 
we wanted, and the World Bank s aid privatize. So OK, we sold the port. We 
sold the airline, sold the phone system. The highest bidder was usually 
American, sometimes Western European. This wasn't supposed to happen, 
but it did. Nobody in Vilnius had cash. And the phone company said, OK,  
we'll have for eign owners with deep pockets, but the port and the airline will 
still be a hundred percent Lithuanian. Well, the port and the airline were  
thinking the same. But still it was OK. Capital was flowing, 'better cuts of 
meat at the b utcher, fewer brownouts. Even the weather seemed milder. 
Mostly criminals took the hard currency, but that's post -Soviet reality. After 
the thaw, you get the rot. Brodsky didn't live to see that. So OK, but then all 
the world economies started collapsing, Thailand, Brazil, Korea, and this was 
a problem, because all the capital ran home to the U.S. We found out, for 
example, that our national airline was sixty -four percent owned by the Quad 
Cities Fund. Which is? A no -load growth fund managed by a young guy 
named Dale Meyers. You never heard of Dale Meyers, but every adult citizen 
of Lithuania knows his name."  
This tale of failure seemed to amuse Gitanas greatly. It had been a long time 
since Chip had had such a powerful sensation of liking some body. His que er 
friends at D ------ College and the Warren Street Journal  
were so frank and headlong in their confidences that they foreclosed actual 
closeness, and his responses to straight men had long fallen into one of two 
categories: fear and resentment of the^ucces ses, flight from the con tagion of 
the failures. But something in Gitanas's tone appealed to him.  
"Dale Meyers lives in eastern Iowa," Gitanas said. "Dale Meyers has two 
assistants, a big computer, and a three -billion -dollar portfolio. Dale Meyers 
says he didn't mean to acquire a controlling stake in our national airline. Dale 
says it was program trading. He says one of his assistants misentered data 
that caused the computer to keep increasing its position in Lithuanian 
Airlines without reporting the overal l size of the accumulated stake. OK, Dale 
apologizes to all Lithuanians for the oversight. Dale says he understands the 
importance of an airline to a country's economy and self -esteem. But because 
of the crisis in Russia and the Baltics, nobody wants ticke ts on Lithuanian 
Airlines. So, and American investors are pulling money out of Quad Cities. 
Dale's only way to meet his obligations is liquidate Lithuanian Airlines' 
biggest asset. Which is its fleet. He's gonna sell three YAK40s to a Miami -
based air freig ht company. He's gonna sell six Aerospatiale turboprops to a 
start -up commuter airline in Nova Scotia. In fact, he already did that, 
yesterday. So, whoops, no airline."  
"Ouch," Chip said.  
112 
THE CORRECTIONS  
Gitanas nodded fiercely. "Yeah! Yeah! Ouch! Too bad you can't fly a truck 
undercarriage! OK, and then. Then an American conglomerate called Orfic 
Midland liquidates the Port of Kaunas. Again, overnight. Whoops! Ouch! And 
then sixty percent of the Bank of L ithuania gets eaten up by a suburban bank 
in Atlanta, Georgia. And your suburban bank then liquidates our bank's hard -
currency reserves. Your bank dou bles our country's commercial interest rates 
overnight —why? To cover heavy losses in its failed line of D ilbert affinity 
MasterCards. Ouch! Ouch! But interesting, huh? Lithuania's not being such a 
successful player, is it? Lithuania really fucked things up!"  
"How are you men doing?" Eden said, returning to her office with April in 
tow. "Maybe you want to use the conference room?"  
Gitanas put a briefcase on his lap and opened it. "I'm explaining to Cheep my 
gripe with America."  
"April, sweetie, sit down here," Eden said. She had a big pad of newsprint 
which she opened on the floor near the door. "This is better  paper for you. 
You can make big pictures now. Like me. Like Mommy. Make a big picture."  
April crouched in the middle of the newsprint pad and drew a green circle 
around herself.  
"We've petitioned the IMF and World Bank for assistance," Gi tanas said. 
"Since they encouraged us to privatize, maybe they're inter ested in the fact 
that our privatized nation -state is now a zone of fe mi -anarchy, criminal 
warlords, and subsistence farming? Unfortu nately, IMF is handling 
complaints of bankrupt client states in o rder of the size of their respective 
GDPs. Lithuania was twenty -six on the list Last Monday. Now we're twenty -
eight. Paraguay just beat us. Always Paraguay."  
"Ouch," Chip said.  
"Paraguay being for some reason the bane of my existence."  
"Gitanas, I told you , Chip is perfect," Eden said. "But listen —" 
"IMF says expect delays of up to thirty -six months before any res -rje can 
begin!"  
Eden slumped into her chair. "Do you think we can wrap this up nirlv soon?"  
773 
Gitanas showed Chip a printout from his  briefcase. "You see, here, this Web 
page? 'A service of the U.S. Department of State, Bureau of European and 
Canadian Affairs.' It says: Lithuanian economy severely depressed, 
unemployment nearly twenty percent, electricity and run ning water 
intermittent  in Vilnius, scarce elsewhere. What kind of busi nessman is going 
to put money in a country like that?"  
"A Lithuanian businessman?" Chip said.  
"Yes, funny." Gitanas gave him an appreciative look. "But what if I need 
something different on this Web page and others like it? What if I need to 
erase what's here and put, in good American English, that our country 
escaped the Russian financial plague? Like, say, Lithuania now has an annual 
inflation rate less than six percent, per capita dollar re serves same as 
Germany, and a trade surplus of nearly one hundred mil lion dollars, due to 
continued strong demand for Lithuania's natural resources!"  
"Chip, you'd be perfect for this," Eden said.  
Chip had quietly and firmly resolved never to look at Eden or say a word to 
her again for as long as he lived.  
"What are Lithuania's natural resources?" he asked Gitanas.  
"Chiefly sand and gravel," Gitanas said.  
"Huge  strategic reserves of sand and gravel. OK."  
"Sand and gravel in abundance." Gitanas closed his briefcase. "However, so, 
here's a quiz for you. Why the unprecedented demand for these intriguing 
resources?"  
"A construction boom in nearby Latvia and Finland?  In sand -starved Latvia? 
In gravel -starved Finland?"  
"And how did these countries escape the contagion of global finan cial 
collapse?"  
"Latvia has strong, stable democratic institutions," Chip said. "It's the 
financial nerve center of the Baltics. Finland placed strict limits on the 
outflow of short -term foreign capital and succeeded in saving its world -class 
furniture industry."  
The Lithuanian nodded, obviously pleased. Eden pounded her fists on her 
desk. "God, Gitanas, Chip's fantastic! He is so entitled to a sign - 
114 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
ing bonus. Also first -class accommodations in Vilnius and a per diem in 
dollars."  
"Vilnius?" Chip said.  
"Yeah, we're selling a country," Gitanas said. "We need a satisfied U.S. 
customer on site. Also much, much safer to work on the Web over there."  
Chip laughed. "You actually expect American investors to send you money? 
On the basis of, what. Of sand shortag es in Latvia?"  
"They're already sending me money," Gitanas said, "on the basis of a little 
joke I played. Not even sand and gravel, just a mean little joke I played. Tens 
of thousands of dollars already. But I want them to send me millions."  
"Gitanas," Ede n said. "Deaf man. This is completely a point -incentive 
moment. There could not be a more perfect situation for an escalator clause. 
Every time Chip doubles your receipts, you give him another point of the 
action. Hm? Hm?"  
"If I see a hundred -times increas e in receipts, trust me, Cheep will be a 
wealthy man."  
"But I'm saying let's have this in writing."  
Gitanas caught Chip's eye and silently conveyed to him his opinion of their 
host. "Eden, this document," he said. "What is Cheep's job designation? 
Internat ional Wire Fraud Consultant? First Deputy Co -Conspirator?"  
"Vice President for Willful Tortious Misrepresentation," Chip offered.  
Eden gave a scream of pleasure. "I love it!"  
"Mommy, look," April said.  
"Our agreement is strictly oral," Gitanas said.  
"Of co urse, there's nothing actually illegal about what you're do ing," Eden 
said.  
Gitanas answered her question by staring out the window for a longish while. 
In his red ribbed jacket he looked like a motocross rider. "Of course not," he 
said.  
"So it isn't wire  fraud," Eden said.  
115 
"No, no. Wire fraud? No."  
"Because, not to be a scaredy -cat here, but wire fraud is what this almost 
sounds like."  
"The collective fungible assets of my country disappeared in yours without a 
ripple," Gitanas said. "A rich  powerful country made the rules we Lithuanians 
are dying by. Why should we respect these rules?"  
"This is an essential Foucaultian question," Chip said.  
"It's also a Robin Hood question," Eden said. "Which doesn't ex actly reassure 
me on the legal front."  
"I'm offering Cheep five hundred dollars American a week. Also bonuses as I 
see fit. Cheep, are you interested?"  
"I can do better here in town," Chip said.  
"Try a thousand a day, minimum," Eden said.  
"A dollar goes a long way in Vilnius."  
"Oh, I'm sure," Eden said. "It goes a long way on the moon, too. What's to 
buy?"  
"Cheep," Gitanas said. "Tell Eden what dollars can buy in a poor country."  
"I imagine you eat and drink pretty well," Chip said.  
"A country where a young generation grew up in  a state of moral anarchy, 
and are hungry."  
"Probably not hard to find a good -looking date, if that's what you mean."  
"If it doesn't break your heart," Gitanas said. "To see a sweet little girl from 
the provinces get down on her knees —" 
"Uch, Gitanas," Ede n said. "There's a child in the room."  
"I'm on an island," April said. "Mommy, look at my island."  
"I'm talking about children," Gitanas said. "Fifteen -year -olds. You have 
dollars? Thirteen. Twelve."  
"Twelve years old is not a selling point with me," Chip said.  
"You prefer nineteen? Nineteen comes even cheaper."  
"This frankly, um," Eden said, napping her hands.  
"I want Cheep to understand why a dollar is a lot of money. Why my offer is a 
valid offer."  
116 
 
 
 
"My problem," Chip said, "is I'd be ser vicing American debts with those very 
same dollars."  
"Believe me, we're familiar with this problem in Lithuania."  
"Chip wants a base salary of a thousand a day, plus performance in centives," 
Eden said.  
"One thousand per week," Gitanas said. "For lending l egitimacy to my 
project. For creative work and reassuring callers."  
"One percent of gross," Eden said. "One point minus his twenty -thousand -
dollar monthly salary."  
Gitanas, ignoring her, took a thick envelope from his jacket and, with hands 
that were stubb y and unmanicured, began to count out hun dreds. April was 
crouched on a patch of white newsprint surrounded by toothed monsters and 
cruel scribbles in several colors. Gitanas tossed a stack of hundreds on Eden's 
desk. "Three thousand," he said, "for the f irst three weeks."  
"He gets business -class plane fare, too, of course," Eden said.  
"Yes, all right."  
"And first -class accommodations in Vilnius."  
"There's a room in the villa, no problem."  
"Also, who protects him from these criminal warlords?"  
"Maybe I'm a criminal warlord myself, a little bit," Gitanas said with a wary, 
shame -faced smile.  
Chip considered the mess of green on Eden's desk. Something was riving him 
a hard -on, possibly the cash, possibly the vision of corrupt and sumptuous 
nineteen -year -olds, or maybe just the prospect of get -zng on a plane and 
putting five thousand miles between himself and the nightmare of his life in 
New York City. What made drugs perpetually so sexy was the opportunity to 
be other. Years after he'd figured out t hat pot only made him paranoid and 
sleepless, he still got hard -ons at the nought of smoking it. Still lusted for that 
jailbreak.  
He touched the hundreds.  
"Why don't I get online and make plane reservations for you both," Eden 
said. "You can leave right aw ay!" 
"So, you gonna do this thing?" Gitanas asked. "It's a lot of work, lot  
7/7 
of fun. Pretty low risk. No such thing as no risk, though. Not where there's 
money."  
"I understand," Chip said, touching the hundreds.  
In the pageantry of weddings En id reliably experienced the paroxysmal love 
of place —of the Midwest in general and suburban St. Jude in par ticular —that 
for her was the only true patriotism and the only viable spirituality. Living 
under presidents as crooked as Nixon and stupid as Reagan  and disgusting as 
Clinton, sjie'd lost interest in American flag -waving, and not one of the 
miracles she'd ever prayed to God for had come to pass; but at a Saturday 
wedding in the lilac season, from a pew of the Paradise Valley Presbyterian 
Church, she c ould look around and see two hundred nice people and not a 
single bad one. All her friends were nice and had nice friends, and since nice 
people tended to raise nice children, Enid's world was like a lawn in which 
the bluegrass grew so thick that evil was simply choked out: a miracle of 
niceness. If, for ex ample, it was one of Esther and Kirby Root's girls coming 
down the Presbyterian aisle on Kirby's arm, Enid would remember how the 
little Root had trick -or-treated in a ballerina costume, vended Girl Scou t 
cookies, and baby -sat Denise, and how, even after the Root girls had gone off 
to good midwestern colleges, they all still made a point, when home on 
holiday, of tapping on Enid's back door and filling her in on the doings chez 
Root, often sitting and vis iting for an hour or more (and not, Enid knew, 
because Esther had told them to come over but just be cause they were good 
St. Jude kids who naturally took an interest in other people), and Enid's heart 
would swell at the sight of yet another sweetly charit able Root girl now 
receiving, as her reward, the vows of a young man with a neat haircut of the 
kind you saw in ads for menswear, a really super young fellow who had an 
upbeat attitude and was polite to older people and didn't believe in 
premarital sex, an d who had a job that contributed to society, such as 
electrical engineer or environmental biologist, and who came from a loving, 
stable, traditional family and wanted to start a loving, stable, traditional 
family of his own. Unless Enid was very much decei ved by appearances, 
young men of this caliber continued, even as the twentieth century drew to a 
close, to be the norm  
118 
THE CORRECTIONS  
in suburban St. Jude. All the young fellows she'd known'as Cub Scouts and 
users of her downstairs bathroom and shovelers of her snow, the many 
Driblett boys, the various Persons, the young Schumpert twins, all these 
clean -cut and handsome young men (whom D enise, as a teenager, to Enid's 
quiet rage, had dismissed with her look of "amuse ment"), had marched or 
would soon be marching down heartland Protestant aisles and exchanging 
vows with nice, normal girls and set -ding down, if not in St. Jude itself, then 
at least in the same time zone. Now, in her secret heart, where she was less 
different from her daugh ter than she liked to admit, Enid knew that tuxes 
came in better colors than powder blue and that bridesmaids' dresses could 
be cut from more interesting fabrics than mauve crepe de chine; and yet, 
although hon esty compelled her to withhold the adjective "elegant" from 
weddings in this style, there was a louder and happier part of her heart that 
loved diis kind of wedding best of all, because a lack of sop histication assured 
the assembled guests that for the two families being joined together there 
were values that mattered more than style. Enid believed in matching and 
was happiest at a wedding where the bridesmaids sup pressed their selfish 
individual des ires and wore dresses that matched die corsages and cocktail 
napkins, the icing on the cake, and the ribbons on the party favors. She liked 
a ceremony at Chiltsville Methodist to be :: [lowed by a modest reception at 
the Chiltsville Sheraton. She liked a m ore elegant wedding at Paradise Valley 
Presbyterian to culminate in -_-.e clubhouse at Deepmire, where even the 
complimentary matches Dean & Trish * June 13, 1987) matched the color 
scheme. Most impor -nnt of all was that the bride and groom themselves 
matc h: have similar : uksrounds and ages and educations. Sometimes, at a 
wedding hosted ry less good friends of Enid's, the bride would be heavier or 
signifi -^ir.dy older than the groom, or the groom's family would hail from a 
inn town upstate and be obviously  overawed by Deepmire's elegance. f. -Tii 
felt sorry for the principals at a reception like that. She just knew ~t marriage 
was going to be a struggle from day one. More typically, pfcoogh, the only 
discordant note at Deepmire would be an off -color •ast off ered by some 
secondary groomsman, often a college buddy of : _ om, often mustached or 
weak -chinned, invariably flushed with  
7/9  
 
 
liquor, who sounded as if he didn't come from the Midwest at all but from 
some more eastern urban place, and who tri ed to show off by making a 
"humorous" reference to premarital sex, causing both groom and bride to 
blush or to laugh with their eyes closed (not, Enid felt, because they were 
amused but because they were naturally tactful and didn't want the offender 
to re alize how offensive his remark was) while Alfred inclined his head deafly 
and Enid cast her eye around the room until she found a friend with whom 
she could exchange a reassuring frown.  
Alfred loved weddings, too. They seemed to him the one kind of party t hat 
had a real purpose. Under their spell he authorized purchases (a new dress 
for Enid, a new suit for himself, a top -quality ten -piece teakwood salad -bowl 
set for a gift) that he ordinarily would have vetoed as unreasonable.  
Enid had looked forward, some  day when Denise was older and had finished 
college, to hosting a really elegant wedding and reception (though not, alas, 
at Deepmire, since, almost alone among their better friends, the Lamberts 
could not afford the astronomical Deepmire fees) for Denise and a tall, 
broad -shouldered, possibly Scandinavian young man whose flaxen hair 
would offset the defect of the too -dark and too -curly hair Denise had 
inherited from Enid but who would otherwise be her match. And so it just 
about broke Enid's heart when, on e October night, not three weeks after 
Chuck Meisner had given his daughter Cindy the most lavish reception ever 
undertaken at Deepmire, with all the men in tails, and a champagne fountain, 
and a helicopter on the eighteenth fairway, and a brass octet play ing fanfares, 
Denise called home with the news that she and her boss had driven to 
Atlantic City and gotten married in a courthouse. Enid, who had a very strong 
stom ach (never got sick, never), had to hand the phone to Alfred and go kneel 
in the bathroom and take deep breaths.  
The previous spring, in Philadelphia, she and Alfred had eaten a late lunch at 
the noisy restaurant where Denise was ruining her hands and wasting her 
youth. After their lunch, which was quite good but much too rich, Denise had 
made a point of introducing them to the "chef" under whom she'd studied 
and for whom she was now boiling  
120 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
and toiling. This "chef," Emile Berger, was a short, unsmiling, middle -aged 
Jew from Montreal whose idea of dressing for work  was to wear an old white 
T-shirt (like a cook, not a chef, Enid thought; no jacket, no toque) and whose 
idea of shaving was to skip it. Enid would have dis liked Emile and snubbed 
him even if she hadn't gathered, from Denise's way of hanging on his words,  
that he had an unhealthy degree of influ ence with her daughter. "Those are 
such rich crab cakes," she accused in the kitchen. "One bite and I was 
stuffed." To which, instead of apologiz ing and deprecating himself, as any 
polite St. Judean would have don e, Emile responded by agreeing that, yes, if 
it could be managed, and the flavor was good, a "lite" crab cake would be a 
wonderful thing, but the question, Mrs. Lambert, was how to manage it? Eh? 
How to make crabmeat "lite"? Denise was following this excha nge hungrily, 
as if she'd scripted it or were memorizing it. Outside the restaurant, before 
she re turned to her fourteen -hour shift, Enid made sure to say to her: "He 
certainly is a short little man! So Jewish -looking." Her tone was less 
controlled than s he might have wished, a little squeakier and thinner at die 
edges, and she could tell from the distant look in Denise's eyes and from a 
bitterness around her mouth that she'd bruised her daughter's reelings. Then 
again, all she'd done was speak the truth. And she never, not for a second, 
imagined that Denise —who, no matter how immature and romantic she was, 
and no matter how impractical her career plans, had just turned twenty -three 
and had a beautiful face and figure and her '.vhole life ahead of her —would  
actually date a person like Emile. As to what exactly a young woman was 
supposed to do with her physical charms while she waited for the maturing 
years to pass, now that girls no longer got married quite so young, Enid was, 
to be sure, somewhat vague. In a general way she believed in socializing in 
groups of three or more; believed, in a word, in parties! The one thing she 
knew categori -c illy, the principle she embraced the more passionately the 
more it was ridiculed in the media and popular entertainment s, was that sex 
before marriage was immoral.  
And yet, on that October night, as she knelt on the bathroom floor, Enid had 
the heretical thought that it might after all have been wiser, in ner maternal 
homilies, to have laid less stress on marriage. It occurred  
121 
<*! I • 
to her that Denise 's rash act might even have been prompted, in some tiny 
part, by her wish to do the moral thing and please her mother. Like a 
toothbrush in the toilet bowl, like a dead cricket in a salad, like a diaper on 
the dinner table, this sickening conundrum confron ted Enid: that it might 
actually have been preferable for Denise to go ahead and commit adultery, 
better to sully herself with a momentary selfish plea sure, better to waste a 
purity that every decent young man had the right to expect from a 
prospective br ide, than to marry Emile. Except that Denise should never have 
been attracted to Emile in the first place! It was the same problem Enid had 
with Chip and even Gary: her children didn't match. They didn't want the 
things that she and all her friends and all  her friends' children wanted. Her 
children wanted radically, shamefully other things.  
While observing peripherally that the bathroom carpet was more spotted 
than she'd realized and ought to be replaced before the holi days, Enid 
listened to Alfred offerin g to send Denise a pair of plane tickets. She was 
struck by the seeming calm with which Alfred took the news that his only 
daughter had made the biggest decision of her life without consulting him. 
But after he'd hung up the phone and she'd come out of the  bathroom and 
he'd commented, simply, that life was full of surprises, she noticed how 
strangely his hands were shaking. The tremor was at once looser and more 
intense than the one he sometimes got from drinking coffee. And during the 
week that followed, w hile Enid made the best of the mortifying position in 
which Denise had placed her by (1) calling her best friends and sounding 
thrilled to an nounce that Denise was getting married soon! to a very nice 
Canadian man, yes, but she wanted immediate family onl y at the ceremony, 
so, and she was introducing her new husband at a simple, informal open 
house at Christmastime (none of Enid's friends believed that she was thrilled, 
but they gave her full credit for trying to hide her suffering; some were even 
sensitiv e enough not to ask where Denise had registered for gifts) and (2) 
ordering, without Denise's permission, two hundred engraved 
announcements, not only to make the wedding appear more conven tional but 
also to shake the gift tree a little in hopes of receiv ing com pensation for the 
dozens and dozens of teakwood salad sets that she and  
122 
THE CORRECTIONS  
Alfred had given in the last twenty years: during this long week, Enid was so 
continually aware of Alfred's strange new tremor that when, by and b y, he 
agreed to^see his doctor and was referred to Dr. Hedgpeth and diagnosed 
with Parkinson's, an underground branch of her intelli gence persisted in 
connecting his disease with Denise's announcement and so in blaming her 
daughter for the subsequent plum meting of her own quality of life, even 
though Dr. Hedgpeth had stressed that Parkin son's was somatic in origin and 
gradual in its onset. By the time the hol idays rolled around, and Dr. 
Hedgpeth had provided her and Alfred with pamphlets and booklets who se 
drab doctor's -office color schemes, dismal line drawings, and frightening 
medical photos presaged a drab and dismal and frightening future, Enid was 
pretty well convinced that Denise and Emile had ruined her life. She was 
under strict orders from Alfred , however, to make Emile feel welcome in the 
family. So at the open house for the newlyweds she painted a smile on her 
face and ac cepted, over and over, the sincere congratulations of old family 
friends who loved Denise and thought she was darling (becaus e Enid in 
raising her had emphasized the importance of being kind to her elders) (al -
though what was her marriage if not an instance of excessive kindness to an 
elder?) where she would have much preferred condolences. The effort she 
made to be a good sport  and cheerleader, to obey Alfred and receive her 
middle -aged son -in-law cordially and not say one single word about his 
religion, only added to the shame and anger she felt five years later when 
Denise and Emile were divorced and Enid had to give this news , too, to all 
her friends. Having attached so much meaning to the marriage, having 
struggled so hard to accept it, she felt that the least Denise could have done 
was stay married.  
"Do you ever hear from Emile anymore?" Enid asked.  
Denise was drying dishes in Chip's kitchen. "Occasionally."  
Enid had parked herself at the dining table to clip coupons from magazines 
she'd taken from her Nordic Pleasurelines shoulder bag. Rain was coming 
down erratically in gusts that slapped and fogged the windows. Alfred was 
sitting on Chip's chaise with his e yes closed.  
"I was just thinking," Enid said, "that even if things had worked out, and 
you'd stayed married, you know, Denise, Emile's going to be  
123 
an old man in not too many years. And that's so much work. You can't 
imagine what a huge respon sibility."  
"In twenty -five years he'll be younger than Dad is now," Denise said.  
"I don't knoW if I ever told you," Enid said, "about my high -school friend 
Norma Greene."  
"You tell me about Norma Greene literally every time I see you."  
"Well, you know the story, then. Norma met this man, Floyd Voinovich, who 
was a perfect gentleman, quite a number of years older, with a high -paying 
job, and he swept her off her feet! He was always taking her to Morelli's, and 
the Steamer, and the Bazelon Room, and the only problem —" 
"Mother."  
"The only problem," Enid insisted, "was that he was married. But Norma 
wasn't supposed to worry about that. Floyd said the whole arrangement was 
temporary. He said he'd made a bad mistake, he had a terrible marriage, he'd 
never loved hi s wife —" 
"Mother."  
"And he was going to divorce her." Enid let her eyes fall shut in raconteurial 
pleasure. She was aware that Denise didn't like this story, but there were 
plenty of things about Denise's life that were disagree able to Enid, too, so. 
"Wel l, this went on for years. Floyd was very smooth and charming, and he 
could afford to do things for Norma that a man closer to her own age couldn't 
have. Norma developed a real taste for luxuries, and then, too, she'd met 
Floyd at an age when a girl falls head over heels in love, and Floyd had sworn 
up and down that he was going to divorce his wife and marry Norma. Well, 
by then Dad and I were married and had Gary. I remember Norma came over 
once when Gary was a baby, and she just wanted to hold him and hol d him. 
She loved little children, oh, she just loved holding Gary, and I felt terrible for 
her, because by then she'd been seeing Floyd for years, and he was still not 
divorced. I said, Norma, you can't wait forever. She said she'd tried to stop 
seeing Flo yd. She'd gone on dates with other men, but they were younger and 
they didn't seem matoor to her —Floyd was fif teen years older and very 
matoor, and I do understand how an older  
124 
THE CORRECTIONS  
man has a matoority that can make him attractive to a younger woman —" 
"Mother."  
"And, of course, these younger men couldn't always afford to be taking 
Norma to fancy places or buying her flowers and gifts like Floyd did (because, 
see, he could really turn on the charm when she got impa tient with him), and 
then, too, a lot of those younger men were inter ested in starting families, and 
Norma —" 
"Wasn't so young anymore," Denise said. "I brought some dessert. Are you 
ready for dessert?"  
"Well, you know what h appened."  
"Yes."  
"It's a heartbreaking story, because Norma —" 
"Yes. I know the story."  
"Norma found herself —" 
"Mother: / know the story. You seem to think it has some bearing on my own 
situation."  
"Denise, I don't. You've never even told me what your 'situ ation' is."  
"Then why do you keep telling me the story of Norma Greene?"  
"I don't see why it upsets you if it has nothing to do with your own situation."  
"What upsets me is that you seem to think it does. Are you under the 
impression that I'm involved with  a married man?"  
Enid was not only under this impression but was suddenly so angry about it, 
so clotted with disapproval, that she had difficulty breathing.  
"Finally, finally, going to get rid of some of these magazines," she said, 
snapping the glossy page s. 
"Mother?"  
"It's better not to talk about this. Just like the Navy, don't ask, don't tell."  
Denise stood in the kitchen doorway with her arms crossed and a dish towel 
balled up in her hand. "Where did you get the idea that I'm involved with a 
married man ?" 
Enid snapped another page.  
125 
"Did Gary say something to give you that idea?" '  
Enid struggled to shake her head. Denise would be furious if she found out 
that Gary had betrayed a confidence, and though Enid spent much of her own 
life furious with Gary about one thing or another, she prided herself on 
keeping secrets, and she didn't w ant to get him in trou ble. It was true that 
she'd been brooding about Denise's situation for many months and had 
accumulated large stores of anger. She'd ironed at the ironing board and 
raked the ivy beds and lain awake at night re hearsing the judgments —That is 
the kind of grossly selfish behavior that I will never understand and never 
forgive and Tm ashamed to be the parent of a person who would live like 
that and In a situation like this, Denise, my sympa thies are one thousand 
percent with the wife, on e thousand percent —that she yearned to pronounce 
on Denise's immoral lifestyle. And now she had an opportunity to pronounce 
these judgments. And yet, if Denise denied the charges, then all of Enid's 
anger, all of her refining and rehearsal of her judgments , would go wasted. 
And if, on the other hand, Denise ad mitted everything, it might still be wiser 
for Enid to swallow her pent -up judgments than to risk a fight. Enid needed 
Denise as an ally on the Christmas front, and she didn't want to set off on a 
luxury cruise with one son having vanished inexplicably, another son blaming 
her for be traying his trust, and her daughter perhaps confirming her worst 
fears.  
With great humbling effort she therefore shook her head. "No, no, no. Gary 
never said a thing."  
Den ise narrowed her eyes. "Never said a thing about what."  
"Denise," Alfred said. "Let her be."  
And Denise, who obeyed Enid in nothing, promptly turned and went back 
into the kitchen.  
Enid found a coupon offering sixty cents off I Can't Believe It's Not Butte r! 
with any purchase of Thomas' English muffins. Her scissors cut the paper 
and with it the silence that had fallen.  
"If I do one thing on this cruise," she said, "I'm going to get through all these 
magazines."  
"No sign of Chip," Alfred said.  
Denise brought slices of tart on dessert plates to the dining table. "I'm afraid 
we may have seen the last of Chip today."  
126 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
"It's very peculiar," Enid said. "I don't understand why he doesn't at least 
call."  
"I've endured wors e," Alfred said.  
"Dad, there's dessert. My pastry chef made a pear tart. Do you want to have it 
at the table?"  
"Oh, that's much too big a piece for me," Enid said.  
"Dad?"  
Alfred didn't answer. His mouth had gone slack and sour again in the way 
that made En id feel that something terrible was going to hap pen. He turned 
to the darkening, rain -spotted windows and gazed at them dully, his head 
hanging low.  
"Dad?"  
"Al? There's dessert."  
Something seemed to melt in him. Still looking at the window, he raised his 
head with a tentative joy, as if he thought he recognized someone outside, 
someone he loved.  
"Al, what is it?"  
"Dad?"  
"There are children," he said, sitting up straighter. "Do you see them?" He 
raised a trembling index finger. "There." His finger moved lat erally, following 
the motion of the children he saw. "And there. And there."  
He turned to Enid and Denise as if he expected them to be over joyed to hear 
this news, but Enid was not the least bit overjoyed. She was about to embark 
on a very elegant fall co lor cruise on which it would be extremely important 
that Alfred not make mistakes like this.  
"Al, those are sunflowers" she said, half angry, half beseeching. "You're 
seeing reflections in the window."  
"Well!" He shook his head bluffly. "I thought I saw ch ildren."  
"No, sunflowers," Enid said. "You saw sunflowers."  
After his party was voted out of power and the Russian currency crisis had 
finished off the Lithuanian economy, Gitanas said, he'd passed his days alone 
in the old offices of the VIPPPAKJRIINPB17,  devoting his idle hours to 
constructing a Web site whose domain name,  
127 
lithuania.com, he'd purchased from an East Prussian speculator for a 
truckload of mimeograph machines, daisy -wheel printers, 64 -kilobyte 
Commodore computers, and other Gor bachev -era office equipment — the 
party's last physical vestiges. To publicize the plight of small debtor nations, 
Gitanas had created a satiric Web page offering DEMOCRACY FOR PROFIT: 
BUY A PIECE OF EUROPEAN HISTORY and had seeded links and references 
in A merican news groups and chat rooms for investors. Visitors to the site 
were invited to send cash to the erstwhile VTPP -PAKJRIINPB17 —"one of 
Lithuania's most venerable political parties," the "cornerstone" of the 
country's governing coalition for "three of the last seven years," the leading 
vote -getter in the April 1993 general elec tion, and now a "Western -leaning 
pro-business party" reorganized as the "Free Market Party Company." 
Gitanas's Web site promised that, as soon as the Free Market Party Company 
had bought enough votes to win a national election, its foreign investors 
would not only become "equity shareholders" in Lithuania Incorporated (a 
"for-profit nation state") but would also be rewarded, in proportion to the 
size of their in vestment, with per sonalized memorials to their "heroic 
contribution" to the "market liberation" of the country. By sending just $100, 
for exam ple, an American investor could have a street in Vilnius ("no less 
than two hundred meters in length") named after him; for $5,000 the Free 
Market Party Company would hang a portrait of the investor ("mini mum size 
60 cm x 80 cm; includes ornate gilt frame") in the Gallery of National 
Heroes at the historic Slapeliai House; for $25,000 the in vestor would be 
awarded perpetual title to  an eponymous town "of no fewer than 5,000 souls" 
and be granted a "modern, hygienic form of droit du seigneur" that met 
"most of" the guidelines established by the Third International Conference on 
Human Rights.  
"It was a nasty little joke," Gitanas said from the corner of the taxi -cab into 
which he'd wedged himself. "But who laughed? Nobody laughed. They just 
sent money. I gave an address and the cashier checks started coming in. E -
mail queries by the hundred. What products would Lithuania Inc. make? 
Who were the officers in the Free Market Party Company and did they have a 
strong track record as managers? Did I have records of past earnings? Could 
the investor alternatively  
128                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
have a Lithuanian street or village named after his children or his chil dren's 
favorite Pokemon charact er? Everybody wanted more infor mation. 
Everybody wanted brochures. And prospectuses! And stock certificates! And 
brokerage information! And are we listed on such and such exchange and so 
forth? People want to come and visit! And nobody is laughing.''''  
Chip was tapping on the window with a knuckle and checking out the women 
on Sixth Avenue. The rain was letting up, umbrellas coming down. "Are the 
proceeds going to you or to the Party?"  
"OK, so my philosophy about that is in transition," Gitanas said. From his 
briefcase he took a bottle of akvavit from which he'd already poured deal -
sealing shots in Eden's office. He rolled sideways and handed it to Chip, who 
took a healthy pull and gave it back.  
"You were an English teacher," Gitanas said.  
"I taught college , yeah."  
"And where your people from? Scandinavia?"  
"My dad's Scandinavian," Chip said. "My mom's sort of mongrel Eastern 
European."  
"People in Vilnius will look at you and think you're one of us."  
Chip was in a hurry to get to his apartment before his par ents left. Xow that 
he had cash in his pocket, a roll of thirty hundreds, he didn't care so much 
what his parents thought of him. In fact, he seemed to re call that a few hours 
earlier he'd seen his father trembling and pleading in a doorway. As he drank 
the akvavit and checked out the women on the sidewalk, he could no longer 
fathom why the old man had seemed like such a killer.  
It was true that Alfred believed the only thing wrong with the death Denalty 
was that it wasn't used often enough; true as well t hat the men whose gassing 
or electrocution he'd called for, over dinner in Chip's :nildhood, were usually 
black men from the slums on St. Jude's north side. ("Oh, Al," Enid would say, 
because dinner was "the family meal," and she couldn't understand why th ey 
had to spend it talking about gas chambers and slaughter in the streets.) And 
one Sunday morning, after he'd stood at a window counting squirrels and 
assessing the damage to :u5 oak trees and zoysia the way white men in 
marginal neighborhoods  
129 
took stock of how many houses had been lost to "the blacks," Alfred had 
performed an experiment in genocide. Incensed that the squirrels in his not -
large front yard lacked the discipline to stop reproducing or pick up after 
themselves, he went to  the basement and found a rat trap over which Enid, as 
he came upstairs with it, shook her head and made small negative noises. 
"Nineteen of them!" Alfred said. "Nineteen of them!" Emotional appeals were 
no match for the discipline of such an exact and sci entific figure. He baited 
the trap with a piece of the same whole wheat bread that Chip had eaten, 
toasted, for breakfast. Then all five Lamberts went to church, and between 
the Gloria Patri and the Doxol -ogy a young male squirrel, engaging in the 
high -risk behavior of the economically desperate, helped itself to the bread 
and had its skull crushed. The family came home to find green flies feasting 
on the blood and brain matter and chewed whole -wheat bread that had 
erupted through the young squirrel's shatt ered jaws. Alfred's own mouth and 
chin were sewn up in the distaste that special exertions of discipline — the 
spanking of a child, the eating of rutabaga —always caused him. (He was quite 
unconscious of this distaste he betrayed for discipline.) He fetched a shovel 
from the garage and loaded both the trap and the squirrel corpse into the 
paper grocery bag that Enid had half filled with pulled crabgrass the day 
before. Chip was following all this from about twenty steps behind him, and 
so he saw how, when Alf red entered the basement from the garage, his legs 
buckled a little, sideways, and he pitched into the washing machine, and then 
he ran past the Ping -Pong table (it had always scared Chip to see his father 
run, he seemed too old for it, too disciplined) an d disappeared into the 
basement bathroom; and henceforth the squirrels did whatever they wanted.  
The cab was approaching University Place. Chip considered re turning to the 
Cedar Tavern and reimbursing the bartender, maybe giv ing her an even 
hundred to ma ke everything OK, maybe getting her name and address and 
writing to her from Lithuania. He was leaning forward to direct the driver to 
the Tavern when a radical new thought arrested him: I stole nine bucks, 
that's what I did, that's who I am, tough luck fo r her.  
He sat back and extended his hand for the bottle.  
130 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
Outside his building the cabby waved away his hundred —too big, too big. 
Gitanas dug something smaller out of his red motocross jacket.  
"Why don't I meet you at your hot el?" Chip said.  
Gitanas was amused. "You're joking, right? I mean, I trust you a lot. But 
maybe I'll wait down here. Pack your bag, take your time. Bring a warm coat 
and hat. Suits and ties. Think financial."  
The doorman Zoroaster was nowhere to be seen. C hip had to use his key to 
get inside. On the elevator he took deep breaths to quell his excitement. He 
didn't feel afraid, he felt generous, he felt ready to em brace his father.  
But his apartment was empty. His family must have left minutes earlier. Body 
warmth was hanging in the air, faint smells of Enid's White Shoulders 
perfume, and something bathroomy, something old -persony. The kitchen 
was cleaner than Chip had ever seen it. In the liv ing room all the scrubbing 
and stowing he'd done was visible now a s it hadn't been the night before. And 
his bookshelves were denuded. And Julia had taken her shampoos and dryer 
from the bathroom. And he was drunker than he'd realized. And nobody had 
left a note for him. There was nothing on the dining table except a sli ce of tart 
and a vase of sun flowers. He had to pack his bags, but everything around him 
and inside him had become so strange that for a moment he could only stand 
and look. The leaves of the sunflowers had black spots and were rimmed with 
pale senescences ; the heads were meaty and splendid, heavy as brownies, 
thick as palms. In the center of a sunflower's Kansan face was a subtly pale 
button within a subtly darker areola. Nature, Chip thought, could hardly have 
devised a more inviting bed for a small winge d insect to tumble into. He 
touched the brown velvet, and ecstasy washed over him.  
The taxi containing three Lamberts arrived at a midtown pier where a white 
high -rise of a cruise ship, the Gunnar Myrdal, was blotting out the river and 
New Jersey and half the sky. A crowd mostly of old people had converged on 
the gate and reattenuated in the long, bright corridor be yond it. There was 
something netherworldly in their determined mi gration, something chilling 
in the cordiality and white raiment of the  
131 
Nordic Pleasurelines shore personnel, the rain clouds breaking up too late to 
save the day —the hush of it all. A throng and twilight by the Styx.  
Denise paid the cab fare and got the luggage into the hands of handlers.  
"So, now, where do you go from here?" Enid asked her.  
"Back to work in Philly."  
"You look darling," Enid said spontaneously. "I love your hair that length."  
Alfred seized Denise's hands and thanked her.  
"I just wish it had been a better day for Chip," Deni se said.  
"Talk to Gary about Christmas," Enid said. "And do think about coming for a 
whole week."  
Denise raised a leather cuff and checked the time. "I'll come for five days. I 
don't think Gary will do it, though. And who knows what's up with Chip."  
"Denise," Alfred said impatiently, as if she were speaking nonsense, "please 
talk to Gary."  
"OK, I will. I will."  
Alfred's hands bounced in the air. "I don't know how much time I have! You 
and your mother need to get along. You and Gary need to get along."  
"Al, you have plenty of —" 
"We all need to get along!"  
Denise had never been a crier, but her face was crumpling up. "Dad, all 
right," she said. "I'll talk to him."  
"Your mother wants a Christmas in St. Jude."  
"I'll talk to him. I promise."  
"Well." He turn ed abruptly. "That's enough of that."  
His black raincoat was flapping and whipping in the wind, and still Enid 
managed to hope that the weather would be perfect for cruising, that the 
water would be calm.  
In dry clothes, with a coat bag and a duffel and ci garettes —smooth lethal 
Murattis, five bucks a box —Chip rode out to Kennedy with  
132 
THE CORRECTIONS  
Gitanas Misevicius and boarded the Helsinki flight on which, in viola tion of 
his oral contract, Gitanas had bought coach -class, not business -class, tickets. 
"We can drink tonight, sleep tomorrow," he said.  
Their seats were aisle and window. As Chip sat down, he recalled how Julia 
had ditched Gitanas. He imagined her walking quickly off the plane and then 
sprinting down the concourse and throwing he rself into the back seat of a 
good old yellow cab. He felt a spasm of homesick ness —terror of the other; 
love of the familiar —but, unlike Julia, he had no desire to bolt. He'd no 
sooner buckled his seat belt than he fell asleep. He awoke briefly during 
takeoff and went under again until the entire population of the plane, as one, 
lit cigarettes.  
Gitanas took a computer from its case and booted up. "So Julia," he said.  
For an alarmed, sleep -clouded moment Chip thought that Gitanas was 
addressing him as Julia . 
"My wife?" Gitanas said.  
"Oh. Sure."  
"Yeah, she's on antidepressants. This was Eden's idea, I think. Eden kind of 
runs her life now, I think. You could see she didn't want me in her office 
today. Didn't want me in town! I'm inconvenient now. So, but, OK,  so Julia 
started taking the drug, and suddenly she woke up and she didn't want to be 
with men with cigarette burns anymore. That's what she says. Enough men 
with cigarette burns. Time to move on. No more men with burns." Gitanas 
loaded a CD into the compu ter's CD drive. "She wants the flat, though. At 
least the divorce lawyer wants her to want it. The divorce lawyer that Eden's 
paying for. Somebody ;hanged the locks on the flat, I had to pay the super to 
let me in."  
Chip closed his left hand. "Cigarette burns?"  
"Yeah. Oh, yeah, I got a few." Gitanas craned his neck to see if any neighbors 
were listening, but all the passengers around them, except for wo children 
with their eyes shut tight, were busy smoking. "Soviet m ilitary prison," he 
said. "I'll show you my memento of a pleasant stay there." He peeled his red 
leather jacket off one arm and rolled up the s -ieve of the yellow T -shirt he was 
wearing underneath. A poxy inter locking constellation of scar tissue extende d 
from his armpit down the  
133 
inside of his arm to his elbow. "This was my 1990," he said. "Eight months in 
a Red Army barracks in the sovereign state of Lithuania."  
"You were a dissident," Chip said.  
"Yeah! Yeah! Dissident!" He worked his arm b ack into its sleeve. "It was 
horrible, great. Very tiring, but it didn't feel tiring. The tiredness came later."  
Chip's memories of 1990 were of Tudor dramas, interminable futile fights 
with Tori Timmelman, a secret unhealthy involvement with cer tain text s of 
Tori's that illustrated the dehumanizing objectifications of pornography, and 
little else.  
"So, I'm kind of scared to look at this," Gitanas said. On his com puter screen 
was a dusky monochrome image of a bed, viewed from above, with a body 
beneath th e blankets. "The super says she's got a boyfriend, and I retrieved 
some data. I had my surveillance in there from the previous owner. Motion 
detector, infrared, digital stills. You can look if you want. Might be 
interesting. Might be hot."  
Chip remembered the smoke detector on the ceiling of Julia's bed room. Often 
enough he'd stared up at it until the corners of his mouth were dry and his 
eyes had rolled back in his head. It had always seemed to him a strangely 
complicated smoke detector.  
He sat up straigh ter in his seat. "Maybe you don't want to look at those."  
Gitanas pointed and clicked intricately. "I'll angle the screen. You don't have 
to look."  
Thunderheads of tobacco smoke were gathering in the aisles. Chip decided 
that he needed to light a Muratti; but the difference between taking a drag 
and taking a breath proved negligible.  
"What I mean," he said, blocking the computer screen with his hand, "is 
maybe you want to eject the CD and not look at it."  
Gitanas was genuinely startled. "Why don't I want to  look at it?"  
"Well, let's think about why."  
"Maybe you should tell me."  
"No, well, let's just think about it."  
For a moment the atmosphere was furiously cheerful. Gitanas con sidered 
Chip's shoulder, his knees, and his wrist, as though deciding  
134 
 
 
where to bite him. Then he ejected the CD and thrust it in Chip's face. "Fuck 
you!"  
"I know, I know."  
"Take it. Fuck you. I don't want to see it again. Take it."  
Chip put the CD in his shirt pocket. He felt pretty good. He felt all right. The 
plane had leveled off in altitude and the noise had the steady vague white 
burning of dry sinuses, the color of scuffed plastic airliner windows, the taste 
of cold pale coffee  in reusable tray -table cups. The North Atlantic night was 
dark and lonely, but here, on the plane, were lights in the sky. Here was 
sociability. It was good to be awake and to feel awakeness all around him.  
"So, what, you got cigarette burns, too?" Gitana s said.  
Chip showed his palm. "It's nothing."  
"Self -inflicted. You pathetic American."  
"Different kind of prison," Chip said.  
735  
GARY LAMBERT'S profitable entanglement with the Axon  Corporation had 
begun three weeks earlier, on a Sunday afternoon that he'd spent in his new 
color darkroom, trying to enjoy reprinting two old photographs of his parents 
and, by enjoying it, to reassure himself about his mental health.  
Gary had been worry ing a lot about his mental health, but on that particular 
afternoon, as he left his big schist -sheathed house on Semi -nole Street and 
crossed his big back yard and climbed the outside stairs of his big garage, the 
weather in his brain was as warm and brigh t as the weather in northwest 
Philadelphia. A September sun was shining through a mix of haze and 
smallish, gray -keeled clouds, and to the ex tent that Gary was able to 
understand and track his neurochemistry (and he was a vice president at 
CenTrust Bank, not a shrink, let's re member) his leading indicators all 
seemed rather healthy.  
Although in general Gary applauded the modern trend toward indi vidual 
self-management of retirement funds and long -distance calling plans and 
private -schooling options, he wa s less than thrilled to be given responsibility 
for his own personal brain chemistry, especially when certain people in his 
life, notably his father, refused to take any such responsibility. But Gary was 
nothing if not conscientious. As he entered the dark room, he estimated that 
his levels of Neurofactor 3 i i.e., serotonin: a very, very important factor) were 
posting seven -day or even thirty -day highs, that his Factor 2 and Factor 7 
levels were likewise outperforming expectations, and that his Factor 1 had  
rebounded from an early -morning slump related to the glass of Armagnac 
he'd drunk at bedtime. He had a spring in his step, an agreeable awareness of 
his above -average height and his late -summer suntan. His resentment of his 
wife, Caroline, was moderate an d well contained. Declines led advances in 
key indices of paranoia (e.g., his persistent suspicion that Caroline and his 
two older sons were mocking him), and his season - 
139 
ally adjusted assessment of life's futility and brevity was consistent with the 
overall robustness of his mental economy. He was not the least bit clinically 
depressed.  
He drew the velvet blackout curtains and shut the lightproof shut ters, took a 
box of 8x10 paper from the big stainless refrigerator, and fed two strips of 
celluloid to the motorized negative cleaner —a sexily heavy little gadget.  
He was printing images from his parents' ill -fated Decade of Con nubial Golf. 
One showed Enid bending over in deep rough, scowling in her sunglasses in 
the obliterative heartland heat,  her left hand squeezing the neck of her long -
suffering five -wood, her right arm blurred in the act of underhandedly 
throwing her ball (a white smear at the image's margin) into the fairway. (She 
and Alfred had only ever played on flat, straight, short, ch eap public courses.) 
In the other photo Alfred was wearing tight shorts and a billed Midland 
Pacific cap, black socks and prehistoric golf shoes, and was addressing a 
white grapefruit -sized tee marker with his prehistoric wooden driver and 
grinning at the camera as if to say, A ball this big I could hit!  
After Gary had given the enlargements their sour baths, he raised the lights 
and discovered that both prints were webbed over with pecu liar yellow 
blotches.  
He cursed a little, not so much because he cared  about the photo graphs as 
because he wanted to preserve his good spirits, his serotonin -rich mood, and 
to do this he needed a modicum of cooperation from the world of objects.  
Outside, the weather was curdling. There was a trickle in the gut ters, a 
rooft op percussion of drops from overhanging trees. Through the walls of the 
garage, while he shot a second pair of enlargements, Gary could hear 
Caroline and the boys playing soccer in the back yard. He heard footfalls and 
punting sounds, less frequent shouts,  the seismic whump of ball colliding 
with garage.  
When the second set of prints emerged from the fixer with the same yellow 
blotches, Gary knew he ought to quit. But there came a tapping on the 
outside door, and his youngest son, Jonah, slipped through the  blackout 
curtain.  
140                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
"Are you printing pictures?" Jonah said.  
Gary hastily folded the failed prints into quarters and  buried them in the 
trash. "Just starting," he said.  
He remixed his solutions and opened a fresh box of paper. Jonah sat down by 
a safe light and whispered as he turned the pages of one of the Narnia books, 
Prince Caspian, that Gary's sister, Denise, had g iven him. Jonah was in 
second grade but was already reading at a fifth -grade level. Often he spoke 
aloud the written words in an articulate whisper that was of a piece with his 
general Narnian dearness as a person. He had shining dark eyes and an oboe 
voic e and mink -soft hair and could seem, even to Gary, more sentient animal 
than little boy.  
Caroline did not entirely approve of Narnia —C. S. Lewis was a known 
Catholic propagandist, and the Narnian hero, Asian, was a furry, four -pawed 
Christ figure —but Gary had enjoyed reading The Lion, the Witch and the 
Wardrobe as a boy, and he had not, it was safe to say, grown up to be a 
religious nut. (In fact he was a strict materialist.)  
"So they kill a bear," Jonah reported, "but it's not a talking bear, and Asian 
comes back, but only Lucy sees him and the others don't believe her."  
Gary tweezed the prints into the stop bath. "Why don't they believe her?"  
"Because she's the youngest," Jonah said.  
Outside, in the rain, Caroline laughed and shouted. She had a habit of 
running herself ragged to keep up with the boys. In the early years of their 
marriage she'd worked full -time as a lawyer, but after Caleb was born she'd 
come into family money and now she worked half days only, at a 
philanthropically low salary, for the Children's Defense Fund. Her real life 
centered on the boys. She called them her best friends.  
Six months ago, on the eve of Gary's forty -third birthday, while he and Jonah 
were visiting his parents in St. Jude, a pair of local contrac tors had come and 
rewired, replumbed, and re -outfitted the second floor of the garage as a 
surprise birthday gift from Caroline. Gary had occasionally spoken of 
reprinting his favorite old family ph otos and col lecting them in a leather -
bound album, an All -Time Lambert Two Hundred. But commercial printing 
would have sufficed for that, and  
141 
meanwhile the boys were teaching him computer pixel -processing, and if 
he'd still needed a lab he c ould have rented one by the hour. His im pulse on 
his birthday, therefore —after Caroline had led him out to the garage and 
presented him with a darkroom that he didn't need or want —was to weep. 
From certain pop -psychology books on Caroline's nightstand, ho wever, he'd 
learned to recognize the Warning Signs of clinical depression, and one of 
these Warning Signs, the authorities all agreed, was a proclivity to 
inappropriate weeping, and so he'd swal lowed the lump in his throat and 
bounded around the expensive  new darkroom and exclaimed to Caroline 
(who was experiencing both buyer's remorse and gift -giver's anxiety) that he 
was utterly delighted with the gift! And then, to reassure himself that he 
wasn't clinically depressed and to make sure that Caroline never  suspected 
anything of the kind, he'd resolved to work in the darkroom twice a week 
until the All -Time Lambert Two Hundred album was complete.  
The suspicion that Caroline, consciously or not, had tried to exile him from 
the house by putting the darkroom in the garage was another key index of 
paranoia.  
When the timer pealed, he transferred the third set of prints to the fixer bath 
and raised the l ights again.  
"What are those white blobs?" Jonah said, peering into the tray.  
"Jonah, I don't know!"  
"They look like clouds," Jonah said.  
The soccer ball slammed into the side of the garage.  
Gary left Enid scowling and Alfred grinning in the fixative and o pened 
shutters. His monkey puzzle tree and the bamboo thicket next to it were 
glossy with rain. In the middle of the back yard, in soaked soiled jerseys that 
stuck to their shoulder blades, Caroline and Aaron were gulping air while 
Caleb tied a shoe. Carol ine at forty -five had the legs of a college girl. Her hair 
was nearly as blond as when Gary had first met her, twenty years earlier, at a 
Bob Seger concert at the Spec trum. Gary was still substantially attracted to 
his wife, still excited by her effortles s good looks and by her Quaker 
bloodlines. By ancient re flex, he reached for a camera and trained the zoom 
telephoto on her.  
The look on Caroline's face dismayed him. There was a pinch in  
 
- 
142 
THE CORRECTIONS  
her brow, a groove of distress aro und her mouth. She was limping as she 
pursued the ball again.  
Gary turned the camera on his oldest son, Aaron, who was best photographed 
unawares, before he could position his head at the self -conscious angle that 
he believed most flattered him. Aaron's fa ce was flushed and mud -flecked in 
the drizzle, and Gary worked the zoom to frame a handsome shot. But 
resentment of Caroline was overwhelming his neurochemical defenses.  
The soccer had stopped now and she was running and limping to ward the 
house.  
Lucy bur ied her head in his mane to hide from his face, Jonah whispered.  
There came a screaming from the house.  
Caleb and Aaron reacted instantly, galloping across the yard like action -
picture heroes and disappearing inside. A moment later Aaron reemerged 
and shou ted, in his newly crack -prone voice, "Dad! Dad! Dad! Dad!"  
The hysteria of others made Gary methodical and calm. He left the darkroom 
and descended the rain -slick stairway slowly. In the open space above the 
commuter -rail tracks, behind the garage, a kind of spring -shower self -
improvement of the light was working through the humid air.  
"Dad, Grandma's on the phone!"  
Gary ambled across the yard, pausing to examine and regret the in juries that 
the soccer had visited on the grass. The surrounding neigh borhood, Chestnut 
Hill, was not un -Narnian. Century -old maples and ginkgos and sycamores, 
many of them mutilated to accommodate power lines, grew in giant riot over 
patched and repatched city streets bearing the names of decimated tribes. 
Seminole and Cher okee, Navajo and Shawnee. For miles in every direction, 
despite high population densities and large household incomes, there were 
no fast roads and few useful stores. The Land That Time Forgot, Gary called 
it. Most of the houses here, including his own, we re made of a schist that 
resembled raw tin and was exactly the color of his hair.  
"Dad!"  
"Thank you, Aaron, I heard you the first time."  
143 
"Grandma's on the phone!"  
"I know that, Aaron. You just told me."  
In the slate -floored kitchen he found C aroline slumped in a chair with both 
hands pressed to her lower back.  
"She called this morning," Caroline said. "I forgot to tell you. The phone's 
been ringing every five minutes, and finally I was running —" 
"Thank you, Caroline."  
"I was running —" 
"Thank y ou." Gary snagged the cordless and held it at arm's length, as if to 
keep his mother at bay, while he proceeded into the dining room. Here he 
was waylaid by Caleb, who had a finger buried in the slick leaves of a 
catalogue. "Dad, can I talk to you for a se cond?"  
"Not now, Caleb, your grandmother is on the phone."  
"I just want —" 
"Not now, I said."  
Caleb shook his head and smiled in disbelief, like a much -televised athlete 
who'd failed to draw a penalty.  
Gary crossed the marble -floored main hall into his very  large living room and 
said hello into the little phone.  
"I told Caroline," Enid said, "that I would call you back if you weren't near the 
phone."  
"Your calls cost seven cents a minute," Gary said.  
"Or you could have called me back."  
"Mother, we're talking about twenty -five cents."  
"I've been trying to reach you all day," she said. "The travel agent needs an 
answer by tomorrow morning at the latest. And, you know, we're still hoping 
you'll come for one last Christmas, like I promised J onah, so —" 
"Hang on a second," Gary said. "I'll check with Caroline."  
"Gary, you've had months to discuss this. I'm not going to sit here and wait 
while you —" 
"One second."  
He blocked the perforations in the phone's mouthpiece with his thumb and 
returned t o the kitchen, where Jonah was standing on a chair with a package 
of Oreos. Caroline, still slumped at the table, was  
144 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
breathing shallowly. "I did something terrible," she said, "when I ran to catch 
the phone."  
"You were out there slipping around in the rain for two hours," Gary said.  
"No, I was fine until I ran to get the phone."  
"Caroline, I saw you limping before you —" 
"I was fine," she said, "until I ran to get the phone, which was ring ing for the 
fiftieth t ime—" 
"Good, all right," Gary said, "it's my mother's fault. Now tell me what you 
want me to say about Christmas."  
"Well, whatever. They're welcome to come here."  
"We'd talked about the possibility of going there."  
Caroline shook her head thoroughly, as if  erasing something. "No. You talked 
about it. I never talked about it."  
"Caroline —" 
"I can't discuss this when she's on the phone. Have her call back next week."  
Jonah was realizing that he could take as many cookies as he wanted and 
neither parent would n otice.  
"She needs to make arrangements now," Gary said. "They're trying to decide 
if they should stop here next month, after their cruise. It de pends on 
Christmas."  
"It's like I slipped a disk."  
"If you won't talk about it," he said, "I'll tell her we're considering coming to 
St. Jude."  
"No way! That was not the agreement."  
"I'm proposing a one -time exception to the agreement."  
"No! No!" Wet tangles of blond hair lashed and twisted as Caroline registered 
refusal. "You can't change the rules like that."  
"A one-time exception isn't changing the rules."  
"God, I think I need an X -ray," Caroline said.  
Gary could feel the buzzing of his mother's voice against his thumb. "A yes or 
a no here?"  
Standing up, Caroline leaned into him and buried her face in his sweater . She 
knocked lightly on his sternum with a little fist. "Please,"  
745  
she said, nuzzling his collarbone. "Tell her you'll call her later. Please? I really 
hurt my back."  
Gary held the phone out to one side, his arm rigid, as she pressed against 
him. "Caroline. They've come here eight years in a row. It's not extreme of me 
to propose a one -time exception. Can I at least say we're considering the 
possibility?"  
Caroline shook her head woefully and sank onto the chair.  
"OK, fine," Gary said. "I'll ma ke my own decision."  
He strode into the dining room, where Aaron, who'd been listen ing, stared at 
him as if he were a monster of spousal cruelty.  
"Dad," Caleb said, "if you're not talking to Grandma, can I ask you 
something?"  
"No, Caleb, I'm talking to Grandma."  
"Then can I talk to you right afterward?"  
"Oh, God, oh, God," Caroline was saying.  
In the living room Jonah had settled onto the larger leather sofa with his 
tower of cookies and Prince Caspian.  
"Mother?"  
"I don't understand this," Enid said. "If it's not a good time to talk, all right, 
call me back, but to make me wait ten minutes —" 
"Yes, but here I am."  
"Well, so, and what have you decided?"  
Before Gary could answer, there burst from the kitchen a piteous  raw feline 
wailing, a cry such as Caroline had produced during inter course fifteen years 
ago, before there were boys to hear her.  
"Mom, sorry, one second."  
"This is not right," Enid said. "This is not polite."  
"Caroline," Gary called into the kitchen, "d o you think we can behave like 
adults for a few minutes?"  
"Ah, ah, uh! Uh!" Caroline cried.  
"Nobody ever died of a backache, Caroline."  
"Please," she cried, "call her later. I tripped on the last step when I was 
running inside, Gary, it hurts —" 
He turned h is back on the kitchen. "Sorry, Mom."  
"What on earth is going on there?"  
148 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"Caroline hurt her back a little bit playing soccer.'"  
"You know, I hate to say this," Enid said, "but aches and pains are a part of 
getting older. I cou ld talk about pain all day long if I wanted to. My hip is 
always hurting. As you get older, though, hopefully you get a little more 
matoor."  
"Oh! Ahh! Ahh!" Caroline cried out voluptuously.  
"Yeah, that's the hope," Gary said.  
"Anyhow, what did you decide?"  
"The jury's still out on Christmas," he said, "but maybe you should plan on 
stopping here —" 
"Ow! Ow! Ow!"  
"It's getting awfully late to be making Christmas reservations," Enid said 
severely. "You know, the Schumperts made their Hawaii reservations back in 
April, because last year, when they waited until September, they couldn't get 
the seats they —" 
Aaron came running from the kitchen. "Dad!"  
"I'm on the phone, Aaron."  
"Dad!"  
"I'm on the telephone, Aaron, as you can see."  
"Dave has a colostomy," Enid said.  
"You've got to do something right now" Aaron said. "Mom is really hurting. 
She says you have to drive her t o the hospital!"  
"Actually, Dad," said Caleb, sidling in with his catalogue, "there's someplace 
you can drive me, too."  
"No, Caleb."  
"No, but there's a store I really actually do need to get to?"  
"The affordable seats fill up early," Enid said.  
"Aaron?" Ca roline shouted from the kitchen. "Aaron! Where are you? 
Where's your father? Where's Caleb?"  
"It certainly is noisy in here for a person trying to concentrate," Jonah said.  
"Mother, sorry," Gary said, "I'm going someplace quieter."  
"It's getting very late, " Enid said, in her voice the panic of a woman for whom 
each passing day, each hour, signified the booking of more seats on late -
December flights and thus the particle -by-particle disinte - 
147 
gration of any hope that Gary and Caroline would b ring their boys to St. Jude 
for one last Christmas.  
"Dad," Aaron pleaded, following Gary up the stairs to the second floor, "what 
do I tell her?"  
"Tell her to call 911. Use your cell phone, call an ambulance." Gary raised his 
voice: "Caroline? Call 911!"  
Nine years ago, after a midwestern trip whose particular torments had 
included ice storms in both Philly and St. Jude, a four -hour runway delay 
with a whining five -year -old and a screaming two -year -old, a night of wild 
vomiting by Caleb in reaction (accordi ng to Caroline) to the butter and bacon 
fat in Enid's holiday cooking, and a nasty spill that Caroline took on her in -
laws' ice -covered driveway (her back trouble dated from her field -hockey 
days at Friends' Central, but she now spoke of having "reactivate d" the injury 
on that driveway), Gary had promised his wife that he would never again ask 
her to go to St. Jude for Christ mas. But now his parents had come to Philly 
eight years in a row, and although he disapproved of his mother's obsession 
with Christma s—it seemed to him a symptom of a larger malaise, a painful 
emptiness in Enid's life —he could hardly blame his parents for wanting to 
stay home this year. Gary also calculated that Enid would be more willing to 
leave St. Jude and move east if she'd had her  "one last Christmas." Basically, 
he was prepared to make the trip, and he expected a modicum of coopera tion 
from his wife: a mature willingness to consider the special circum stances.  
He shut himself inside his study and locked the door against the shout s and 
whimpers of his family, the barrage of feet on stairs, the pseudo -emergency. 
He lifted the receiver of his study phone and turned off the cordless.  
"This is ridiculous," Enid said in a defeated voice. "Why don't you call me 
back?"  
"We haven't quite d ecided about December," he said, "but we may very well 
come to St. Jude. In which case, I think you should stop here after the 
cruise."  
Enid was breathing rather loudly. "We're not making two trips to 
Philadelphia this fall," she said. "And I want to see t he boys at Christ - 
148                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
mas, and so as far as I'm concerned this means you're coming to St. Jude."  
"No, Mother," he said . "No, no, no. We haven't decided any thing."  
"I promised Jonah —" 
"Jonah's not buying the tickets. Jonah's not in charge here. So you make your 
plans, we'll make ours, and hopefully everything will work out."  
Gary could hear, with strange clarity , the rustle of dissatisfaction from Enid's 
nostrils. He could hear the seashore of her respiration, and all at once he 
realized.  
"Caroline?' 1''he said. "Caroline, are you on the line?"  
The breathing ceased.  
"Caroline, are you eavesdropping? Are you on the  line?"  
He heard a faint electronic click, a spot of static.  
"Mom, sorry —" 
Enid: "What on earth?"  
Unbelievable! Unfuckingbelievable! Gary dropped the receiver on his desk, 
unlocked the door, and ran down the hallway past a bedroom in which Aaron 
was standi ng at his mirror with his brow wrinkled and his head at the 
Flattering Angle, past the main staircase on which Caleb was clutching his 
catalogue like a Jehovah's Witness with a pamphlet, to the master bedroom 
where Caroline was curled up fetally on a Persi an rug, in her muddy clothes, 
a frosty gelpack pressed into her lower back.  
"Are you eavesdropping on me?"  
Caroline shook her head weakly, perhaps hoping to suggest that she was too 
infirm to have reached the phone by the bed.  
"Is that a no? You're saying no? You weren't listening?"  
"No, Gary," she said in a tiny voice.  
"I heard the click, I heard the breathing —" 
"No."  
"Caroline, there are three phones on this line, I've got two of them in my 
study, and the third one's right here. Hello?"  
"I wasn't eavesdropping. I just picked up the phone —" She inhaled through 
gritted teeth. "To see if the line was free. That's all."  
"And sat and listened! You were eavesdropping!' Like we've talked and talked 
and talked about not doing!"  
"Gary," she said in a piteous little voice, "I swear to you I wasn't. My back is 
killing me. I couldn't reach to put the phone back for a minute. I put it on the 
floor. I wasn't eavesdropping. Please be nice to  
me. 
That her face was beautiful and that the agony in  it was mistakable for 
ecstasy —that the sight of her doubled -over and mud -spattered and red -
cheeked and vanquished and wild -haired on the Persian rug turned him on; 
that some part of him believed her denials and was full of ten derness for 
her—only deepene d his feeling of betrayal. He stormed back up the hall to his 
study and slammed the door. "Mother, hello, I'm sorry."  
But the line was dead. He had to dial St. Jude now at his own ex pense. 
Through the window overlooking the back yard he could see sunlit, 
clamshell -purple rain clouds, steam rising off the monkey puzzle tree.  
Because she wasn't paying for the call, Enid sounded happier. She asked Gary 
if he'd heard of a company called Axon. "It's in Schwenksville, Pennsylvania," 
she said. "They want to buy D ad's pa tent. Here, I'll read you the letter. I'm a 
little upset about this."  
At CenTrust Bank, where Gary now ran the Equities Division, he'd long 
specialized in large -cap securities and never much concerned him self with 
small fry. The name Axon was not familiar to him. But as he listened to his 
mother read the letter from Mr. Joseph K. Prager at Bragg Knuter & Speigh, 
he felt he knew these people's game. It was clear that the lawyer, in drafting a 
letter and sending it to an old man with a midwestern add ress, had offered 
Alfred no more than a tiny per centage of the patent's actual value. Gary knew 
the way these shysters worked. In Axon's position he would have done the 
same.  
"I'm thinking we should ask for ten thousand, not five thousand," Enid said.  
"Wh en does that patent expire?" Gary said.  
"In about six years."  
150 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"They must be looking at big money. Otherwise they'd just go ahead and 
infringe."  
"The letter says it's experimental and uncertain."  
"Mother, exactly. That's exactly what they want you to think. But if it's so 
experimental, why are they bothering with this at all? Why not just wait six 
years?"  
"Oh, I see."  
"It's very, very good that you told me about this, Mother. What you need to 
do no w is write back to these guys and ask them for a $200,000 licensing fee 
up front."  
Enid gasped as she'd done long ago on family car trips, when Alfred swung 
into oncoming traffic to pass a truck. "Two hundred thousand! Oh, my, 
Gary —" 
"And a one percent roy alty on gross revenues from their process. Tell them 
you're fully prepared to defend your legitimate claim in court."  
"But what if they say no?"  
"Trust me, these guys have no desire to litigate. There's no down side to being 
aggressive here."  
"Well, but it 's Dad's patent, and you know how he thinks."  
"Put him on the phone," Gary said.  
His parents were cowed by authority of all kinds. When Gary wanted to 
reassure himself that he'd escaped their fate, when he needed to measure his 
distance from St. Jude, he c onsidered his own fearless ness in the face of 
authority —including the authority of his father.  
"Yes," Alfred said.  
"Dad," he said, "I think you should go after these guys. They're in a very weak 
position and you could make some real money."  
In St. Jude th e old man said nothing.  
"You're not telling me you're going to take that offer," Gary said. "Because 
that's not even an option. Dad. That's not even on the menu."  
"I've made my decision," Alfred said. "What I do is not your busi ness."  
"Yes, it is, though.  I have a legitimate interest in this."  
151 
"Gary, you do not."  
"I have a legitimate interest," Gary insisted. If Enid and Alfred ever ran out of 
money, it would fall to him and Caroline —not to his under capitalized sister, 
not to his feckless br other —to pay for their care. But he had enough self -
control not to spell this out for Alfred. "Will you at least tell me what you're 
going to do? Will you pay me that courtesy?"  
"You could pay me the courtesy of not asking," Alfred said. "How ever, since 
you ask, I will tell you. I'm going to take what they offer and give half of the 
money to Orfic Midland."  
The universe was mechanistic: the father spoke, the son reacted.  
"Well, now, Dad," Gary said in the low, slow voice he reserved for situations 
in which  he was very angry and very certain he was right. "You can't do that."  
"I can and I will," Alfred said.  
"No, really, Dad, you have to listen to me. There is absolutely no legal or 
moral reason for you to split the money with Orfic Midland."  
"I was using the railroad's materials and equipment," Alfred said. "It was 
understood that I would share any income from the patents. And Mark 
Jamborets put me in touch with the patent lawyer. I suspect I was given a 
courtesy rate."  
"That was fifteen years ago! The company no longer exists. The people you 
had the understanding with are dead."  
"Not all of them are. Mark Jamborets is not."  
"Dad, it's a nice sentiment. I understand the feeling, but —" 
"I doubt you do."  
"That railroad was raped and eviscerated by the Wroth brothers."  
"I will not discuss it any further."  
"This is sick! This is sick!" Gary said. "You're being loyal to a cor poration that 
screwed you and the city of St. Jude in every conceivable way. It's screwing 
you again, right now, with your health insurance."  
"You have your opinion, I have mine."  
"And I'm saying you're being irresponsible. You're being selfish. If you want 
to eat peanut butter and pinch pennies, that's your business, but it's not fair 
to Mom and it's not f air to —" 
"I don't give a damn what you and your mother think."  
752                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
"It's not fair to me! Who's going to pay your bills if you get in trou ble? Who's 
your fallback?"  
"I will endure what I have to endure," Alfred said. "Yes, and I'll eat peanut 
butter if I have to. I like peanut butter. It's a good food."  
"And if that's what Mom has to eat, she'll eat it, too. Right? She can  eat dog 
food if she has to! Who cares what she wants?"  
"Gary, I know what the right thing to do is. I don't expect you to understand —
I don't understand the decisions you make —but I know what's fair. So let that 
be the end of it."  
"I mean, give Orfic Midla nd twenty -five hundred dollars if you ab solutely 
have to," Gary said. "But that patent is worth —" 
"Let that be the end of it, I said. Your mother wants to talk to you again."  
"Gary," Enid cried, "the St. Jude Symphony is doing The Nutcracker in 
December! They do a beautiful job with the regional ballet, and it sells out so 
fast, tell me, do you think I should get nine tickets for the day of Christmas 
Eve? They have a two o'clock matinee, or we can go on the night of the 
twenty -third, if you think that's be tter. You decide."  
"Mother, listen to me. Do not let Dad accept that offer. Don't let him do 
anything until I've seen the letter. I want you to put a copy of it in the mail to 
me tomorrow."  
"OK, I will, but I'm thinking the important thing right now is The Nutcracker, 
to get nine tickets all together, because it sells out so fast, Gary, you wouldn't 
believe."  
When he finally got off the phone, Gary pressed his hands to his eyes and 
saw, engraved in false colors on the darkness of his mental movie screen, tw o 
images of golf: Enid improving her lie from the rough (cheating was the word 
for this) and Alfred making light of his badness at the game.  
The old man had pulled the same kind of self -defeating stunt four teen years 
ago, after the Wroth brothers bought t he Midland Pacific. Alfred was a few 
months shy of his sixty -fifth birthday when Fenton Creel, the Midpac's new 
president, took him to lunch at Morelli's in St. Jude. The top echelon of 
Midpac executives had been purged by the Wroths for having resisted th e 
takeover, but Alfred, as chief engineer,  
153 
had not been a part of this palace guard. In the chaos of shutting down the St. 
Jude office and moving operations to Little Rock, the Wroths needed 
somebody to keep the railroad running while the new  crew, headed by Creel, 
learned the ropes. Creel offered Alfred a fifty percent raise and a block of 
Orfic stock if he would stay on for two extra years, oversee the move to Little 
Rock, and provide continuity.  
Alfred hated the Wroths and was inclined to s ay no, but that night, at home, 
Enid went to work on him. She pointed out that the Orfic stock alone was 
worth $78,000, that his pension would be based on his last three full years' 
salary, and that here was a chance to increase their retirement income by fifty 
percent.  
These irresistible arguments appeared to sway Alfred, but three nights later 
he came home and announced to Enid that he'd tendered his resignation that 
afternoon and that Creel had accepted it. Alfred was then  seven weeks short 
of a full year at his last, largest salary; it made no sense at all to quit. But he 
gave no explanation, then or ever, to Enid or to anyone else, for his sudden 
turnabout. He simply said: I have made my decision.  
At the Christmas table i n St. Jude that year, moments after Enid had sneaked 
onto baby Aaron's little plate a bite of hazelnut goose stuff ing and Caroline 
had grabbed the stuffing from the plate and marched into the kitchen and 
flung it in the trash like a wad of goose crap, say ing, "This is pure grease —
yuck," Gary lost his temper and shouted: You couldn't wait seven weeks? You 
couldn't wait till you were sixty -five?  
Gary, I worked hard all my life. My retirement is my business, not yours.  
And the man so keen to retire that h e couldn't wait those last seven weeks: 
what had he done with his retirement? He'd sat in his blue chair.  
Gary knew nothing of Axon, but Orfic Midland was the sort of con glomerate 
whose holdings and management structure he was paid to stay abreast of. He 
happened to know that the Wroth brothers had sold their controlling stake to 
cover losses in a Canadian gold -mining ven ture. Orfic Midland had joined the 
ranks of the indistinguishable bland megafirms whose headquarters dotted 
the American exurbs; its exe cutives had been replaced like the cells of a living 
organism or like the let ters in a game of Substitution in which SHIT turned to 
SHOT and SOOT  
754                                                                                                                  THE CORRECTIONS  
and FOOT and FOOD, so that, by the time Gary had'okayed the latest bulk 
purchase of OrficM for CenTrust's portfolio, no blamable human trace 
remained of the company that had shut down St. Jude's third -largest 
employer and  eliminated train service to much of rural Kansas. Orfic 
Midland was out of the transportation business altogether now. What 
survived of the Midpac's trunk lines had been sold off to enable the company 
to concentrate on prison -building, prison management, gourmet coffee, and 
financial services; a new 144 -strand fiber -optic cable system lay buried in the 
railroad's old right -of-way.  
This was the company to which Alfred felt loyal?  
The more Gary thought about it, the angrier he got. He sat by himself in his 
study, unable to stem his rising agitation or to slow the steam -locomotive 
pace at which his breaths were coming. He was blind to the pretty pumpkin -
yellow sunset unfolding in the tulip trees beyond the commuter tracks. He 
saw nothing but the principles at stake.  
He might have sat there obsessing indefinitely, marshaling evidence against 
his father, had he not heard a rustling outside the study door. He jumped to 
his feet and pulled the door open.  
Caleb was cross -legged on the floor, studying his catalogue. "Can I talk to you 
now?"  
"Were you sitting out here listening to me?"  
"No," Caleb said. "You said we could talk when you were done. I had a 
question. I was wondering what room I could put under surveil lance."  
Even upside down Gary could see that the price s for the equipment in Caleb's 
catalogue —items with brushed -aluminum cases, color LCD screens —were 
three - and four -figure.  
"It's my new hobby," Caleb said. "I want to put a room under sur veillance. 
Mom says I can do the kitchen if it's OK with you."  
"You want to put the kitchen under surveillance as a hobby?"  
"Yeah!"  
Gary shook his head. He'd had many hobbies when he was a boy, and for a 
long time it had pained him that his own boys seemed to have none at all. 
Eventually Caleb had figured out that if he us ed the word "hobby," Gary 
would green -light expenditures he otherwise might have  
755  
forbidden Caroline to make. Thus Caleb's hobby had "been photogra phy until 
Caroline had bought him an autofocus camera, an SLR with a better zoom 
telephoto lens  than Gary's own, and a digital point -and-shoot camera. His 
hobby had been computers until Caroline had bought him a palmtop and a 
notebook. But now Caleb was nearly twelve, and Gary had been around the 
block one too many times. His guard was up regarding hobbies. He'd 
extracted from Caroline a prom ise not to buy Caleb more equipment of any 
kind without consulting with him first.  
"Surveillance is not a hobby," he said.  
"Dad, yes it is! Mom was the one who suggested it. She said I could start with 
the kitch en." 
It seemed to Gary another Warning Sign of depression that his thought was: 
The liquor cabinet is in the kitchen.  
"Better let me talk about this with Mom, all right?"  
"But the store's only open till six," Caleb said.  
"You can wait a few days. Don't tel l me you can't."  
"But I've been waiting all afternoon. You said you'd talk to me, and now it's 
almost night."  
That it was almost night gave Gary clear title to a drink. The liquor cabinet 
was in the kitchen. He took a step in its direction. "What equip ment exactly 
are we talking about?"  
"Just a camera and a microphone and servo controls." Caleb thrust the 
catalogue at Gary. "See, I don't even need the expensive kind. This one's just 
six fifty. Mom said it was OK."  
Time and again Gary had the feeling tha t there was something dis agreeable 
that his family wanted to forget, something only he insisted on remembering; 
something requiring only his nod, his go -ahead, to be forgotten. This feeling, 
too, was a Warning Sign.  
"Caleb," he said, "this sounds like som ething you're going to get bored with 
very soon. It sounds expensive and like you won't stay inter ested."  
"No! No!" Caleb said, anguished. "I'm totally interested. Dad, it's a hobby."  
"You've gotten bored, though, pretty quickly with some of the  
15B                                                                                                                        THE CORRECTIONS  
other things we've gotten you. Things you also said you were Very in terested 
in' at the time."  
"This is diffe rent," Caleb pleaded. "This time I'm really, truly interested."  
Clearly the boy was prepared to spend any amount of devalued ver bal 
currency to buy his father's acquiescence.  
"Do you see what I'm saying, though?" Gary said. "Do you see the pattern? 
That t hings look one way before you buy them and another way afterward? 
Your feelings change after you buy things. Do you see that?"  
Caleb opened his mouth, but before he could utter another plea or complaint, 
a craftiness nickered in his face.  
"I guess," he sai d with seeming humility. "I guess I see that."  
"Well, do you think it's going to happen with this new equipment?" Gary said.  
Caleb gave every appearance of giving the question serious thought. "I think 
this is different," he said finally.  
"Well, OK," Gary said. "But I want you to remember we had this 
conversation. I don't want to see this become just another expensive toy you 
play with for a week or two and then neglect. You're going to be a teenager 
pretty soon, and I want to start seeing a little longer a ttention span —" 
"Gary, that isn't fair!" Caroline said hotly. She was hobbling from the 
doorway of the master bedroom, one shoulder hunched and her hand behind 
her back, applying pressure to the soothing gelpack.  
"Hello, Caroline. Didn't realize you were l istening."  
"Caleb is not neglecting things."  
"Right, I'm not," Caleb said.  
"What you don't understand," Caroline told Gary, "is that every thing's getting 
used in this new hobby. That's what's so brilliant about it. He's figured out a 
way to use all that e quipment together in one —" 
"Good, well, I'm glad to hear it."  
"He does something creative and you make him feel guilty."  
Once, when Gary had wondered aloud if giving Caleb so many gadgets might 
be stunting his imagination, Caroline had all but accused  
157 
him of slandering his son. Among her favorite parenting books was The 
Technological Imagination: What Today's Children Have to Teach Their 
Parents, in which Nancy Claymore, Ph.D., contrasting the "tired para digm" 
of Gifted Child as Socially Iso lated Genius with the "wired paradigm" of 
Gifted Child as Creatively Connected Consumer, argued that electronic toys 
would soon be so cheap and widespread that a child's imagination would no 
longer be exercised in crayon drawings and made -up stories but in  the 
synthesis and exploitation of existing technologies —an idea that Gary found 
both persuasive and depressing. When he was a boy not much younger than 
Caleb, his hobby had been building models with Popsicle sticks.  
"Does this mean we can go to the store now?" Caleb said.  
"No, Caleb, not tonight, it's almost six," Caroline said.  
Caleb stamped his foot. "This always happens! I wait and wait, and then it 
gets too late."  
"We'll rent a movie," Caroline said. "We'll get whatever movie you want."  
"I don't want a movie. I want to do surveillance."  
"It's not going to happen," Gary said. "So start dealing with it."  
Caleb went to his room and slammed the door. Gary followed and flung it 
open. "That's enough now," he said. "We don't slam doors in this h ouse."  
"You slam doors!"  
"I don't want to hear another word from you."  
"You slam doors!"  
"Do you want to spend the whole week in your room?"  
Caleb replied by crossing his eyes and sucking his lips into his mouth: not 
another word.  
Gary let his gaze drift i nto corners of the boy's room that he ordi narily took 
care not to look at. Neglected in piles, like the loot in a thief's apartment, was 
new photographic and computer and video equipment with an aggregate 
retail value possibly exceeding the annual salary of Gary's secretary at 
CenTrust. Such a riot of luxury in the lair of an eleven -year -old! Various 
chemicals that molecular floodgates had  
158 
THE CORRECTIONS  
been holding back all afternoon burst loose  and flooded Gary's neural 
pathways. A cascade of reactions initiated by Factor 6 relaxed his tear valves 
and sent a wave of nausea down his vagus: a "sense" that he sur vived from 
day to day by distracting himself from underground truths that day by day 
grew more compelling and decisive. The truth that he was going to die. That 
heaping your tomb with treasure wouldn't save you.  
The light in the windows was failing rapidly.  
"You're really going to use all this equipment?" he said with a tight ness in his 
chest. 
Caleb, his lips still involuted, gave a shrug.  
"Nobody should be slamming doors," Gary said. "Me included. All right?"  
"Yeah, Dad. Whatever."  
Emerging from Caleb's room into the shadowed hallway, he nearly collided 
with Caroline, who was hurrying on t iptoe, in her stockinged feet, back in the 
direction of their bedroom.  
"Again? Again? I say don't eavesdrop, and what do you do?"  
"I wasn't eavesdropping. I've got to go lie down." And she hurried, limping, 
into the bedroom.  
"You can run but you can't hide ," Gary said, following her. "I want to know 
why you're eavesdropping on me."  
"It is your paranoia, not my eavesdropping."  
"My paranoia?"  
Caroline slumped on the oaken king -size bed. After she and Gary were 
married, she'd undergone five years of twice -week ly therapy which the 
therapist, at the final session, had declared "an unqualified success" and 
which had given her a lifelong advantage over Gary in the race for mental 
health.  
"You seem to think everybody except you has a problem," she said. "Which is 
what your mother thinks, too. Without ever —" 
"Caroline. Answer me one question. Look me in the eye and an swer me one 
question. This afternoon, when you were —" 
"God, Gary, not this again. Listen to yourself."  
159 
"When you were horsing around in the rain, running yourself ragged, trying 
to keep up with an eleven -year -old and a fourteen -year -old—" 
"You're obsessed! You're obsessed with that!"  
"Running and sliding and kicking in the rain —" 
"You talk to your parents a nd then you take your anger out on us."  
"Were you limping before you came inside? " Gary shook his finger in his 
wife's face. "Look me in the eye, Caroline, look me right in the eye. Come on! 
Do it! Look me in the eye and tell me you weren't already limping ? 
Caroline was rocking in pain. "You're on the phone with them for the better 
part of an hour —" 
"You can't do it!" Gary crowed in bitter triumph. "You're lying to me and you 
will not admit you're lying!"  
"Dad! Dad!" came a cry outside the door. Gary turned  and saw Aaron shaking 
his head wildly, beside himself, his beautiful face twisted and tear -slick. "Stop 
shouting at her!"  
The remorse neurofactor (Factor 26) flooded the sites in Gary's brain 
specially tailored by evolution to respond to it.  
"Aaron, all r ight," he said.  
Aaron turned away and turned back and marched in place, taking big steps 
nowhere, as though trying to force the shameful tears out of his eyes and into 
his body, down through his legs, and stamp them out. "God, please, Dad, do —
not—shout —at her."  
"OK, Aaron," Gary said. "Shouting's over."  
He reached to touch his son's shoulder, but Aaron fled back up the hall. Gary 
left Caroline and followed him, his sense of isolation deep ened by this 
demonstration that his wife had strong allies in the hou se. Her sons would 
protect her from her husband. Her husband who was a shouter. Like his 
father before him. His father before him who was now depressed. But who, in 
his prime, as a shouter, had so frightened young Gary that it never occurred 
to him to inte rcede on his mother's behalf.  
Aaron was lying face down on his bed. In the tornado aftermath of laundry 
and magazines on the floor of his room, the two nodes of order were his 
Bundy trumpet (with mutes and a music stand) and his enor - 
160                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
mous alphabetized collection of compact discs, including boxed -set complete 
editions of Dizzy and Satchmo and Miles Davis, plus great mi scellaneous 
quantities of Chet Baker and Wynton Marsalis and Chuck Mangione and 
Herb Alpert and Al Hirt, all of which Gary had given him to encourage his 
interest in music.  
Gary perched on the edge of the bed. "I'm sorry I upset you," he said. "As you 
know , I can be a mean old judgmental bastard. And some times your mother 
has trouble admitting she's wrong. Especially when —" 
"Her. Back. Is. Hurt," came Aaron's voice, muffled by a Ralph Lauren duvet. 
"She is not lying."  
"I know her back hurts, Aaron. I love your mother very much."  
"Then don't shout at her."  
"OK. Shouting's over. Let's have some dinner." Gary lightly judo -chopped 
Aaron's shoulder. "What do you say?"  
Aaron didn't move. Further cheering words appeared to be called for, but 
Gary couldn't think of any. He was experiencing a critical short age of Factors 
1 and 3. He'd had the sense, moments earlier, that Caro line was on the verge 
of accusing him of being "depressed," and he was afraid that if the idea that 
he was depressed gained currency, he would forfeit his right to his opinions. 
He would forfeit his moral certainties; every word he spoke would become a 
symptom of disease; he would never again win an ar gument.  
It was therefore all the more important now to resist depression — to fight it 
with the truth.  
"Listen," he said. "You were out there with Mom, playing soccer. Tell me if 
I'm right about this. Was she limping before she went in side?"  
For a moment, as Aaron roused himself from the bed, Gary be lieved that the 
truth would prevail. But the face Aaron showed him was a reddish -white 
raisin of revulsion and disbelief.  
"You're horrible!" he said. "You're horriblel" And he ran from the room.  
Ordinarily Gary wouldn't have let Aaron get away with this. Ordi narily he 
would have battled his son all evening if that was what it took  
 
to extract an apology from him. But his mental markets —glycemic, 
endocrine, over -the-synapse —were crashing.  He was feeling ugly, and to 
battle Aaron now would only make him uglier, and the sensation of ugliness 
was perhaps the leading Warning Sign.  
He saw that he'd made two critical mistakes. He should never have promised 
Caroline that there would be no more Ch ristmases in St. Jude. And today, 
when she was limping and grimacing in the back yard, he should have 
snapped at least one picture of her. He mourned the moral advantages these 
mistakes had cost him.  
"I am not clinically depressed," he told his reflection in the nearly dark 
bedroom window. With a great, marrow -taxing exertion of will, he stood up 
from Aaron's bed and sallied forth to prove himself capable of having an 
ordinary evening.  
Jonah was climbing the dark stairs with Prince Caspian. "I finished the 
book," he said.  
"Did you like it?"  
"I loved it," Jonah said. "This is outstanding children's literature. Asian made 
a door in the air that people walked through and disap peared. They went out 
of Narnia and back into the real world."  
Gary dropped into a cr ouch. "Give me a hug."  
Jonah draped his arms on him. Gary could feel the looseness of his youthful 
joints, the cublike pliancy, the heat radiating through his scalp and cheeks. 
He would have slit his own throat if the boy had needed blood; his love was 
imm ense in that way; and yet he wondered if it was only love he wanted now 
or whether he was also coalition -building. Se curing a tactical ally for his 
team.  
What this stagnating economy needs, thought Federal Reserve Board Chairman 
Gary R. Lambert, is a mass ive infusion of Bombay Sapphire gin.  
In the kitchen Caroline and Caleb were slouched at the table drink ing Coke 
and eating potato chips. Caroline had her feet up on another chair and 
pillows beneath her knees.  
"What should we do for dinner?" Gary said.  
His wife and middle son traded glances as if this were the stick -in-the-mud 
sort of question he was famous for. From the density of  
THE CORRECTIONS  
potato -chip crumbs he could see they were well on their way to spoiled 
appetites.  
"Mixed grill, I gu ess," said Caroline.  
"Oh, yeah, Dad, do a mixed grill!" Caleb said in a tone mistakable for either 
irony or enthusiasm.  
Gary asked if there was meat.  
Caroline stuffed chips into her mouth and shrugged.  
Jonah asked permission to build a fire.  
Gary, taking i ce from the freezer, granted it.  
Ordinary evening. Ordinary evening.  
"If I put the camera over the table," Caleb said, "I'll get part of the dining 
room, too."  
"You miss the whole nook, though," Caroline said. "If it's over the back door, 
you can sweep bot h ways."  
Gary shielded himself with the door of the liquor cabinet while he poured 
four ounces of gin onto ice.  
" 'Alt. eighty -five'?" Caleb read from his catalogue.  
"That means the camera can look almost straight down."  
Still shielded by the cabinet door, Gary took a hefty warmish gulp. Then, 
closing the cabinet, he held up the glass in case anyone cared to see what a 
relatively modest drink he'd poured himself.  
"Hate to break it to you," he said, "but surveillance is out . It's not appropriate 
as a hobby."  
"Dad, you said it was OK as long as I stayed interested."  
"I said I would think about it."  
Caleb shook his head vehemently. "No! You didn't! You said I could do it as 
long as I didn't get bored."  
"That is exactly what you said," Caroline confirmed with an un pleasant smile.  
"Yes, Caroline, I'm sure you heard every word. But we're not put ting this 
kitchen under surveillance. Caleb, you do not have my permis sion to make 
those purchases."  
"Dad!"  
"That's my decision, it's final."  
"Caleb, it doesn't matter, though," Caroline said. "Gary, it doesn't matter, 
because he's got his own money. He can spend it however he wants. Right, 
Caleb?"  
Out of Gary's sight, below the level of the table, she ga ve Caleb some kind of 
hand signal.  
"Right, I've got my own savings!" Caleb's tone again ironic or en thusiastic or, 
somehow, both.  
"You and I will talk about this later, Caro," Gary said. Warmth and perversion 
and stupidity, all deriving from the gin, were  descending from behind his ears 
and down his arms and torso.  
Jonah came back inside smelling like mesquite.  
Caroline had opened a second large bag of potato chips.  
"Don't spoil your appetite, guys," Gary said in a strained voice, tak ing food 
from plastic  compartments.  
Again mother and son traded glances.  
"Yeah, right," Caleb said. "Gotta save room for mixed grill!"  
Gary energetically sliced meats and skewered vegetables. Jonah set the table, 
spacing the flatware with the precision that he liked. The rain had stopped, 
but the deck was still slippery when Gary went outside.  
It had started as a family joke: Dad always orders the mixed grill in 
restaurants, Dad only wants to go to restaurants with mixed grill on the 
menu. To Gary there was indeed something end lessly delicious, some thing 
irresistibly luxurious, about a bit of lamb, a bit of pork, a bit of veal, and a 
lean and tender modern -style sausage or two —a classic mixed grill, in short. 
It was such a treat that he began to do his own mixed grills at home.  Along 
with pizza and Chinese takeout and one -pot pasta meals, mixed grill became 
a family staple. Caroline helped out by bringing home multiple heavy blood -
damp bags of meat and sausage every Saturday, and before long Gary was 
doing mixed grill two or eve n three times a week, braving all but the foulest 
weather on the deck, and loving it. He did partridge breasts, chicken livers, 
filets mignons, and Mexican -flavored turkey sausage. He did zucchini and 
red peppers. He did eggplant, yellow peppers, baby lamb  chops, Italian 
sausage. He came up with a wonderful bratwurst -rib eye -bok choy combo. He 
loved it and loved it and loved it and then all at once he didn't.  
1B4 
THE CORRECTIOHS  
The clinical term, ANHEDONIA , had introduced itself to him in a night stand 
book of Caroline's called Feeling GREAT! (Ashley Tralpis, M.D., Ph.D.). He'd 
read the dictionary entry for ANHEDONIA with a shiver of recognition, a 
kind of malignant yes, yes: "a psychological con dition characterized by 
inability to experience plea sure in normally pleasurable acts." ANHEDONIA 
was more than a Warning Sign, it was an out -and-out symptom. A dry rot 
spreading from pleasure to pleasure, a fungus spoiling the delight in luxury 
and joy in leisure which for so many years had fueled Gary's r esistance to the 
poorthink of his parents.  
The previous March, in St. Jude, Enid had observed that, for a bank vice 
president married to a woman who worked only part -time, pro bono, for the 
Children's Defense Fund, Gary seemed to do an awful lot of cooking . Gary 
had shut his mother up easily enough; she was married to a man who 
couldn't boil an egg, and obviously she was jealous. But on Gary's birthday, 
after he'd flown back from St. Jude with Jonah and received the expensive 
surprise of a color photo lab, after he'd mustered the will to exclaim, A 
darkroom, fantastic, I love it, I love it, Caroline handed him a platter of raw 
prawns and brutal swordfish steaks to grill, and he wondered if his mother 
had a point. On the deck, in the radiant heat, as he black ened the prawns and 
seared the swordfish, a weariness overtook him. The aspects of his life not 
related to grilling now seemed like mere blips of extraneity between the 
poundingly recurrent mo ments when he ignited the mesquite and paced the 
deck, avoiding  smoke. Shutting his eyes, he saw twisted boogers of browning 
meats on a grille of chrome and hellish coals. The eternal broiling, broiling of 
the damned. The parching torments of compulsive repetition. On the inner 
walls of the grill a deep -pile carpet of  phenolic black greases had accu -
mulated. The ground behind the garage where he dumped the ashes re -
sembled a moonscape or the yard of a cement plant. He was very, very, very 
sick of mixed grill, and the next morning he told Caroline: "I'm doing too 
much c ooking."  
"So do less," she said. "We'll eat out."  
"I want to eat at home and I want to do less cooking."  
"So order in," she said.  
"It's not the same."  
765  
"You're the one who's bent on having these sit -down dinners. The boys 
couldn't care less."  
"/ care about it. It's important to me"  
"Fine, but, Gary: it's not important to me, it's not important to the boys, and 
we're supposed to cook for you?"  
He couldn't entirely blame Caroline. In the years when she'd worked full -
time, he'd never complained ab out frozen or takeout or pre -prepared 
dinners. To Caroline it probably seemed that he was changing the rules on 
her. But to Gary it seemed that the nature of fam ily life itself was changing —
that togetherness and filiality and fraternity weren't valued the  way they were 
when he was young.  
And so here he was, still grilling. Through the kitchen windows he could see 
Caroline thumb -wrestling Jonah. He could see her taking Aaron's 
headphones to listen to music, could see her nodding to the beat. It sure 
looked like family life. Was there really anything amiss here but the clinical 
depression of the man peering in?  
Caroline seemed to have forgotten how much her back hurt, but she 
remembered as soon as he went inside with the steaming, smoking platter of 
vulcanize d animal protein. She seated herself sideways at the table, nudged 
her food with a fork, and whimpered softly. Caleb and Aaron regarded her 
with grave concern.  
"Doesn't anyone else want to know how Prince Caspian ends?" Jonah said. 
"Isn't anyone curious at  all?"  
Caroline's eyelids were fluttering, her mouth hanging open miser ably to let 
air trickle in and out. Gary struggled to think of something undepressed to 
say, something reasonably unhostile, but he was rather drunk.  
"Jesus, Caroline," he said, "we kn ow your back hurts, we know you're 
miserable, but if you can't even sit up straight at the table —" 
Without a word she slid off her chair, hobbled to the sink with her plate, 
scraped her dinner into the garbage grinder, and hobbled up stairs. Caleb and 
Aaro n excused themselves and ground up their own dinners and followed 
her. Altogether maybe thirty dollars' worth of meat went into the sewer, but 
Gary, trying to keep his Factor 3 levels off the floor, succeeded pretty well in 
forgetting about the animals tha t 
166 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
had died for this purpose. He sat in the leaden twilight of his buzz, ate 
without tasting, and listened to Jonah's impervious bright chatter.  
"This is an excellent skirt steak, Dad, and I would love another piece of  that 
grilled zucchini, please."  
From the entertainment room upstairs came the woofing of prime time. Gary 
felt briefly sorry for Aaron and Caleb. It was a burden to have a mother need 
you so extremely, to be responsible for her bliss," Gary knew this. He also 
understood that Caroline was more alone in the world than he was. Her 
father had been a handsome, charismatic anthropologist who died in a plane 
crash in Mali when she was eleven. Her father's parents, old Quakers who 
intermittently said "thee," had l eft her half of their estate, including a well -
regarded Andrew Wyeth, three Winslow Homer watercolors, and forty sylvan 
acres near Kennett Square for which a developer had paid an incredible sum. 
Caroline's mother, now seventy -six and in scarily good healt h, lived with her 
second husband in Laguna Beach and was a major benefactor of the Cali -
fornia Democratic Party; she came east every April and bragged about not 
being "one of those old women" who were obsessed with their grandkids. 
Caroline's only sibling , a brother named Philip, was a pa tronizing, pocket -
protected bachelor and solid -state physicist on whom her mother doted 
somewhat creepily. Gary hadn't known this kind of family in St. Jude. From 
the start, he'd loved and pitied Caroline for the misfortu ne and neglect she'd 
suffered growing up. He'd undertaken to provide a better family for her.  
But after dinner, while he and Jonah were loading the dishwasher, he began 
to hear female laughter upstairs, actual loud laughter, and he decided that 
Caroline wa s doing something very bad to him. He was tempted to go up and 
crash the party. As the buzzing of the gin faded from his head, however, the 
clanging of an earlier anxiety was becoming audible. An Axon -related 
anxiety.  
He wondered why a small company with a  highly experimental process was 
bothering to offer his father money.  
That the letter to Alfred had come from Bragg Knuter & Speigh, a firm that 
often worked closely with investment bankers, suggested due diligence —a 
dotting of i's and crossing of t's on t he eve of something big.  
167 
"Do you want to go and be with your brothers?" Gary said to Jonah. "It 
sounds like fun up there."  
"No, thank you," Jonah said. "I'm going to read the next Narnia book, and I 
thought I might go to the basement, where it's quiet. Will you come with 
me?"  
The old playroom in the basement, still dehumidified and carpeted and pine -
paneled, still nice, was af flicted with the necrosis of clutter that sooner or 
later kills a living space: stereo boxes, geometric Styrofoam packing solids, 
outdated ski and beach gear in random drifts. Aaron and Caleb's old toys 
were in five big bins and a dozen smaller bins. Nobod y but Jonah ever 
touched them, and in the face of such a glut even Jonah, alone or with a play -
date pal, took an essentially archaeological ap proach. He might devote an 
afternoon to unpacking half of one large bin, patiently sorting action figures 
and rel ated props, vehicles, and model buildings by scale and manufacturer 
(toys that matched nothing he flung behind the sofa), but he rarely reached 
the bottom of even one bin before his play date ended or dinner was served 
and he reburied everything he'd excav ated, and so the toys whose profusion 
ought to have been a seven -year -old's heaven went basically unplayed with, 
another lesson in ANHEDONIA for Gary to ignore as well as he could.  
While Jonah settled down to read, Gary booted up Caleb's "old" laptop and 
went online. He typed the words axon and schwenksville in the Search field. 
One of the two resulting site matches was the Axon Corpo ration Home Page, 
but this site, when Gary tried to reach it, turned out to be UNDER 
RENOVATION. The other match led him to  a deeply nested page in the Web 
site of Westportfolio Biofunds, whose listing of Privately Held Corporations 
to Watch was a cyberbackwater of drab graphics and misspellings. The Axon 
page had last been updated a year earlier.  
Axon Corporation, 24 East Ind ustrial Serpentine, Schwenksville, PA, a Limited 
Liability Corporation registered in the state of Delaware, holds wordwide rights to the 
Eberle Process of Directed Neurochemotaxis. The Eberle Process is profected by 
United States Patents 5,101,239, 5,101,5 99, 5,103,628, 5,103,629, and 5,105,996, 
for which the Axon Corporation is the sole and exclusive grantor of license. Axon en - 
168 
THE CORRECTIONS  
gages in refinement, marketing and sales of the Eberle Process to hos pitals and 
clinics worldwide,  and in research and development of re lated technologies. Its 
founder and chairman is Dr. Earl H. Eberle, former Distinguished Lecturer in Applied 
Neurobiology at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine.  
The Eberle Process of Directed Neurochemotaxis, also k nown as Eberle Reverse -
Tomographic Chemotherapy, hav4 revolutionized the treatment of inoperable 
neuroblastomas and a variety of other morphologic defects of the brain.  
The Eberle Process utilizes computer -orchestrated RF radiation to direct powerful 
carci nocdies, mutagens, and certain nonspecific toxins to dis eased cerebral tissues 
and locally activate them without harm to sur rounding healthy tissue.  
At present, due to limitations in computing power, the Eberle Process requires 
sedating and immobilizing the patient in an Eberle Cylinder for up to thirfy -six hours 
while minutely orchestrated fields direct therapeu -tically active ligands and their inert 
"piggyback" carriers to the sight of disase. The next generation of Eberle Cylinders is 
expected to reduc e maximum total treatment time to less two hours.  
The Eberle Process received full FDA approval as a "safe and effective" therapy in 
October 1996. Widespread clincial use throughout the world in the years since then, 
as detailed in .the numerous publicatio ns listed below, hav4 only confirmed its safety 
and effectiveness.  
Gary's hopes of extracting quick megabucks from Axon were with ering in the 
absence of online hype. Feeling a bit e -weary, fighting an e -headache, he ran 
a word search for earl eberle. The several hundred matches included articles 
with titles like NEW HOPE FOR NEURO -BLASTOMA and A GIANT LEAP 
FORWARD and THIS CURE REALLY MAY BE A MIRACLE. Eberle and 
collaborators were also represented in professional journals with^ "Remote 
Computer -Aided Stim ulation of Receptor  
169 
Sites 14, 16A and 21: A Practical Demonstration," "Four Low -Toxicity 
Ferroacetate Complexes That Cross the BBB," "In -Vitro RF Stimula tion of 
Colloidal Micro tubules," and a dozen other papers. The refer ence that most 
interested Gary, however, had appeared in Forbes ASAP six months earlier:  
Some of these developments, such as the Fogarty balloon catheter and Lasik corneal 
surgery, are cash cows for their respective corporate patent holders. Others, with esoteric 
names like  the Eberle Process of Directed Neurochemotaxis, enrich their inventors the 
old-fashioned way: one man, one fortune. The Eberle Process, which as late as 1996 
lacked regulatory approval but today is recognized as the gold standard for the treatment 
of a large class of cerebral tumors and lesions, is esti mated to net its inventor, Johns 
Hopkins neurobiologist Earl H. ("Curly") Eberle, as mu ch as $40 million annually in 
licensing fees and other revenues worldwide.  
Forty million dollars annually was more like it. Forty million dollars an -
nually restored Gary's hopes and pissed him off all over again. Earl Eberle 
earned forty million dollars an nually while Alfred Lambert, also an inventor 
but (let's face it) a loser by temperament —one of the meek of the earth —was 
offered five thousand for his trouble. And planned to split this pea with Orfic 
Midland!  
"I'm loving this book," Jonah reported. "This  may be my favorite book yet."  
So why, Gary wondered, why the rush -rush to get Dad's patent, eh, Curly? 
Why the big push -push? Financial intuition, a warm tingling in his loins, told 
him that perhaps, after all, a piece of inside information had fallen int o his 
lap. A piece of inside information from an accidental (and therefore perfectly 
lawful) source. A juicy piece of private meat.  
"It's like they're on a luxury cruise," Jonah said, "except they're try ing to sail 
to the end of the world. See, that's whe re Asian lives, at the end of the world."  
In the SEC's Edgar Database Gary found an unapproved prospec tus, a so -
called redyherring prospectus, for an initial public offering of  
170 
THE CORRECTIONS  
Axon stock. The offering was scheduled for Decem ber 15, three -plus months 
away. The lead underwriter was Hevy & Hodapp, one of the elite investment 
banks. Gary checked certain vital signs —cash flow, size of issue, size of float —
and, loins tingling, hit the Download Later button.  
"Jonah, nine o'clock," h e said. "Run up and take your bath."  
"I would love to go on a luxury cruise, Dad," Jonah said, climbing the stairs, 
"if that could ever be arranged."  
In a different Search field, his hands a little parkinsonian, Gary entered the 
words beautiful, nude, and blond.  
"Shut the door, please, Jonah."  
On the screen an image of a beautiful nude blonde appeared. Gary pointed 
and clicked, and a nude tan man, photographed mainly from the rear but also 
in close -up from his knees to his navel, could be s een giving his fully tumid 
attention to the beautiful nude blonde. There was something of the assembly 
line in these images. The beautiful nude blonde was like fresh raw material 
that the nude tan man was extremely keen to process with his tool. First the 
material's colorful fabric casing was removed, then the material was placed 
on its knees and the semi skilled worker fitted his tool into its mouth, then the 
material was placed on its back while the worker orally calibrated it, then the 
worker clamped the  material into a series of horizontal and vertical positions, 
crimping and bending the material as necessary, and very vigorously 
processed it with his tool . . .  
The pictures were softening rather than hardening Gary. He won dered if he'd 
reached the age where money excited him more than a beautiful nude blonde 
engaging in sex acts, or whether ANHEDONIA, the solitary father's 
depression in a basement, might be encroaching even here.  
Upstairs the doorbell rang. Adolescent feet came pounding down from the 
second floor to answer it.  
Gary hastily cleansed the computer screen and went upstairs in time to see 
Caleb returning to the second floor with a large pizza box. Gary followed him 
and stood for a moment outside the entertainment room, smelling pepperoni 
and listening to the wordless munching of his  
77? 
sons and wife. On TV something military, a tank or a truck,'was roaring to the 
accompaniment of war -movie music.  
"Ve increase ze pressure, Lieutenant. Now you vill talk? Now?"  
In Hands -Off Parenting: Skills for the Next Millennium, Dr. Harriet L. 
Schachtman warned: All too often, today's anxious parents "protect" their 
children from the so -called "ravages" of TV and computer garnes, only to ex -
pose them to the far more damaging ravages of social ostrad zation by their 
peers.  
To Gary, who as a boy had been allowed half an hour of TV a day and had not 
felt ostracized, Schachtman's theory seemed a recipe for letting a 
community's most permissive parents set standards that other parents were 
forced to lower their own to meet. But Caroline sub scribed to the theory 
wholeheartedly, and since she was the sole trustee of Gary's ambition not to 
be like his father, and since she believed that kids learned more from peer 
interaction than from parental instruction, G ary deferred to her judgment 
and let the boys watch nearly unlimited TV  
What he hadn't foreseen was that he himself would be the ostra cized.  
He retreated to his study and dialed St. Jude again. The kitchen cordless was 
still on his desk, a reminder of ear lier unpleasantnesses and of fights still to 
come.  
He was hoping to speak to Enid, but Alfred answered the telephone and said 
that she was over at the Roots' house, socializing. "We had a street -
association meeting tonight," he said.  
Gary considered calling back later, but he refused to be cowed by his father. 
"Dad," he said, "I've done some research on Axon. We're looking at a 
company with a lot of money."  
"Gary, I said I didn't want you monkeying with this," Alfred replied. "It is 
moot now anyway."  
"What do you mean, 'moot'?"  
"I mean moot. It's taken care of. The documents are notarized. I'm recouping 
my lawyer's fees and that's the end of it."  
Gary pressed two fingers into his forehead. "My God. Dad. You had it 
notarized? On a Sunday ?" 172                                                                                                                        THE CORRECTIONS  
 
"I will tell your mother that you called."  
"Do not put those documents in the mail. Do you hear me?"  
"Gary, I've had about enough of this."  
"Well, too bad, because I'm just getting started!"  
"I've asked you not to speak of it. If you will not behave like a decent, civilized 
person, then I have no choice —" 
"Your decency is bullshit. Your civilization is bull shit. It's weakness! It's fear! 
It's bullshit!"  
"I have no wish to discuss this."  
"Then forget it."  
"I intend to. We'll not speak of it again. Your mother and I will visit for two 
days next month, and we will hope to see you here in Decem ber. It's my wish 
that we can all be civil."  
"Never mind what's going on underneath. As long as we're all 'civil.' "  
"That is the essence of my philosophy, yes."  
"Well, it ain't mine," Gary said.  
"I'm aware of that. And that's why we will spend forty -eight  hours and no 
more."  
Gary hung up angrier than ever. He'd hoped his parents would stay for an 
entire week in October. He'd wanted them to eat pie in Lan caster County, see 
a production at the Annenberg Center, drive in the Poconos, pick apples in 
West Ches ter, hear Aaron play the trumpet, watch Caleb play soccer, take 
delight in Jonah's company, and generally see how good Gary's life was, how 
worthy of their admiration and re spect; and forty -eight hours was not enough 
time.  
He left his study and kissed Jon ah good night. Then he took a shower and lay 
down on the big oaken bed and tried to interest himself in the latest Inc. But 
he couldn't stop arguing with Alfred in his head.  
During his visit home in March he'd been appalled by how much his father 
had deter iorated in the few weeks since Christmas. Alfred seemed forever on 
the verge of derailing as he lurched down hallways or half slid down stairs or 
wolfed at a sandwich from which lettuce and meat loaf rained; checking his 
watch incessantly, his eyes wanderi ng whenever a conversation didn't engage 
him directly, the old iron horse  
773 
was careering toward a crash, and Gary could hardly stand to look. Because 
who else, if not Gary, was going to take responsibility? Enid was hysterical 
and moralizing, Denise lived in a fantasyland, and Chip hadn't been to St. 
Jude in three years. Who else but Gary was going' to say: This train should 
not be running on these tracks^  
The first order of business, as Gary saw it, was to sell the house. Get top 
dollar for it , move his parents into someplace smaller, newer, safer, cheaper, 
and invest the difference aggressively. The house was Enid and Alfred's only 
large asset, and Gary took a morning to inspect the whole property slowly, 
inside and out. He found cracks in the  grouting, rust lines in the bathroom 
sinks, and a softness in the master bedroom ceiling. He noticed rain stains on 
the inner wall of the back porch, a beard of dried suds on the chin of the old 
dishwasher, an alarming thump in the forced -air blower, pust ules and ridges 
in the driveway's asphalt, termites in the woodpile, a Damoclean oak limb 
dangling above a dormer, finger -wide cracks in the foundation, retain ing 
walls that listed, whitecaps of peeling paint on window jambs, big 
emboldened spiders in the  basement, fields of dried sow bug and cricket 
husks, unfamiliar fungal and enteric smells, everywhere he looked the sag of 
entropy. Even in a rising market, the house was beginning to lose value, and 
Gary thought: We've got to sell this fucker now, we can 't lose another day.  
On the last morning of his visit, while Jonah helped Enid bake a birthday 
cake, Gary took Alfred to the hardware store. As soon as they were on the 
rpad, Gary said it was time to put the house on the market.  
Alfred, in the passenger se at of the gerontic Olds, stared straight ahead. 
"Why?"  
"If you miss the spring season," Gary said, "you'll have to wait an other year. 
And you can't afford another year. You can't count on good health, and the 
house is losing value."  
Alfred shook his head.  "I've agitated for a long time. One bedroom and a 
kitchen is all we need. Somewhere your mother can cook and we have a place 
to sit. But it's no use. She doesn't want to leave."  
"Dad, if you don't put yourself someplace manageable, you're going to hurt 
yourself. You're going to wind up in a nursing home."  
174 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
"I have no intention of going to a nursing home. So."  
"Just because you don't intend to doesn't mean it won't happen."  
Alfred looked, in passing, at Gary's old elementary school. "Where are we 
going?"  
"You fall down the stairs, you slip on the ice and break your hip, you're going 
to end up in a nursing home. Caroline's grandmother —" 
"I didn't hear where we were going."  
"We're going to the hardware store," Gary said. "Mom wants a dimmer switch 
for the kitchen."  
Alfred shook his head. "She and her romantic lighting."  
"She gets pleasure from it," Gary said. "What do you get pleasure from?"  
"What do you mean?"  
"I mean you've just about worn her out."  
Alfred's active hands, on his lap, were gathering nothing —raking in a poker 
pot that did not exist. "I'll ask you again not to meddle," he said.  
The midmorning light of a late -winter thaw, the stillness of a week day 
nonhour in St. Jude, Gary wondered how his parents stood it. The oak trees 
were the same oily black as the crows perching in them. The sky was the same 
color as the salt -white pavement on which elderly St. Judean drivers obeying 
barbiturate speed limits were crawling to their destinations: to malls with 
pools of meltwater on their papered roofs, to the arterial that overlooked 
puddled steel yards and the state mental hospital and transmission towers 
feeding soaps and game shows to the ether; to the beltwa ys and, beyond 
them, to a million acres of thawing hinterland where pickups were axle -deep 
in clay and .22s were fired in the woods and only gospel and pedal steel 
guitars were on the radio; to residential blocks with the same pallid glare in 
every window,  besquir -reled yellow lawns with a random plastic toy or two 
embedded in the dirt, a mailman whistling something Celtic and slamming 
mailboxes harder than he had to, because the deadness of these streets, at 
such a nonhour, in such a nonseason, could hones tly kill you.  
"Are you happy with your life?" Gary said, waiting for a left -turn arrow. "Can 
you say you're ever happy?"  
175 
A CENTURY OF AUTOMOTIVE SAFETY. Block after block of taxing text. 
What Gary hated most about the Midwest was how unpamper ed and 
unprivileged he felt in it. St. Jude in its optimistic egalitarianism consis tently 
failed to accord him the respect to which his gifts and attain ments entitled 
him. Oh, the sadness of this place! The earnest St. Judean rubes all around 
him seemed curious and undepressed. Happily filling their misshapen heads 
with facts. As if facts were going to save them! Not one woman half as pretty 
or as well dressed as Caroline. Not one other man with a decent haircut or an 
abdomen as flat as Gary's. But, like Alfred, like Enid, they were all extremely 
deferential. They didn't jostle Gary or cut in front of him but waited until he'd 
drifted to the next exhibit. Then they gathered round and read and learned. 
God, he hated the Midwest! He could hardly breathe or h old his head up. He 
thought he might be getting sick. He took refuge in the museum's gift shop 
and bought a silver belt buckle, two engravings of old Midland Pa cific 
trestles, and a pewter hip flask (all for himself), a deerskin wallet (for Aaron), 
and a CD-ROM Civil War game (for Caleb).  
"Dad," Jonah said, "Grandma says she'll buy me two books that cost less than 
ten dollars each or one book for less than twenty dollars, is that OK?"  
Enid and Jonah were a lovefest. Enid had always preferred little kids to  big 
kids, and Jonah's adaptive niche in the family ecosystem was to be the perfect 
grandchild, eager to scramble up on laps, unafraid of bitter vegetables, 
underexcited by television and computer games, and skilled at cheerfully 
answering questions like " Are you loving school?" In St. Jude he was 
luxuriating in the undivided attention of three adults. He declared St. Jude 
the nicest place he'd ever been. From the back seat of the Oldfolksmobile, his 
elfin eyes wide, he marveled at everything Enid showed hi m. 
"It's so easy to park here!  
"No traffic!  
"The Transport Museum is better than any museums we have, Dad, don't you 
agree?  
"I love the legroom in this car. I think this is the nicest car I've ever ridden in.  
J78 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"All the stores a re so close and handy!"  
That night, after they'd returned from the museum and Gary had gone out 
and done more shopping, Enid served stuffed pork chops and a chocolate 
birthday cake. Jonah was dreamily eating ice cream when -she asked him if he 
might like to  come and have Christmas in St. Jude.  
"I would love that," Jonah said, his eyelids drooping with satiety.  
"You could have sugar cookies, and eggnog, and help us decorate the tree," 
Enid said. "It'll probably snow, so you can go sledding. And, Jonah, there' s a -
wonderful light show every year at Waindell Park, it's called Christmasland, 
they have the whole park lit up —" 
"Mother, it's March," Gary said.  
"Can we come at Christmas?" Jonah asked him.  
"We'll come again very soon," Gary said. "I don't know about C hristmas."  
"I think Jonah would love it," Enid said.  
"I would completely love it," Jonah said, hoisting another spoonload of ice 
cream. "I think it might turn out to be the best Christmas I ever had."  
"I think so, too," Enid said.  
"It's March," Gary said. "We don't talk about Christmas in March. 
Remember? We don't talk about it in June or August, either. Remem ber?"  
Well," Alfred said, standing up from the table. "I am going to bed."  
"St. Jude gets my vote for Christmas," Jonah said . 
Enlisting Jonah directly in her campaign, exploiting a little boy for leverage, 
seemed to Gary a low trick on Enid's part. After he'd put Jonah to bed, he 
told his mother that Christmas ought to be the last of her worries.  
"Dad can't even install a light switch," he said. "And now you've got a leak 
upstairs, you've got water coming in around the chimney —" 
"I love this house," Enid said from the kitchen sink, where she was scrubbing 
the pork -chop pan. "Dad just needs to work a little on his attitude."  
"He needs shock treatments or medication," Gary said. "And if you  
179 
want to dedicate your life to being his servant, that's your choice. If you want 
to live in an old house with a lot of problems, and try to keep ever ything just 
the way you like it, that's fine, too. If you want to wear yourself out trying to 
do both, be my guest. Just don't ask me to make Christmas plans in March so 
you can feel OK about it all."  
Enid upended the pork -chop pan on the counter beside th e over loaded 
drainer. Gary knew he ought to pick up a towel, but the jumble of wet pans 
and platters and utensils from his birthday dinner made him weary; to dry 
them seemed a task as Sisyphean as to repair the things wrong with his 
parents' house. The on ly way to avoid despair was not to involve himself at 
all. 
He poured a smallish brandy nightcap while Enid, with unhappy stabbing 
motions, scraped waterlogged food scraps from the bottom of the sink.  
"What do you think I should do?" she said.  
"Sell the hou se," Gary said. "Call a realtor tomorrow."  
"And move into some cramped, modern condominium?" Enid shook the 
repulsive wet scraps from her hand into the trash. "When I have to go out for 
the day, Dave and Mary Beth invite Dad over for lunch. He loves that, and I 
feel so comfortable knowing he's with them. Last fall he was out planting a 
new yew, and he couldn't get the old stump out, and Joe Person came over 
with a pickax and the two of them worked all afternoon together."  
"He shouldn't be planting yews," Ga ry said, regretting already the smalmess 
of his initial pour. "He shouldn't be using a pickax. The man can hardly stand 
up."  
"Gary, I know we can't be here forever. But I want to have one last really nice 
family Christmas here. And I want —" 
"Would you cons ider moving if we had that Christmas?"  
New hope sweetened Enid's expression. "Would you and Caroline consider 
coming?"  
"I can't make any promises," Gary said. "But if you'd feel more comfortable 
about putting the house on the market, we would certainly con sider —" 
"I would adore it if you came. Adore it." 
180                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
"Mother, though, you have to be realistic."  
"Let's get through t his year," Enid said, "let's think about having Christmas 
here, like Jonah wants, and then we'll see!"  
Gary's ANHEDONIA had worsened when he returned to Chestnut Hill. As a 
winter project, he'd been distilling hundreds of hours of home videos into a 
watcha ble two -hour Greatest Lamben Hits compila tion that he could make 
quality copies of and maybe send out as a "video Christmas card." In the final 
edit, as he repeatedly reviewed his favorite family scenes and re -cued his 
favorite songs ("Wild Horses," "Time  After Time," etc.), he began to hate 
these scenes and hate these songs. And when, in the new darkroom, he 
turned his attention to the All -Time Lambert Two Hundred, he found that he 
no longer enjoyed looking at still photographs, either. For years he'd men tally 
tinkered with the All -Time Two Hundred, as with an ideally balanced mutual 
fund, listing with great satisfaction the images that he was sure be longed in 
it. Now he wondered whom, besides himself, he was trying to impress with 
these pictures. Whom wa s he trying to persuade, and of what? He had a 
weird impulse to burn his old favorites. But his entire life was set up as a 
correction of his father's life, and he and Caroline had long agreed that Alfred 
was clinically depressed, and clinical de pression was known to have genetic 
bases and to be substantially heri table, and so Gary had no choice but to keep 
resisting ANHEDONIA, keep gritting his teeth, keep doing his best to have 
fun . . .  
\           He came awake with an itching hard -on and Caroline bes ide him in  
the sheets.  
His nightstand light was still burning, but otherwise the room was dark. 
Caroline lay in sarcophagal posture, her back flat on the mattress and a 
pillow beneath her knees. Through the screens on the bedroom windows 
came seeping the coolish, humid air of a summer grown tired. No wind 
stirred the leaves of the sycamore whose lowest branches hung outside the 
windows.  
On Caroline's nightstand was a hardcover copy of Middle Ground: How to 
Spare Your Child the Adolescence YOU Had (Caren Tamkin, Ph.D., 1998).  
She seemed to be asleep. Her long arm, kept flabless by thrice - 
181 
weekly swims at the Cricket Club, rested at her side. Gary gazed at her little 
nose, her wide red mouth, the blond down and the dull sheen of sweat on her 
upper lip, the tapering strip of exposed blond skin between the hem of her T -
shirt and the elastic of her old Swarthmore College gym shorts. Her nearer 
breast pushed out against the  inside of the T -shirt, the carmine definition of 
its nipple faintly visible through the fabric's stretched weave . . .  
When he reached out and smoothed her hair, her entire body jerked as if the 
hand were a defibrillator paddle.  
"What's going on here?" he  said.  
"My back is killing me."  
"An hour ago you were laughing and feeling great. Now you're sore again?"  
"The Motrin's wearing off."  
"The mysterious resurgence of the pain."  
"You haven't said a sympathetic word since I hurt my back."  
"Because you're lying  about how you hurt it," Gary said.  
"My God. Again?"  
"Two hours of soccer and horseplay in the rain, that's not the prob lem. It's 
the ringing phone."  
"Yes," Caroline said. "Because your mother won't spend ten cents to leave a 
message. She has to let it ri ng three times and then hang up, ring three times 
and then hang up —" 
\ "It has nothing to do with anything you did," Gary said. "It's my mom! She 
magically flew here and kicked you in the back because she wants to hurt 
you!"  
"After listening to it ring and  stop and ring and stop all afternoon, I'm a 
nervous wreck."  
"Caroline, / saw you limping before you ran inside. I saw the look on your 
face. Don't tell me you weren't in pain already."  
She shook her head. "You know what this is?"  
"And then the eavesdroppi ng!" 
"Do you know what this is?"  
"You're listening on the only other free phone in the house, and you have the 
gall to tell me —" 
182 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
"Gary, you're depressed. Do you realize that?"  
He laughed. "I don't think so."  
"You're brooding, and suspicious, and obsessive. You walk around with a 
black look on your face. You don't sleep well. You don't seem to get pleasure 
out of anything."  
"You're changing the subject," he said. "My mother called because she had a 
reasonable r equest regarding Christmas."  
"Reasonable?" Now Caroline laughed. "Gary, she is bonkers on the topic of 
Christmas. She is a lunatic."  
"Oh, Caroline. Really."  
"I mean it!"  
"Really. Caroline. They're going to be selling that house soon, they want us all 
to vi sit one more time before they die, Caroline, before my parents die—" 
"We've always agreed about this. We agreed that five people with busy lives 
should not have to fly at the peak holiday season so that two people with 
nothing in their lives wouldn't have to come here. And I've been more than 
happy to have them —" 
"The hell you have."  
"Until suddenly the rules change!"  
"You have not been happy to have them here. Caroline. They're at the point 
where they won't even stay for more than forty -eight hours."  
"And this is my fault?" She was directing her gestures and facial ex pressions, 
somewhat eerily, at the ceiling. "What you don't understand, Gary, is that this 
is an emotionally healthy family. I am a loving and deeply involved mother. I 
have three intelli gent, creative, and emotion ally healthy children. If you think 
there's a problem in this house, you better take a look at yourself."  
"I'm making a reasonable proposal," Gary said. "And you're calling me 
'depressed.' ' : 
"So it's never occurred to you?"  
"The minute I bring up Christmas, I'm 'depressed.'''  
"Seriously, are you telling me it's never occurred to you, in the last six 
months, that you might have a clinical problem?"  
"It is extremely hostile, Caroline, to call another person crazy."  
183 
 
"Not if the person potentially has a clinical problem."  
"I'm proposing that we go to St. Jude," he said. "If you won't talk about it like 
an adult, I'll make my own decision."  
"Oh, yeah?" Caroline made a contemptuous noise. "I guess Jonah might go 
with you . But see if you can get Aaron and Caleb on the plane with you. Just 
ask them where they'd rather be for Christmas."  
Just ask them whose team they're on.  
"I was under the impression that we're a family," Gary said, "and that we do 
things together."  
"You're  the one deciding unilaterally."  
"Tell me this is not a marriage -ending problem."  
"You're the one who's changed."  
"Because, no, Caroline, that is, no, that is ridiculous. There are good reasons 
to make a one -time exception this year."  
"You're depressed," she said, "and I want you back. I'm tired of liv ing with a 
depressed old man."  
Gary for his part wanted back the Caroline who just a few nights ago had 
clutched him in bed when there was heavy thunder. The Caroline who came 
skipping to ward him when he walked into a room. The semi -orphaned girl 
whose most fervent wish was to be on his team.  
But he'd also always loved how tough she was, how unlike a Lam bert, how 
fundamentally unsympathetic to his family. Over the years he'd collected 
certain remarks of hers into a kind of personal Deca logue, an All -Time 
Caroline Ten to which he privately referred for strength and sustenance:  
1.    You're nothing at all like your father.  
2.    You don't have to apologize for buying the BMW.  
3.    Your dad  emotionally abuses your mom.  
4.    I love the taste of your come.  
5.    Work was the drug that ruined your father's life.  
6.    Let's buy both!  
7.    Your family has a diseased relationship with food.  
8.    You're an incredibly good -looking man.  
184 
THE C ORRECTIONS  
 
9.    Denise is jealous of what you have. 10.    There's absolutely nothing useful 
about suffering.  
He'd subscribed to this credo for years and years —had felt deeply in debted to 
Caroline for each remark —and now he wondered how much o f it was true. 
Maybe none of it.  
"I'm calling the travel agent tomorrow morning," he said.  
"And I'm telling you," Caroline replied immediately, "call Dr. Pierce instead. 
You need to talk to somebody."  
"I need somebody who tells the truth."  
"You want the tr uth? You want me to tell you why I'm not going?" Caroline 
sat up and leaned forward at the funny angle that her backache dictated. "You 
really want to know?"  
Gary's eyes fell shut. The crickets outside sounded like water run ning 
interminably in pipes. From the distance came a rhythmic canine barking like 
the downthrusts of a handsaw.  
"The truth," Caroline said, "is that forty -eight hours sounds just about right 
to me. I don't want my children looking back on Christmas as the time when 
everybody screamed at each other. Which basically seems to be unavoidable 
now. Your mother walks in the door with three hundred sixty days' worth of 
Christmas mania, she's been obsess ing since the previous January, and then, 
of course, Where's t hat Austrian reindeer figurine —don't you like it? Don't 
you use it? Where is it? Where is it? Where is the Austrian reindeer figurine? 
She's got her food ob sessions, her money obsessions, her clothes obsessions, 
she's got the whole ten -piece set of baggag e which my husband used to agree 
is kind of a problem, but now suddenly, out of the blue, he's taking her side. 
We're going to turn the house inside out looking for a piece of thirteen -dollar 
gift-store kitsch because it has sentimental value to your mothe r—" 
"Caroline."  
"And when it turns out that Caleb —" 
"This is not an honest version."  
"Please, Gary, let me finish, when it turns out that Caleb did the kind of thing 
that any normal boy might do to a piece of gift -store crap that he found in 
the basement —" 
785  
 
"I can't listen to this."  
"No, no, the problem is not that your eagle -eyed mother is ob sessed with 
some garbagey piece of Austrian kitsch, no, that's not the problem —" 
"It was a hundred -dollar hand -carved —" 
"I don't care if it's a thousand dollars! Since when do you punish him, your 
own son, for your mother's craziness? It's like you're suddenly trying to make 
us act like it's 1964 and we're all living in Peoria. 'Clean your plate!' 'Wear a 
necktie!' 'No TV t onight!' And you wonder why we're fighting! You wonder 
why Aaron rolls his eyes when your mom walks in the room! It's like you're 
embarrassed to let her see us. It's like, for as long as she's here, you're trying 
to pretend we live some way that she approv es of. But I'm telling you, Gary, 
we have nothing to be ashamed of. Your mother's the one who should be 
embarrassed. She fol lows me around the kitchen scrutinizing me, like, as if I 
roast a turkey every week, and if I turn my back for one second she's goi ng to 
pour a quart of oil into whatever I'm making, and as soon as I leave the room 
she's going to not through the trash like some fucking Food Police, she's 
going to take food from the trash and feed it to my children —" 
"The potato was in the sink, not th e trash, Caroline."  
"And you defend her! She goes outside to the trash barrels to see what other 
dirt she can dig up, and disapprove of, and she's asking me, literally every ten 
minutes, How's your back? How's your back? How's your back? Is your back 
any b etter? How'd you hurt it? Is your back any better? How's your back? She 
goes looking for things to disapprove of, and then she tries to tell my children 
how to dress for dinner in my house, and you don't back me up! You don't 
back me up, Gary. You start ap ologizing, and I don't get it, but I'm not doing 
it again. Basically, I think your brother's got the right idea. Here's a sweet, 
smart, funny man who's honest enough to say what he can and can't tolerate 
in the way of get -togethers. And your mother acts li ke he's this huge 
embarrassment and failure! Well, you wanted the truth. The truth is 1 cannot 
starvd an other Christmas like that. If we absolutely have to see your parents, 
we're doing it on our own turf. Just like you promised we always would."  
186 
THE CORRECTIONS  
A pillow of blue blackness lay on Gary's brain: He'd reached the point on the 
post -martini evening downslope where a sense of compli cation weighed on 
his cheeks, his forehead, his eyelids, his mouth. He understood how much his 
mother  infuriated Caroline, and at the same time he found fault with almost 
everything that Caroline had said. The rather beautiful wooden reindeer, for 
example, had been stored in a well -marked box; Caleb had broken two of its 
legs and hammered a roofing nail t hrough its skull; Enid had taken an 
uneaten baked potato from the sink and sliced it and fried it for Jonah; and 
Caroline hadn't bothered to wait until her in -laws had left town before 
depositing in a trash barrel the pink polyester bathrobe that Enid had given 
her for Christmas.  
"When I said I wanted the truth," he said, not opening his eyes, "I meant I 
saw you limping before you ran inside."  
"Oh, my God," Caroline said.  
"My mother didn't hurt your back. You hurt your back."  
"Please, Gary. Do me a favor an d call Dr. Pierce."  
"Admit that you're lying, and I'll talk about anything you want. But nothing's 
going to change until you admit that."  
"I don't even recognize your voice."  
"Five days in St. Jude. You can't do that for a woman who, like you say, has 
noth ing else in her life?"  
"Please come back to me."  
A jolt of rage forced Gary's eyes open. He kicked the sheet aside and jumped 
out of bed. "This is a marriage -ender! I can't believe it!"  
"Gary, please —" 
"We're going to split up over a trip to St. Jude!"  
And  then a visionary in a warm -up jacket was lecturing to pretty college 
students. Behind the visionary, in a pixilated middle distance, were ster ilizers 
and chromatography cartridges and tissue stains in weak solution, long -
necked medicoscientific faucets, pinups of spread -eagled chromo somes, and 
diagrams of tuna -red brains sliced up like sashimi. The visionary was Earl 
"Curly" Eberle, a small -mouthed fifty -year -old in dime -store glasses, whom 
the creators of the Axon Corporation's pro - 
787 
motion al video had done their best to make glamorous'. The camera work 
was nervous, the lab floor pitched and lurched. Blurry zooms zeroed in on 
female student faces aglow with fascination. Curiously obsessive attention 
was paid to the back of the visionary head  (it was indeed curly).  
"Of course, chemistry, too, even brain chemistry," Eberle was say ing, "is 
basically just manipulation of electrons in their shells. But compare this, if 
you will, to an electronics that consists of little two -and three -pole switches. 
The diode, the transistor. The brain, by con trast, has several dozen kinds of 
switches. The neuron either fires or it doesn't; but this decision is regulated 
by receptor sites  that often have shades of offness and on -ness between plain 
Off and plain On. Even if you could build an artificial neuron out of molecular 
transistors, the conventional wisdom is that you can still never translate all 
that chem istry into the language of  yes/no without running out of space. If 
we conservatively estimate twenty neuroactive ligands, of which as many as 
eight can operate simultaneously, and each of these eight switches has five 
different settings —not to bore you with the combinatorics, but u nless you're 
living in a world of Mr. Potato Heads, you're going to be a pretty funny -
looking android."  
Close -up of a turnip -headed male student laughing.  
"Now, these are facts so basic," Eberle said, "that we ordinarily wouldn't even 
bother spelling them  out. It's just the way things are. The only workable 
connection we have with the electrophysiology of cogni tion and volition is 
chemical. That's the received wisdom, part of the gospel of our science. 
Nobody in their right mind would try to connect the w orld of neurons with 
the world of printed circuits."  
Eberle paused dramatically.  
"Nobody, that is, but the Axon Corporation."  
Ripples of buzz crossed the sea of institutional investors who'd come to 
Ballroom B of the Four Seasons Hotel, in central Philadelphia, for the road 
show promoting Axon's initial public offering. A giant video screen had been 
set up on the dais. On each of  the twenty round tables in the semidark 
ballroom were platters of satay and sushi appetiz ers with the appropriate 
dipping sauces.  
188                                                                                                                THE CORRE CTIONS  
Gary was sitting with his sister, Denise, at a table nearthe door. He had hopes 
of transacting business at this road show and he would rather have come 
alone, but Denise had insisted on having lunch, today being Monday and 
Monday being her  one day off, and had invited herself along. Gary had 
figured that she would find political or moral or aes thetic reasons to deplore 
the proceedings, and, sure enough, she was watching the video with her eyes 
narrowed in suspicion and her arms crossed tig htly. She was wearing a yellow 
shift with a red floral print, black sandals, and a pair of Trotskyish round 
plastic glasses; but what really set her apart from the other women in 
Ballroom B was the bare ness of her legs. Nobody who dealt in money did not 
wear stockings.  
WHAT IS THE CORECKTALL PROCESS?  
"Corecktall," said the cutout image of Curly Eberle, whose young audience 
had been digitally pureed into a uniform backdrop of tuna -red brain matter, 
"is a revolutionary neurobiological therapy!"  
Eberle was se ated on an ergonomic desk chair in which, it now developed, he 
could float and swerve vertiginously through a graphical space representing 
the inner -sea world of the intracranium. Kelpy gan glia and squidlike neurons 
and eellike capillaries began to flash by. 
"Originally conceived as a therapy for sufferers of PD and AD and other 
degenerative neurological diseases," Eberle said, "Corecktall has proved so 
powerful and versatile that its promise extends not only to therapy but to an 
outright cure, and to a cu re not only of these terrible degenerative afflictions 
but also of a host of ailments typically consid ered psychiatric or even 
psychological. Simply put, Corecktall offers for the first time the possibility of 
renewing and improving the hard wiring of an adult human brain."  
"Ew," Denise said, wrinkling her nose.  
Gary by now was quite familiar with the Corecktall Process. He'd scrutinized 
Axon's red -herring prospectus and read every analysis of the company he 
could find on the Internet and through the priva te services that CenTrust 
subscribed to. Bearish analysts, mindful of recent gut -wrenching corrections 
in the biotech sector, were cautioning against in - 
189 
vesting in an untested medical technology that was "at least six years from 
market. Cert ainly a bank like CenTrust, with its fiduciary duty to be 
conservative, wasn't going to touch this IPO. But Axon's fundamen tals were a 
lot healthier than those of most biotech startups, and to Gary the fact that the 
company had bothered to buy his father' s patent at such an early stage in 
Corecktall's development was a sign of great corporate confidence. He saw an 
opportunity here to make some money and avenge Axon's screwing of his 
father and, more generally, be bold where Alfred had been timid.  
It happen ed that in June, as the first dominoes of the overseas cur rency 
crises were toppling, Gary had pulled most of his playing -around money out 
of Euro and Far Eastern growth funds. This money was available now for 
investment in Axon; and since the IPO was sti ll three months away, and since 
the big sales push for it had not begun, and since the red herring contained 
such. dubieties as give non -insiders pause, Gary should have had no trouble 
getting a commitment for five thousand shares. But trouble was pretty m uch 
all he'd had.  
His own (discount) broker, who had barely heard of Axon, belatedly did his 
homework and called Gary back with the news that his firm's al location was a 
token 2,500 shares. Normally a brokerage wouldn't com mit more than five 
percent of i ts allocation to a single customer this early in the game, but since 
Gary had been the first to call, his man was willing to set aside 500 shares. 
Gary pushed for more, but the sad fact was that he was not a big -time 
customer. He typically invested in mult iples of a hundred, and to save on 
commissions he executed smaller trades himself online.  
Now, Caroline was a big investor. With Gary's guidance she often bought in 
multiples of a thousand. Her broker worked for the largest house in 
Philadelphia, and ther e was no doubt that 4,500 shares of Axon's new issue 
could be found for a truly valued customer; this was how the game was 
played. Unfortunately, since the Sunday afternoon when she'd hurt her back, 
Gary and Caroline had been as close to not speaking as a couple could be and 
still function as parents. Gary was keen to get his full five thousand shares of 
Axon, but he refused to sac - 
THE CORRECTIONS  
rifice his principles and crawl back to his wife and beg her to invest for him.  
So instead he'd phon ed his large -cap contact at Hevy & Hodapp, a man 
named Pudge Portleigh, and asked to be put down for five thou sand shares of 
the offering on his own account. Over the years, in his fiduciary role at 
CenTrust, Gary had bought a lot of stock from Portleigh,  including some 
certifiable turkeys. Gary hinted now to Portleigh that CenTrust might give 
him an even larger portion of its business in the future. But Portleigh, with 
weird hedginess, had agreed only to pass along Gary's request to Daffy 
Anderson, who wa s Hevy & Hodapp's deal manager for the IPO.  
There had then ensued two maddening weeks during which Pudge Portleigh 
failed to call Gary back and confirm an allocation. Online buzz about Axon 
was building from a whisper to a roar. Two related ma jor papers b y Earl 
Eberle's team —"Reverse -Tomographic Stimulation of Synaptogenesis in 
Selected Neural Pathways" and "Transitory Posi tive Reinforcement in 
Dopamine -Deprived Limbic Circuits: Recent Clinical Progress" —appeared in 
Nature and the New England Journal of M edicine within days of each other. 
The two papers received heavy cov erage in the financial press, including a 
front -page notice in the Wall Street Journal. Analyst after analyst began to 
flash strong Buys for Axon, and still Portleigh did not return Gary' s messages, 
and Gary could feel the advantages of his insiderly head start disappearing 
hour by hour . . .  
1. HAVE A COCKTAIL!  
"... Of ferrocitrates and ferroacetates specially formulated to cross the blood -
brain barrier and accumulate interstitially!"  
Said the unseen pitchman whose voice had joined Earl Eberle's on ie video 
sound track.  
"We also stir in a mild, non -habit -forming sedative and a generous squirt of 
Hazelnut Moccacino syrup, courtesy of the country's most popular chain of 
coffee bars!"  
A female extra from the earlier lecture scene, a girl with whose neu - 
191 
rological functions there was clearly nothing in the slightest wrong, drank 
with great relish and sexily pulsing throat muscles a tall, frosty glass of 
Corecktall electrolytes.  
"What was Dad's patent?" Denise whispered to Gary. "Ferroacetate gel 
something -something?"  
Gary nodded grimly. "Electropolymerization."  
From his correspondence files at home, which contained, among other 
things, every letter he'd ever received from either of his parents, Gary had 
dug out an old copy of Alfred's patent. He wasn't sure  he'd ever really looked 
at it, so impressed was he now by the old man's clear account of "electrical 
anisotropy" in "certain ferro -organic gels" and his proposal that these gels be 
used to "minutely image" living human tissues and create "direct electrica l 
contact" with "fine morphologic structures." Comparing the wording of the 
patent with the descrip tion of Corecktall at Axon's newly renovated Web site, 
Gary was struck by the depth of similarity. Evidently Alfred's five -thousand -
dollar pro cess was at t he center of a process for which Axon now hoped to 
raise upward of $200 million: as if a man didn't have enough in his life to lie 
awake at night and fume about!  
"Yo, Kelsey, yuh, Kelsey, get me twelve thousand Exxon at one -oh-four max," 
the young man sitt ing to Gary's left said suddenly and too loudly. The kid had 
a palmtop stock -quoter, a wire in his ear, and the schizophrenic eyes of the 
cellularly occupied. "Twelve thousand Exxon, upper limit one zero four," he 
said.  
Exxon, Axon, better be careful, Gary  thought.  
2, PUT ON A HEADSET & TURN ON THE RADIO!  
"You won't hear a thing —not unless your dental fillings pick up ball games on 
the AM dial," the pitchman joked as the smiling girl lowered onto her 
camera -friendly head a metal dome reminiscent of a hair d ryer, "but radio 
waves are penetrating the innermost recesses of your skull. Imagine a kind of 
global positioning system for the brain: RF radiation pinpointing and 
selectively stimulating the neural pathways  
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
associated with part icular skills. Like signing your name. Climbing stairs. 
Remembering your anniversary. Thinking positively! Clinically tested at 
scores of hospitals across America, Dr. Eberle's reverse -tomographic 
methods have now been further refined to make this stage of  the Corecktall 
process as simple and painless as a visit to your hair stylist."  
"Until recently," Eberle broke in (he and his chair still drifting through a sea 
of simulated blood and gray matter), "my process re quired overnight 
hospitalization and the p hysical screwing of a cali brated steel ring into the 
patient's cranium. Many patients found this inconvenient; some also 
experienced discomfort. Now, however, enor mous increases in computing 
power have made possible a process that is instantaneously self -coiTecting 
as to the location of the individual neural pathways under stimulation ..."  
"Kelsey, you da man!" young Mr. Twelve Thousand Shares of Exxon said 
loudly.  
In the first hours and days following Gary's big Sunday blowout with 
Caroline, three weeks ago, both he and she had made overtures of peace. Very 
late on that Sunday night she'd reached across the demilita rized zone of the 
mattress and touched his hip. The next night he'd offered an almost -complete 
apology in which, although he refused to conce de the central issue, he 
conveyed sorrow and regret for the collat eral damage he'd caused, the 
bruised feelings and willful misrepresenta tions and hurtful imputations, and 
thus gave Caroline a foretaste of the rush of tenderness that awaited her if she 
would only admit that, regarding the central issue, he was in the right. On 
Tuesday morning she'd made an actual breakfast for him —cinnamon toast, 
sausage links, and a bowl of oatmeal topped with raisins arranged to 
resemble a face with a comically downturn ed mouth. On Wednesday 
morning he'd given her a compliment, a simple statement of fact ("You're 
beautiful") which, although it fell short of an outright avowal of love, did 
serve as a reminder of an objective basis (physical attraction) on which love 
could  be restored if she would only admit that, regarding the central issue, he 
was in the right.  
793  
But each hopeful overture, each exploratory sally, came to naught. When he 
squeezed the hand she offered him and he whispered that he was sorry that 
her back hurt, she was unable to take the next step and allow that possibly (a 
simple "possibly" would have sufficed!) her two hours of soccer in the rain 
had contributed to her injury. And when she thanked him for his compliment 
and asked him how he'd sle pt, he was powerless to ignore a tendentious 
critical edge in her voice; he under stood her to be saying, Prolonged 
disturbance of sleep is a common symptom of clinical depression, oh, and, 
by the way, how did you sleep, dear? and so he didn't dare admit t hat, as a 
matter of fact, he'd slept atrociously; he averred that he'd slept extremely 
well, thank you, Caroline, extremely well, extremely well.  
Each failed overture of peace made the next overture less likely to succeed. 
Before long, what at first glance  had seemed to Gary an absurd possibility —
that the till of their marriage no longer contained sufficient funds of love and 
goodwill to cover the emotional costs that going to St. Jude entailed for 
Caroline or that not going to St. Jude entailed for him —assumed the contours 
of something terribly actual. He began to hate Caroline simply for continuing 
to fight with him. He hated the newfound reserves of independence she 
tapped in order to resist him. Especially, devastatingly hateful was her hatred 
of him -. He could have ended the crisis in a minute if all he'd had to do was 
forgive her; but to see mirrored in her eyes how repellent she found him —it 
made him crazy, it poisoned his hope.  
Fortunately, the shadows cast by her accusation of depression, long and da rk 
though they were, did not yet extend to his corner office at CenTrust and to 
the pleasure he took in managing his managers, ana lysts, and traders. Gary's 
forty hours at the bank had become the only hours he could count on 
enjoying in a week. He'd even begun to toy with the idea of working a fifty -
hour week; but this was easier said than done, because at the end of his eight -
hour day there was often literally no work left on his desk, and he was all too 
aware, besides, that spend ing long hours at the of fice to escape unhappiness 
at home was exactly the trap his father had fallen into; was undoubtedly how 
Alfred had begun to self -medicate.  
794                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
When he married Caroline, Gary had silently vowed never to work later than 
five o'clock and never to bring a briefcase home at night. By signing on with a 
mid -sized regional bank, he'd chosen one of the least ambitious career paths 
that a Wharton School M.B.A. could take. At first his intention was simply to 
avoid his father's mistakes —to give himself time to enjoy life, cherish his 
wife, play with his kids —but be fore long, even as he was proving to be an 
outstanding portfolio man ager, he became more specifically allergic to 
ambition. Colleagues far less capable than he were moving on to work for 
mutual funds, to be freelance money managers, or to start their own funds; 
but they were also working twelve - or fourteen -hour days, and e very single 
one of them had the perspiring manic style of a striver. Gary, cushioned by 
Caroline's inheritance, was free to cultivate nonambition and to be, as a boss, 
the perfect strict and loving father that he could only halfway be at home. He 
demanded honesty and excellence from his workers. In re turn he offered 
patient instruction, absolute loyalty, and the assurance that he would never 
blame them for his own mistakes. If his large -cap manager, Virginia Lin, 
recommended upping the percentage of energy  stocks in the bank's 
boilerplate trust portfolio from six percent to nine percent and Gary (as was 
his wont) decided to leave the mix alone, and if the energy sector then 
proceeded to enjoy a couple of banner quar ters, he pulled his big ironic I'm -
a-jerk  grimace and publicly apologized to Lin. Fortunately, for each of his bad 
decisions he made two or three good ones, and in the history of the universe 
there had never been a better six years for equities investment than the six 
years he'd run Cen -Trust's E quities Division; only a fool or a crook could have 
failed. With success guaranteed, Gary could then make a game of being 
unawed by his boss, Marvin Koster, and by Koster's boss, Marty Breitenfeld, 
the chairman of CenTrust. Gary never, ever kowtowed or fla ttered. Indeed, 
both Koster and Breitenfeld had begun to defer to him in matters of taste and 
protocol, Koster all but asking Gary's permission to enroll his eldest daughter 
in Abington Friends instead of Friends' Select, Breiten feld buttonholing Gary 
outside the senior -executive pissoir to inquire if he and Caroline were 
planning to attend the Free Library benefit ball or if Gary had spun off his 
tickets to a secretary . . .  
7 95 
3. RELAX —IT'S ALL IN YOUR HEAD!  
Curly Eberle had reappeared in his intracranial desk chair with a plastic 
model of an electrolyte molecule in each hand. "A remarkable property of 
ferrocitrate/ferroacetate gels," he said, "is that under low -level radio 
stimulation at certain resonant freq uencies the molecules may spontaneously 
polymerize. More remarkably yet, these polymers turn out to be fine 
conductors of electrical impulses."  
The virtual Eberle looked on with a benign smile as, in the bloody animated 
moil around him, eager waveforms cam e squiggling through. As if these 
waves were the opening strains of a minuet or reel, all the ferrous molecules 
paired off and arranged themselves in long, twinned lines.  
"These transient conductive micro tubules," Eberle said, "make thinkable  the 
previously unthinkable: direct, quasi -real -time digital -chemical interface."  
"But this is good," Denise whispered to Gary. "This is what Dad's always 
wanted."  
"What, to screw himself out of a fortune?"  
"To help other people," Denise said. "To make a d ifference."  
Gary could have pointed out that, if the old man really felt like helping 
somebody, he might start with his wife. But Denise had bizarre and 
unshakable notions of Alfred. There was no point in rising to her bait.  
4. THE RICH GET RICHER!  
"Yes, a n idle corner of the brain may be the Devil's workshop," the pitchman 
said, "but every idle neural pathway gets ignored by the Corecktall process. 
Wherever there's action, though, Corecktall is there to make it stronger! To 
help the rich get richer!"  
From all over Ballroom B came laughter and applause and whoops of 
appreciation. Gary sensed that his grinning, clapping left -hand neighbor, Mr. 
Twelve Thousand Shares of Exxon, was looking in his  
196 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 11
 
 
direction. Possibly the guy w as wondering why Gary wasn't clapping. Or 
possibly he was intimidated by the casual elegance of Gary's clothes.  
For Gary a key element of not being a striver, a perspirer, was to dress as if he 
didn't have to work at all: as if he were a gentleman who just  happened to 
enjoy coming to the office and helping other people. As if noblesse oblige.  
Today he was wearing a caper -green half -silk sport coat, an ecru linen 
button -down, and pleatless black dress pants; his own cell phone was turned 
off, deaf to all inc oming calls. He tipped his chair back and scanned the 
ballroom to confirm that, indeed, he was the only male guest without a 
necktie, but the contrast between self and crowd today left much to be 
desired. Just a few years ago the room would have been a jun gle of blue 
pinstripe, ventless Mafiawear, two -tone power shirts, and tasseled loafers. 
But now, in the late maturing years of the long, long boom, even young 
suburban galoots from New Jersey were buying hand -tailored Italian suits 
and high -end eyewear. So  much money had flooded the system that twenty -
six-year -olds who thought Andrew Wyeth was a furniture company and 
Winslow Homer a cartoon charac ter were able to dress like Hollywood 
aristocracy . . .  
Oh, misanthropy and sourness. Gary wanted to enjoy bein g a man of wealth 
and leisure, but the country was making it none too easy. All around him, 
millions of newly minted American millionaires were en gaged in the identical 
pursuit of feeling extraordinary —of buying the perfect Victorian, of skiing the 
virgin  slope, of knowing the chef per sonally, of locating the beach that had no 
footprints. There were further tens of millions of young Americans who didn't 
have money but were nonetheless chasing the Perfect Cool. And meanwhile 
the sad truth was that not ever yone could be extraordinary, not everyone 
could be ex tremely cool; because whom would this leave to be ordinary? Who 
would perform the thankless work of being comparatively uncooV?  
Well, there was still the citizenry of America's heartland: St. Judean min ivan 
drivers thirty and forty pounds overweight and sporting pastel sweats, pro -
life bumper stickers, Prussian hair. But Gary in recent years had observed, 
with plate -tectonically cumulative anxiety, that popula - 
 
197 
tion was continuing to flow out of the Midwest and toward the cooler coasts. 
(He was part of this exodus himself, of course, but he'd made his escape 
early, and, frankly, priority had its privileges.) At the same time, all the 
restaurants in St. Jude were suddenly coming up to Europe an speed 
(suddenly cleaning ladies knew from sun -dried tomatoes, sud denly hog 
farmers knew from creme brulee), and shoppers at the mall near his parents' 
house had an air of entitlement offputtingly similar to his own, and the 
electronic consumer goods fo r sale in St. Jude were every bit as powerful and 
cool as those in Chestnut Hill. Gary wished that all further migration to the 
coasts could be banned and all mid -westerners encouraged to revert to eating 
pasty foods and wearing dowdy clothes and playing b oard games, in order 
that a strategic na tional reserve of cluelessness might be maintained, a 
wilderness of taste which would enable people of privilege, like himself, to 
feel extremely civilized in perpetuity — 
But enough, he told himself. A too -annihilat ing will to specialness, a wish to 
reign supreme in his superiority, was yet another Warning Sign of clinical D.  
And Mr. Twelve Thousand Shares of Exxon wasn't looking at him anyway. He 
was looking at Denise's naked legs.  
"The polymer strands," Eberle expl ained, "chemotactically associ ate with 
active neural pathways and so facilitate the discharge of electri cal potential. 
We don't yet fully understand the mechanism, but the effect is to make any 
action the patient is performing easier and more enjoyable to repeat and to 
sustain. Producing this effect even transiently would be an exciting clinical 
achievement. Here at Axon, however, we have found a way to render that 
effect permanent."  
"Just watch," the pitchman purred.  
5. NOW IT'S YOUR TURN TO WORK A LITTL E! 
As a cartoon human figure shakily raised a teacup to its mouth, cer tain shaky 
neural pathways lit up inside its cartoon head. Then the fig ure drank 
Corecktall electrolytes, donned an Eberle helmet, and raised the cup again. 
Little glowing microtubules hued to the active pathways,  
198                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
which began to blaze with light and strength. Steady as a rock the car toon 
hand that lowered the teacup to its saucer.  
"We've got to get Dad signed up for testing," Denise whispered.  
"What do you mean?" Gary said.  
"Well, this i s for Parkinson's. It could help him."  
Gary sighed like a tire losing air. How could it be that such an in credibly 
obvious idea had never occurred to him? He felt ashamed of himself and, at 
the same time, obscurely resentful of Denise. He aimed a bland sm ile at the 
video screen as if he hadn't heard her.  
"Once the pathways have been identified and stimulated," Eberle said, "we 
are only a short step away from actual morphologic correc tion. And here, as 
everywhere in medicine today, the secret is in the gen es." 
6. REMEMBER THOSE PILLS YOU TOOK LAST MONTH?  
Three days ago, on Friday afternoon, Gary had finally got through to Pudge 
Portleigh at Hevy & Hodapp. Portleigh had sounded harried in the extreme.  
"Gare, sorry, it's a rave scene here," Portleigh said, "b ut listen, my friend, I 
did talk to Daffy Anderson per your request. Daffy says, sure, no problem, we 
will definitely allocate five hundred shares for a good customer at CenTrust. 
So, are we OK, my friend? Are we good?"  
"No," Gary said. "We said five thous and, not five hundred."  
Portleigh was silent for a moment. "Shit, Gare. Big mix -up. I thought you said 
five hundred."  
"You repeated it back to me. You said five thousand. You said you were 
writing it down."  
"Remind me —this is on your own account or CenTrus t's?" 
"My account."  
"Look, Gare, here's what you do. Call Daffy yourself, explain the situation, 
explain the mix -up, and see if he can rustle up another five hundred. I can 
back you up that far. I mean, it was my mistake, I had no idea how hot this 
thing w ould be. But you gotta realize, Daffy's taking food from somebody 
else's mouth to feed you. It's the Nature Channel,  
199 
Gare. Ail the little birdies with their beaks open wide. Me! Me! Me! I can back 
you up for another five hundred, but you gott a do your own squawking. All 
right, my friend? Are we good?"  
"No, Pudge, we aren't good," Gary said. "Do you remember I took twenty 
thousand shares of refinanced Adelson Lee off your hands? We also took —" 
"Gare, Gare, don't do this to me," Pudge said. "I'm  aware. Have I forgotten 
Adelson Lee? Christ, please, it haunts my every waking hour. All I'm trying to 
say to you is that five hundred shares of Axon, it may sound like a dis, but it's 
not a dis. It's the best Daffy's going to do for you."  
"A refreshing b reath of honesty," Gary said. "Now tell me again if you forgot I 
said five thousand."  
"OK, I'm an asshole. Thank you for letting me know. But I can't get you more 
than a thousand total without going all the way upstairs. If you want five 
thousand, Daffy ne eds a direct order from Dick Hevy. And since you mention 
Adelson Lee, Dick's going to point out to me that CoreStates took forty 
thousand, First Delaware took thirty thou sand, TIAA -CREF took fifty, and so 
on down the line. The calculus is that crude, Gare . You helped us to the tune 
of twenty, we help you to the tune of five hundred. I mean, I'll try Dick if you 
want. I can also probably get another five hundred out of Daffy just by telling 
him you'd never guess he used to be shiny on top, to see him now. W huff, the 
miracle of Rogaine. But basically this is the kind of deal where Daffy gets to 
play Santa Glaus. He knows if you've been bad or good. In particular, he 
knows for whom you work. To be honest, for the kind of considera tion you're 
looking for, wha t you really need to do is triple the size of your institution."  
Size, oh, did it matter. Short of promising to buy some arrant turkeys with 
CenTrust money at a later date (and he could lose his job for this), Gary had 
no further leverage with Pudge Portle igh. However, he still had moral 
leverage in the form of Axon's underpayment for Al fred's patent. Lying awake 
last night, he'd honed the wording of the clear, measured lecture that he 
intended to deliver to Axon's brass this  
200 
THE CORRECTIONS  
afternoon: I want you to look me in the eye and tell me that your offer to my father 
was reasonable and fair. My father had personal reasons for accepting that offer; 
but I know what you did to him. Do you understand me? Tm not an old man in the 
Midwest. I  know what you did. And I think you realize that it is not an option for me 
to leave this room without a firm commitment for five thousand shares. I could also 
insist on an apology. But I'm simply proposing a straightforward transaction 
between adults. Whi ch, by the way, costs you nothing. Zero. Nada. Niente.  
"Synaptogenesis!" Axon's video pitchman exulted.  
7. NO, IT'S NOT A BOOK OF THE BIBLE!  
The professional investors in Ballroom B laughed and laughed.  
"Could this possibly be a hoax?" Denise asked Gary.  
"Why license Dad's patent for a hoax?" Gary said.  
She shook her head. "This makes me want to, like, go back to bed."  
Gary understood the feeling. He hadn't had a good night's sleep in three 
weeks. His circadian schedule was 180 degrees out of phase, he was  revved all 
night and sandy -eyed all day, and he found it ever more arduous to believe 
that his problem wasn't neurochemical but personal.  
How right he'd been, all those months, to conceal the many Warn ing Signs 
from Caroline! How accurate his intuition t hat a putative deficit of 
Neurofactor 3 would sap the legitimacy of his moral argu ments! Caroline was 
now able to camouflage her animosity toward him as "concern" about his 
"health." His lumbering forces of conventional domestic warfare were no 
match for this biological weaponry. He cru elly attacked her person; she 
heroically attacked his disease.  
Building on this strategic advantage, Caroline had then made a series of 
brilliant tactical moves. When Gary drew up his battle plans for the first full 
weekend  of hostilities, he assumed that Caroline would circle the wagons as 
she'd done on the previous weekend —would ado -lescently pal around with 
Aaron and Caleb and incite them to make fun of Clueless Old Dad. Therefore 
on Thursday night he ambushed her. He pro posed, out of the blue, that he 
and Aaron and Caleb go  
201 
mountain -biking in the Poconos on Sunday, leaving at dawn for a long day of 
older -male bonding in which Caroline could not partici pate because her back 
hurt.  
Caroline's countermove was t o endorse his proposal enthusiasti cally. She 
urged Caleb and Aaron to go and enjoy the time with their father. She laid 
curious stress on this phrase, causing Aaron and Caleb to pipe up, as if on 
cue, "Mountain -biking, yeah, Dad, great!" And all at once G ary realized what 
was going on. He realized why, on Monday night, Aaron had come and 
unilaterally apologized for having called him "horrible," and why Caleb on 
Tuesday, for the first time in months, had invited him to play foosball, and 
why Jonah, on Wedne sday, had brought him, unbidden, on a cork -lined tray, 
a second martini that Car oline had poured. He saw why his children had 
turned agreeable and solicitous: because Caroline had told them that their 
father 'was struggling with clinical depression. What a brilliant gambit! And 
not for a second did he doubt that a gambit was what it was —that Caroline's 
"concern" was purely bogus, a wartime tactic, a way to avoid spending 
Christmas in St. Jude —because there continued to be no warmth or fondness 
for him, not  the faintest ember, in her eyes.  
"Did you tell the boys that I'm depressed?" Gary asked her in the darkness, 
from the far margin of their quarter -acre bed. "Caroline? Did you lie to them 
about my mental state? Is that why everybody's sud denly being so 
agreeable?"  
"Gary," she said. "They're being agreeable because they want you to take 
them mountain -biking in the Poconos."  
"Something about this doesn't smell right."  
"You know, you are getting seriously paranoid."  
"Fuck, fuck, fuck!"  
"Gary, this is frighten ing."  
"You're fucking with my head! And there is no lower trick than that. There's 
no meaner trick in the book."  
"Please, please, listen to yourself."  
"Answer my question," he said. "Did you tell them I'm 'depressed'? 'Having a 
hard time'?"  
"Well —aren't yo u?" 
202  
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
"Answer my question!"  
She didn't answer his question. She said nothing more at all that night, 
although he repeated his question for half an hour, pausing for a minute or 
two each time so that she could ans wer, but she didn't answer.  
By the morning of the bike trip, he was so destroyed by lack of sleep that his 
ambition was simply to function physically. He loaded three bikes onto 
Caroline's extremely large and safe Ford Stomper vehicle and drove for two 
hou rs, unloaded the bikes, and pedaled mile after mile on rutted trails. The 
boys raced on far ahead. By the time he caught up with them, they'd taken 
their rest and were ready to move again. They volunteered nothing but wore 
expressions of friendly ex pectat ion, as if Gary might have a confession to 
make. His situation was neurochemically somewhat dire, however; he had 
nothing to say except "Let's eat our sandwiches" and "One more ridge and 
then we turn around." At dusk he loaded the bikes back onto the Stomp er, 
drove two hours, and unloaded them in an access of ANHEDONIA.  
Caroline came out of the house and told the older boys what great fun she 
and Jonah had had. She declared herself a convert to the Narnia books. All 
evening, then, she and Jonah chattered ab out "Asian" and "Cair Paravel" and 
"Reepicheep," and the online kids -only Narnia chat room that she'd located 
on the Internet, and the C. S. Lewis Web site that had cool online games to 
play and tons of cool Narnian products to order.  
"There's a Prince Cas pian CD-ROM," Jonah told Gary, "that I'm very much 
looking forward to playing with."  
"It looks like a really interesting and well -designed game," Caroline said. "I 
showed Jonah how to order it."  
"There's a Wardrobe?" Jonah said. "And you point and click an d go through 
the Wardrobe into Narnia? And then there's all this cool stuff inside?"  
Profound was Gary's relief the next morning as he bum ped and glided, like a 
storm -battered yacht, into the safe harbor of his work week. There was 
nothing to do but patch himself up as well as he could, stay the course, not be 
depressed. Despite serious losses, he remained con fident of victory. Since his 
very first fight with Caroline, twenty years  
earlier, when he'd sat alone in his apartment and watched an eleven -inning 
Phillies game and listened to his phone ring every ten minutes, every five 
minutes, every two minutes, he'd understood that at t he tick ing heart of 
Caroline was a desperate insecurity. Sooner or later, if he withheld his love, 
she came knocking on his chest with her little fist and let him have his way.  
Caroline showed no sign of weakening, however. Late at night, when Gary 
was to o freaked out and angry to shut his eyes, let alone sleep, she politely 
but firmly declined to fight with him. She was partic ularly adamant in her 
refusal to discuss Christmas; she said that listen ing to Gary on the topic was 
like watching an alcoholic d rink.  
"What do you need from me?" Gary asked her. "Tell me what you need to 
hear from me."  
"I need you to take responsibility for your mental health."  
"Jesus, Caroline. Wrong, wrong, wrong answer."  
Meanwhile Discordia, the goddess of marital strife, had pu lled strings with 
the airline industry. There appeared in the Inquirer a full -page ad for a 
slasheroo sale on Midland Airlines tickets, including a $198 round -trip fare 
between Philly and St. Jude. Only four dates in late December were blacked 
out; by stay ing just one extra day at Christ mastime Gary could take the whole 
family to and from St. Jude (non stop!) for under a thousand bucks. He had 
his travel agent hold five tickets for him, renewing the option daily. Finally, 
on Friday morning, with the sale d ue to end at midnight, he'd announced to 
Caroline that he was buying tickets. In accordance with her strict no -
Christmas pol icy, Caroline turned to Aaron and asked him if he'd studied for 
his Spanish test. From his office at CenTrust, in a spirit of trenc h warfare, 
Gary called his travel agent and authorized the purchase. Then he called his 
doctor and requested a sleep aid, a short -term prescription, something a little 
more potent than the nonprescription stuff. Dr. Pierce replied that a sleep aid 
didn't s ound like such a good idea. Caro line, Pierce said, had mentioned that 
Gary might be depressed, and a sleep aid certainly wasn't going to help with 
that. Maybe, instead, Gary would like to come in and talk about how he was 
feeling?  
For a moment, after he h ung up, Gary let himself imagine being di - 
204 
THE CORRECTIONS  
vorced. But three glowing and idealized mental portraits of his children, 
shadowed by a batlike horde of fears regarding finances, chased the notion 
from his head.  
At a dinner party o n Saturday he'd rifled the medicine chest of his friends 
Drew and Jamie, hoping to find a bottle of something in the Valium class, but 
no such luck.  
Yesterday Denise had called him and insisted, with ominous steeli -ness, that 
he have lunch with her. She sa id she'd seen Enid and Alfred in New York on 
Saturday. She said that Chip and his girlfriend had flaked on her and 
vanished.  
Gary, lying awake last night, had wondered if stunts like this were what 
Caroline meant when she described Chip as a man "honest en ough" to say 
what he could and couldn't "tolerate."  
"The cells are genetically reprogrammed to release nerve -growth factor only 
when locally activated!" Earl Eberle's video facsimile said cheerfully.  
A fetching young model, her skull in an Eberle Helmet, w as strapped into a 
machine that retrained her brain to instruct her legs to walk.  
A model wearing a wintry look, a look of misanthropy and sourness, pushed 
up the corners of her mouth with her fingers while magnified cutaway 
animation revealed, within her brain, the flowering of den -drites, the forging 
of new synaptic links. In a moment she was able to smile, tentatively, without 
using her fingers. In another moment, her smile was dazzling.  
CORECKTALL IT'S THE FUTURE!  
"The Axon Corporation is fortunate to h old five U.S. patents protecting this 
powerful platform technology," Earl Eberle told the camera. "These patents, 
and eight others that are pending, form an in surmountable fire wall 
protecting the hundred -fifty million dollars that we have spent to date o n 
research and development. Axon is the recog nized world leader in this field. 
We have a six -year track record of posi tive cash flows and a revenue stream 
that we expect to top eighty  
205 
million dollars in the coming year. Potential investors may rest assured that 
every penny of every dollar we raise on December 15 will be spent on 
developing this marvelous and potentially historic product.  
"Corecktall: It's the Future!" Eberle said.  
"It's the Future!" intoned the pitchman.  
"It's the Future!" chorused the crowd of really good -looking students in nerdy 
glasses.  
"I liked the past," Denise said, uptilting her complimentary half -liter of 
imported water.  
In Gary's opinion, too many people were b reathing the air in Ballroom B. A 
ventilation problem somehow. As the lights came up to full strength, silent 
wait -personnel fanned in among the tables bearing luncheon entrees under 
chafing lids.  
"My first guess is salmon," Denise said. "No, my only guess  is salmon."  
Rising from talk -show chairs and moving to the front of the dais now were 
three figures who reminded Gary, oddly, of his honeymoon in Italy. He and 
Caroline had visited a cathedral somewhere in Tuscany, maybe Siena, in the 
museum of which were  big medieval statues of saints that had once stood on 
the roof of the cathedral, each with an arm raised like a waving presidential 
candidate and each wearing a saintly grin of certainty.  
The eldest of the three beatific greeters, a pink -faced man with ri mless 
glasses, extended a hand as if to bless the crowd.  
"All right!" he said. "All right, everybody! My name is Joe Prager, I'm the lead 
deal attorney at Bragg Knuter. To my left is Merilee Finch, CEO of Axon, to 
my right Daffy Anderson, the all -importan t deal man ager at Hevy and 
Hodapp. We were hoping Curly himself might deign to join us today, but he 
is the man of the hour, he is being interviewed by CNN as we speak. So let me 
do a little caveating here, wink -wink -wink, and then turn the floor over to 
Daffy and Merilee."  
"Yo, Kelsey, talk to me, baby, talk to me," Gary's young neighbor shouted.  
"Caveat A," Prager said, "is please everyone take note that I'm stressing that 
Curly's results are extremely preliminary. This is all Phase  
206 THE CORRECTIONS  
n se  
One research, folks. Anybody not hear me? Anybody in the back?" Prager 
craned his neck and waved both arms at the most distant tables, including 
Gary's. "Full disclosure: this is Phase One research. Axon does not yet have, 
in no way is it re presenting that it has, FDA approval for Phase Two testing. 
And what comes after Phase Two? Phase Three! And after Phase Three? A 
multistage review process that can delay the product launch by as much as 
three more years. Folks, hello, we are dealing with clinical results that are 
extremely interesting but extremely preliminary. So caveat emptor. All 
righty? Wink wink wink. All righty?"  
Prager was struggling to keep his face straight. Merilee Finch and Daffy 
Anderson were sucking on smiles as if they, too, had guilty secrets or religion.  
"Caveat B," Prager said. "An inspirational video presentation is not a 
prospectus. Daffy's representations here today, likewise Merilee's rep -
resentations, are impromptu and, again, not a prospectus . . ." 
The waitstaff desc ended on Gary's table and gave him salmon on a bed of 
lentils. Denise waved away her entree.  
"Aren't you going to eat?" Gary whispered.  
She shook her head.  
"Denise. Really." He felt inexplicably wounded. "You can surely have a couple 
of bites with me."  
Den ise looked him square in the face with an unreadable expres sion. "I'm a 
little sick to my stomach."  
"Do you want to leave?"  
"No. I just don't want to eat."  
Denise at thirty -two was still beautiful, but long hours at the stove had begun 
to cook her youthfu l skin into a kind of terra -cotta mask that made Gary a 
little more anxious each time he saw her. She was his baby sister, after all. 
Her years of fertility and marriageability were passing with a swiftness to 
which he was attuned and she, he suspected, wa s not. Her career seemed to 
him an evil spell under the influence of which she worked sixteen -hour days 
and had no social life. Gary was afraid —he claimed, as her oldest brother, the 
right to be afraid —that by the time Denise awakened from this spell she 
would be too old to start a family.  
207 
He ate his salmon quickly while she drank her imported water.  
On the dais the CEO of Axon, a fortyish blonde with the intelligent pugnacity 
of a college dean, was talking about side effects. "Apart from headaches and 
nausea, which are to be expected," said Merilee Finch, "we haven't tracked 
anything yet. Remember, to o, that our platform technology has been widely 
used for several years now, with no signifi cant deleterious effects reported." 
Finch pointed into the ballroom. "Yes, gray Armani?"  
"Isn't Corecktall the name of a laxative?"  
"Ah, well," Finch said, nodding violently. "Different spelling, but yes. Curly 
and I considered approximately ten thousand different names before we 
realized that branding isn't really an issue for the Alzheimer's patient, or the 
Parkinson's sufferer, or the massively depressed individ ual. We could call it 
Carcino -Asbesto, they'd still knock doors down to get it. Curly's big vision 
here, though, and the reason he's willing to risk the poopy jokes, and so forth, 
is that twenty years from now there's not going to be a prison left standing in 
the United States, because of this process. I mean, realistically, we live in the 
age of medical break throughs. There's no question we'll have competing 
therapies for AD and PD. Some of these therapies will probably come on line 
before Corecktall. So, for most disorders of the brain, our product will be just 
one weapon in the arsenal. Clearly the best weapon, but still, just one among 
many. On the other hand, when it comes to social disease, the brain of the 
criminal, there's no other option on the hori zon. It's Corecktall or prison. So 
it's a forward -looking name. We're laying claim to a whole new hemisphere. 
We're planting the Spanish flag right on the beach here."  
There was a murmur at a distant table where a tweedy, homely con tingent 
was seated, may be union fund managers, maybe the endowment crowd from 
Penn or Temple. One stork -shaped woman stood up from this table and 
shouted, "So, what's the idea, you reprogram the repeat offender to enjoy 
pushing a broom?"  
"That is within the realm of the feasible , yes," Finch said. "That is one 
potential fix, although possibly not the best."  
208 
THE CORRECTIONS  
The heckler couldn't believe it. "Not the best? It's an ethical ni\ 
mare.  
"So, free country, go invest in alternative energy," Finch said, for a laugh, 
because most of the guests were on her side. "Buy some geother -mal penny 
stocks. Solar -electricity futures, very cheap, very righteous. Yes, next, please? 
Pink shirt?"  
"You guys are dreaming," the heckler persisted at a shout, "if you think the 
Amer ican people —" 
"Honey," Finch interrupted with the advantage of her lapel mike and 
amplification, "the American people support the death penalty. Do you think 
they'll have a problem with a socially constructive alternative like this? Ten 
years from now we'l l see which of us is dreaming. Yes, pink shirt at Table 
Three, yes?"  
"Excuse me," the heckler persisted, "I'm trying to remind your po tential 
investors of the Eighth Amendment —" 
"Thank you. Thank you very much," Finch said, her emcee's smile tightening. 
"Since you bring up cruel and unusual punishment, let me suggest that you 
walk a few blocks north of here to Fairmount Avenue. Go take a look at the 
Eastern State Penitentiary. World's first modern prison, opened in 1829, 
solitary confinement for up to twen ty years, as tonishing suicide rate, zero 
corrective benefit, and, just to keep this in mind, still the basic model for 
corrections in the United States today. Curly's not talking about this on CNN, 
folks. He's talking about the million Americans with Park inson's and the four 
million with Alzheimer's. What I'm telling you now is not for general 
consumption. But the fact is, a one -hundred -percent voluntary alternative to 
incarceration is the opposite of cruel and unusual. Of all the potential 
applications of  Corecktall, this is the most humane. This is the liberal vision: 
genuine, permanent, voluntary self -melioration."  
The heckler, shaking her head with the emphasis of the uncon -vinceable, was 
already exiting the ballroom. Mr. Twelve Thousand Shares of Exxon , at 
Gary's left shoulder, cupped his hands to his mouth and booed her.  
Young men at other tables followed suit, booing and smirking, hav - 
209 
ing their sports -fan fun and lending support, Gary feared, to Denise's disdain 
for the world he moved in. Denise had leaned forward and was staring at 
Twelve Thousand Shares of Exxon in open -mouthed amaze ment.  
Daffy Anderson, a linebacker type with thick glossy sideburns and a 
texturally distinct stubblefield of hair higher up, had stepped forward to 
answer money questions. He spoke of being gratifyingly oversubscribed. He 
compared the heat of this IPO to Vindaloo curry and Dallas in July. He 
refused to di vulge the price that Hevy & Hodapp planned to ask for a share of 
Axon. He spoke of pricing it fairly and—wink, wink —letting the market do 
its job.  
Denise touched Gary's shoulder and pointed to a table behind the dais, where 
Merilee Finch was standing by he rself and putting salmon in her mouth. "Our 
prey is feeding. I say we pounce."  
"What for?" Gary said.  
"To get Dad signed up for testing."  
Nothing about the idea of Alfred's participation in a Phase II study appealed 
to Gary, but it occurred to him that by letting Denise broach the topic of 
Alfred's affliction, by letting her create sympathy for the Lamberts and 
establish their moral claim on Axon's favors, he could in crease his chances of 
getting his five thousand shares.  
"You do the talking," he said, sta nding up. "Then I'll have a ques tion for her, 
too."  
As he and Denise moved toward the dais, heads turned to admire Denise's 
legs.  
"What part of 'no comment' didn't you understand?" Daffy Ander son asked a 
questioner for a laugh.  
The cheeks of Axon's CEO were puffed out like a squirrel's. Merilee Finch put 
a napkin to her mouth and regarded the accosting Lamberts warily. "I'm so 
starving," she said. It was a thin woman's apology for be ing corporeal. "We'll 
be setting up some table s in a couple of minutes, if you don't mind waiting."  
"This is a semi -private question," Denise said.  
Finch swallowed with difficulty —maybe self -consciousness, maybe 
insufficient chewing. "Yeah?"  
210 
THE CORRECTIONS  
Denise and Gary introduced the mselves and Denise mentioned the letter that 
Alfred had been sent.  
"I had to eat something," Finch explained, shoveling up lentils. "I think Joe 
was the one who wrote to your father. I'm assuming we're all square there 
now. He'd be happy to talk to you if you still had ques tions."  
"Our question is more for you," Denise said.  
"Sorry. One more bite here." Finch chewed her salmon with la bored 
jawstrokes, swallowed again, and dropped her napkin on the plate. "As far as 
that patent goes, I'll tell you frankly,  we considered just infringing. That's 
what everybody else does. But Curly's an inventor himself. He wanted to do 
the right thing."  
"Frankly," Gary said, "the right thing might have been to offer more."  
Finch's tongue was probing beneath her upper lip like  a cat beneath blankets. 
"You may have a somewhat inflated idea of your father's achievement," she 
said. "A lot of researchers were studying those gels in the sixties. The 
discovery of electrical anisotropy is generally, I believe, credited to a team at 
Cornell. Plus I understand from Joe that the word ing of that patent is 
unspecific. It doesn't even refer to the brain; it's just 'human tissues.' Justice 
is the right of the stronger, when it comes to patent law. I think our offer was 
rather generous."  
Gary  made his I'm -a-jerk face and looked at the dais, where Daffy Anderson 
was being mobbed by well -wishers and supplicants.  
"Our father was fine with the offer," Denise assured Finch. "And he'll be 
happy to know what you guys are doing."  
Female bonding, the m aking of nice, faintly nauseated Gary.  
"I forget which hospital he's with," Finch said.  
"He's not," Denise said. "He was a railroad engineer. He had a lab in our 
basement."  
Finch was surprised. "He did that work as an amateur?"  
Gary didn't know which versi on of Alfred made him angrier: the spiteful old 
tyrant who'd made a brilliant discovery in the basement and cheated himself 
out of a fortune, or the clueless basement amateur who'd unwittingly 
replicated the work of real chemists, spent scarce  
211 
family money to file and maintain a vaguely worded patent, and was now 
being tossed a scrap from the table of Earl Eberle. Both versions incensed 
him.  
Perhaps it was best, after all, that the old man had ignored Gary's advice and 
taken the money.  
"My dad has Parkinson's," Denise said.  
"Oh, I'm very sorry."  
"Well, and we were wondering if you might include him in the test ing of 
your —product."  
"Conceivably," Finch said. "We'd have to ask Curly. I do like the human -
interest aspect. Does your dad liv e around here?"  
"He's in St. Jude."  
Finch frowned. "It won't work if you can't get him to Schwenksville twice a 
week for at least six months."  
"Not a problem," Denise said, turning to Gary. "Right?"  
Gary was hating everything about this conversation. Health health, female 
female, nice nice, easy easy. He didn't answer.  
"How is he mentally?" Finch said.  
Denise opened her mouth, but at first no words came out.  
"He's fine," she said, rallying. "Just —fine." 
"No dementia?"  
Denise pursed her lips and shook her head. "No. He gets a little confused 
sometimes, but —no."  
"The confusion could be from his meds," Finch said, "in which case it's 
fixable. But Lewy -body dementia is beyond the purview of Phase Two testi ng. 
So is Alzheimer's."  
"He's pretty sharp," Denise said.  
"Well, if he's able to follow basic instructions, and he's willing to travel east in 
January, Curly might try to include him. It would make a good story."  
Finch produced a business card, warmly shoo k Denise's hand, less warmly 
shook Gary's, and moved into the mob surrounding Daffy Anderson.  
Gary followed her and caught her by the elbow. She turned around, startled.  
212 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
"Listen, Merilee," he said in a low voice, as if to say , Let's be realistic now, we 
adults can dispense with the nicey -nice crap. "I'm glad you think my dad's a 
'good story.' And it's very generous of you to give him five thou sand dollars. 
But I believe you need us more than we need you."  
Finch waved to someb ody and held up one ringer; she would be there in one 
second. "Actually," she said to Gary, "we don't need you at all. So I'm not sure 
what you're saying."  
"My family wants to buy five thousand shares of your offering."  
Finch laughed like an executive with  an eighty -hour work week. "So does 
everybody in this room," she said. "That's why we have invest ment bankers. 
If you'll excuse me —" 
She broke free and got away. Gary, in the crush of bodies, was having trouble 
breathing. He was furious with himself for h aving begged, furious for having 
let Denise attend this road show, furious for being a Lambert. He strode 
toward the nearest exit without waiting for Denise, who hurried after him.  
Between the Four Seasons and the neighboring office tower was a corporate 
courtyard so lavishly planted and flawlessly maintained that it might have 
been pixels in a cybershopping paradise. The two Lamberts were crossing the 
courtyard when Gary's anger found a fault through which to vent itself. He 
said, "I don't know where the h ell you think Dad's going to stay if he comes 
out here."  
"Partly with you, partly with me," Denise said.  
"You're never home," he said. "And Dad's on record as not wanting to be at 
my house for more than forty -eight hours."  
"This wouldn't be like last Chris tmas," Denise said. "Trust me. The 
impression I got on Saturday —" 
"Plus how's he going to get out to Schwenksville twice a week?"  
"Gary, what are you saying? Do you not want this to happen?"  
Two office workers, seeing angry parties bearing down, stood up a nd vacated 
a marble bench. Denise perched on the bench and folded her arms 
intransigently. Gary paced in a tight circle, his hands on his hips.  
"For the last ten years," he said, "Dad has done nothing to take care of 
himself. He's sat in that fucking blue chair and wallowed in self -pity. I don't 
know why you think he's suddenly going to start —" 
213 
"Well, but if he thought there might actually be a cure —" 
"What, so he can be depressed for an extra five years and die miser able at 
eighty -five instead of eighty? That's going to make all the differ ence?"  
"Maybe he's depressed because he's sick."  
"I'm sorry, but that is bullshit, Denise. That is a crock. The man has been 
depressed since before he even retired. He was depressed  when he was still in 
perfect health."  
A low fountain was murmuring nearby, generating medium -strength privacy. 
A small unaffiliated cloud had wandered into the quad rant of private -sphere 
sky defined by the encompassing rooflines. The light was coastal an d diffuse.  
"What would you do," Denise said, "if you had Mom nagging you seven days a 
week, telling you to get out of the house, watching every move you make, and 
acting like the kind of chair you sit in is a moral issue? The more she tells him 
to get up, the more he sits there. The more he sits there, the more she —" 
"Denise, you're living in fantasyland."  
She looked at Gary with hatred. "Don't patronize me. It's just as much a 
fantasy to act like Dad's some worn -out old machine. He's a person, Ga ry. He 
has an interior life. And he's nice to me, at least —" 
"Well, he ain't so nice to me," Gary said. "And he's an abusive self ish bully to 
Mom. And I say if he wants to sit in that chair and sleep his life away, that's 
just fine. I love that idea. I'm one-thousand -percent a fan of that idea. But 
first let's yank that chair out of a three -floor house that's falling apart and 
losing value. Let's get Mom some kind of quality of life. Just do that, and he 
can sit in his chair and feel sorry for himself unti l the cows come home."  
"She loves that house. That house is her quality of life."  
"Well, she's in a fantasyland, too! A lot of good it does her to love the house 
when she's got to keep an eye on the old man twenty -four hours a day."  
Denise crossed her eyes  and blew a wisp of hair off her forehead. "You're the 
one in a fantasy," she said. "You seem to think they're going to be happy 
living in a two -room apartment in a city where the only  
214 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
people they know are you and me. And do you know who that's conve nient 
for? For you."  
He threw his hands in the air. "So it's convenient for me! I'm sick of worrying 
about that house in St. Jude. I'm sick of making trips out there. I'm sick of 
hearing how miserable Mom is. A situation that's co nvenient for you and me 
is better than a situation that's convenient for nobody. Mom's living with a 
guy who's a physical wreck. He's had it, he's through, finite, end of story, take 
a charge against earnings. And still she's got this idea that if he woul d only try 
harder, everything would be fine and life would be just like it used to be. 
Well, I got news for every body: it ain't ever gonna be the way it used to be."  
"You don't even want him to get better."  
"Denise." Gary clutched his eyes. "They had five  years before he even got sick. 
And what did he do? He watched the local news and waited for Mom to cook 
his meals. This is the real world we're living in. And / want them out of that 
house —" 
"Gary."  
"I want them in a retirement community out here, and Pm not afraid to say 
it." 
"Gary, listen to me." Denise leaned forward with an urgent good will that only 
irritated him the more. "Dad can come and stay with me for six months. They 
can both come and stay, I can bring home meals, it's not that big a deal. If h e 
gets better, they'll go back home. If he doesn't get better, they'll have had six 
months to decide if they like liv ing in Philly. I mean, what is wrong with 
this?"  
Gary didn't know what was wrong with it. But he could already hear Enid's 
invidious desca nts on the topic of Denise's wonderfulness. And since it was 
impossible to imagine Caroline and Enid amicably sharing a house for six 
days (never mind six weeks, never mind six months), Gary could not, even 
ceremonially, offer to put his parents up rnmself . 
He raised his eyes to the intensity of whiteness that marked the ?un's 
proximity to a corner of the office tower. The beds of mums and o -esonias 
and liriope all around him were like bikinied extras in a music video, planted 
in full blush of perfection an d fated to be yanked again  
215 
before they had a chance to lose petals, acquire brown 'spots, drop leaves. 
Gary had always enjoyed corporate gardens as backdrops for the pageant of 
privilege, as metonymies of pamperment, but it was vital not to ask too much 
of them. It was vital not to come to them in need.  
"You know, I don't even care," he said. "It's a great plan. And if you want to 
do the legwork, that would be great."  
"OK, I'll do the 'legwork,' " Denise said quickly. "Now what about Christmas? 
Dad really wants you guys to come."  
Gary laughed. "So he's involved now, too."  
"He wants it for Mom's sake. And she really, really wants it."  
"Of course she wants it. She's Enid Lambert. What does Enid Lam bert want if 
not Christmas in St. Jude?"  
"Well, I'm going to go there," Denise said, "and  I'm going to try to get Chip to 
go, and I think the five of you should go. I think we should all just get 
together and do that for them."  
The faint tremor of virtue in her voice set Gary's teeth on edge. A lecture 
about Christmas was the last thing he nee ded on this October afternoon, with 
the needle of his Factor 3 gauge bumping on the bright redE.  
"Dad said a strange thing on Saturday," Denise continued. "He said, 'I don't 
know how much time I have.' Both of them were talking like this was their 
last cha nce for a Christmas. It was kind of intense."  
"Well, count on Mom," Gary said a little wildly, "to phrase the thing for 
maximum emotional coercion!"  
"Right. But I also think she means it."  
"I'm sure she means it!" Gary said. "And I will give it some though t! But, 
Denise, it is not so easy getting all five of us out there. It is not so easy! Not 
when it makes so much sense for us all to be here! Right? Right?"  
"I know, I agree," Denise persisted quietly. "But remember, this would be a 
strictly one -time -only thing."  
"I said I'd think about it. That's all I can do, right? I'll think about it! I'll think 
about it! All right?"  
Denise seemed puzzled by his outburst. "OK. Good. Thank you. But the thing 
is—" 
218                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
"Yeah, what's the thing," Gary said, taking three steps away from her and 
suddenly turning back. "Tell me what the thi ng is."  
"Well, I was just thinking —" 
"You know, I'm half an hour late already. I really need to get back to the 
office."  
Denise rolled her eyes up at him and let her mouth hang open in mid -
sentence.  
"Let's just finish this conversation," Gary said.  
"OK, we ll, not to sound like Mom, but —" 
"A little too late for that! Huh? Huh?" he found himself shouting with crazy 
joviality, his hands in the air.  
"Not to sound like Mom, but —you don't want to wait too long before you 
decide to buy tickets. There, I said it."  
Gary began to laugh but checked the laugh before it got away from him. 
"Good plan!" he said. "You're right! Gotta decide soon! Gotta buy those 
tickets! Good plan!" He clapped his hands like a coach.  
"Is something wrong?"  
"No, you're right. We should all go  to St. Jude for one last Christ mas before 
they sell the house or Dad falls apart or somebody dies. It's a no -brainer. We 
should all be there. It is so obvious. You're absolutely right."  
"Then I don't understand what you're upset about."  
"Nothing! Not upset about anything!"  
"OK. Good." Denise gazed up at him levelly. "Then let me ask you one other 
thing. I want to know why Mom is under the impression that I'm having an 
affair with a married man."  
A pulse of guilt, a shock wave, passed thro ugh Gary. "No idea," he said.  
"Did you tell her I'm involved with a married man?"  
"How could I tell her that? I don't know the first thing about your private 
life."  
"Well, did you suggest it to her? Did you drop a hint?"  
"Denise. Really." Gary was regainin g his parental composure, his aura of big -
brotherly indulgence. "You're the most reticent person I know. On the basis 
of what could I say anything?"  
217 
"Did you drop a hint?" she said. "Because somebody did. Somebody put that 
idea in her head. A nd it occurs to me that I said one little thing to you, once, 
which you might have misinterpreted and passed on to her. And, Gary, she 
and I have enough problems without your giving her ideas."  
"You know, if you weren't so mysterious —" 
"I'm not 'mysterious .'" 
"If you weren't so secretive," Gary said, "maybe you wouldn't have this 
problem. It's almost like you want people whispering about you."  
"It's pretty interesting that you're not answering my question."  
He exhaled slowly through his teeth. "I have no id ea where Mom got that 
idea. I didn't tell her anything."  
"All right," Denise said, standing up. "So I'll do that 'legwork.' You think 
about Christmas. And we'll get together when Mom and Dad are in town. I'll 
see you later."  
With breathtaking decision she headed toward the nearest exit, not moving 
so fast as to betray anger but fast enough that Gary couldn't have caught up 
with her without running. He waited for a minute to see if she would return. 
When she didn't, he left the courtyard and bent his steps t oward his office.  
Gary had been flattered when his little sister had chosen a college in the very 
city where he and Caroline had lately bought their dream house. He'd looked 
forward to introducing Denise (showing her off, really) to all his friends and 
colleagues. He'd imagined that she would come to Seminole Street for dinner 
every month and that she and Car oline would be like sisters. He'd imagined 
that his whole family, even Chip, would eventually settle in Philadelphia. 
He'd imagined nieces and nephews , house parties and parlor games, long 
snowy Christmases on Seminole Street. And now he and Denise had lived in 
the same city for fifteen years, and he felt as if he hardly knew her. She never 
asked him for anything. No matter how tired she was, she never came to 
Seminole Street without flowers or dessert for Caroline, sharks' teeth or 
comic books for the boys, a lawyer joke or a lightbulb joke for Gary. There 
was no way around her properness, no way to convey to her the depth  
218                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
of his disappointment that, of the rich family -filled future that he'd imagined, 
almost nothing had come to pass.  
A year ago, over lunch, Gary had told her about a married "friend" of his 
(actually a colleague, Jay Pascoe) who was having an affair with his 
daughters' piano teacher. Gary said that he could understand his friend's 
recreational interest in the affair (Pa scoe had no intention of leaving his wife) 
but that he didn't see why the piano teacher was both ering.  
"So you can't imagine," Denise said, "why a woman would want to have an 
affair with you?"  
"I'm not talking about me," Gary said.  
"But you're married and  you have kids."  
"I'm saying I don't understand what the woman sees in a guy she knows to be 
a liar and a sneak."  
"Probably she disapproves of liars and sneaks in general," Denise said. "But 
she makes an exception for the guy she's in love with."  
"So it's a kind of self -deception."  
"No, Gary, it's the way love works."  
"Well, and I guess there's always a chance she'll get lucky and marry into 
instant money."  
This puncturing of Denise's liberal innocence with a sharp eco nomic truth 
seemed to sadden her.  
"You see a person with kids," she said, "and you see how happy they are to be 
a parent, and you're attracted to their happiness. Impossibility is attractive. 
You know, the safety of dead -ended things."  
"You sound like you know something about it," Gary sai d. 
"Emile is the only man I've ever been attracted to who didn't have kids."  
This interested Gary. Under cover of fraternal obtuseness, he risked asking: 
"So, and who are you seeing now?"  
"Nobody."  
"You're not into some married guy," he joked.  
Denise's fac e went a shade paler and two shades redder as she reached for 
her water glass. "I'm seeing nobody," she said. "I'm working very hard."  
219 
"Well, just remember," Gary said, "there's more to life than cook ing. You're at 
a stage now where you need  to start thinking about what you really want and 
how you're going to get it."  
Denise twisted in her seat and signaled to the waiter for the check. "Maybe I'll 
marry into instant money," she said.  
The more Gary thought about his sister's involvement with m arried men, the 
angrier he got. Nevertheless, he should never have mentioned the matter to 
Enid. The disclosure had come of drinking gin on an empty stomach while 
listening to his mother sing Denise's praises at Christmastime, a few hours 
after the mutilat ed Austrian reindeer had come to light and Enid's gift to 
Caroline had turned up in a trash can like a murdered baby. Enid extolled the 
generous multimillionaire who was bankrolling Denise's new restaurant and 
had sent her on a luxury two -month tasting tou r of France and Central 
Europe, she extolled Denise's long hours and her dedication and her thrift, 
and in her back -handedly comparative way she carped about Gary's 
"materialism" and "ostentation" and "obsession with money" —as if she 
herself weren't dollar -sign -headed! As if she herself, given the opportunity, 
wouldn't have bought a house like Gary's and furnished it very much the 
same way he had! He wanted to say to her: Of your three children, my life 
looks by far the most like yours! I have what you taug ht me to want! And 
now that I have it, you disapprove of it!  
But what he actually said, when the juniper spirits finally boiled over, was: 
"Why don't you ask Denise who she's sleeping with? Ask her if the guy's 
married and if he has any kids."  
"I don't thi nk she's dating anybody," Enid said.  
"I'm telling you," the juniper spirits said, "ask her if she's ever been involved 
with somebody married. I think honesty compels you to ask that question 
before you hold her up as a paragon of midwestern values."  
Enid c overed her ears. "I don't want to know about this!"  
"Fine, go ahead, stick your head in the sand!" the sloppy spirits raged. "I just 
don't want to hear any more crap about what an angel she is."  
Gary knew that he'd broken the sibling code of honor. But he was 
220                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
glad he'd broken it. He was glad Denise was taking heat again from Enid. He 
felt surrounded, imprisoned, by di sapproving women.  
There was, of course, one obvious way of breaking free: he could say yes 
instead of no to one of the dozen secretaries and female pedestri ans and sales 
clerks who in any given week took note of his height and his schist -gray hair, 
his ca lfskin jacket and his French mountaineering pants, and looked him in 
the eye as if to say The key's under the doormat. But there was still no pussy 
on earth he'd rather lick, no hair he'd rather gather in his fist like a golden 
silk bellpull, no gaze with which he'd rather lock his own at climax, than 
Caroline's. The only guaranteed result of having an affair would be to add yet 
another disapproving woman to his life.  
In the lobby of the CenTrust Tower, on Market Street, he joined a crowd of 
human beings by  the elevators. Clerical staff and soft ware specialists, 
auditors and keypunch engineers, returning from late lunches.  
"The lion he ascendant now," said the woman standing closest to Gary. "Very 
good time to shop now. The lion he often preside over bar gains in the store,"  
"Where is our Savior in this?" asked the woman to whom the woman had 
spoken.  
"This also a good time to remember the Savior," the first woman answered 
calmly. "Time of the lion very good time for that."  
"Lutetiu m supplements combined with megadoses of partially hy -drogenated 
Vitamin E!" a third person said.  
"He's programmed his clock radio," a fourth person said, "which it says 
something about something I don't know that you can even do this, but he's 
programmed it to wake him up to WMIA at eleven past the hour every hour. 
Whole night through."  
Finally an ele vator came. As the mass of humanity moved onto it, Gary 
considered waiting for a less populated car, a ride less pullulating with 
mediocrity and body smells. But coming in from Market Street now was a 
young female estate planner who in recent months had be en giving him talk -
to-me smiles, touch -me smiles. To avoid contact with her, he darted through 
the elevator's closing doors. But the doors  
22] 
bumped his trailing foot and reopened. The young estate plan crowded on 
next to him.  
"The prophet Jerem iah, girl, he speak of the lion. It tell about it in the 
pamphlet here."  
"Like it's 3:11 in the morning and the Clippers lead the Grizzlies 146 -145 with 
twelve seconds left in triple overtime."  
Absolutely no reverb on a full elevator. Every sound was deade ned by clothes 
and flesh and hairdos. The air prebreathed. The crypt over -warm.  
"This pamphlet is the Devil's work."  
"Read it over coffeebreak, girl. What the harm in that?"  
"Both last -place teams looking to improve their odds in the college draft 
lottery by losing this otherwise meaningless late -season game."  
"Lutetium is a rare -earth element, very rare and from the earth, and it's pure 
because it's elemental!"  
"Like and if he set the clock for 4:11 he could hear all the late scores and only 
have to wake u p once. But there's Davis Cup action in Sydney and it's 
updated hourly. Can't miss that."  
The young estate planner was short and had a pretty face and hen naed hair. 
She smiled up at Gary as if inviting him to speak. She looked midwestern and 
happy to be s tanding next to him.  
Gary fixed his gaze on nothing and attempted not to breathe. He was 
chronically bothered by the T erupting in the middle of the word CenTrust. 
He wanted to push the T down hard, like a nipple, but when he pushed it 
down he got no satis faction. He got cent -rust: a corroded penny.  
"Girl, this ain't replacement faith. This supplemental. Isaiah mention that 
lion, too. Call it the lion of Judah."  
"A pro -am thing in Malaysia with an early leader in the clubhouse, but that 
could change between  2:11 and 3:11. Can't miss that."  
"My faith don't need no replacing."  
"Sheri, girl, you got a wax deposit in your ear? Listen what I saying. This. 
Ain't. No. Replacement. Faith. This supplemental.''''  
"It guarantees silky vibrant skin plus an eighteen perc ent reduction in panic 
attacks!"  
222  THE CORRECTIONS  
"Like I'm wondering how Samantha feels about the alarm clock go ing off next 
to her pillow eight times a night every night."  
"All I saying is now's the time to shop is all I saying."  
It occurre d to Gary, as the young estate planner leaned into him to let a raft 
of sweltering humanity leave the elevator, as she pressed her hennaed head 
against his ribs more intimately than seemed strictly nec essary, that another 
reason he'd remained faithful to Caroline through twenty years of marriage 
was his steadily growing aversion to physical contact with other human 
beings. Certainly he was in love with fidelity; certainly he got an erotic kick 
out of adhering to principle; but some where between his brain and his balls a 
wire was also perhaps coming loose, because when he mentally undressed 
and violated this little red -haired girl his main thought was how stuffy and 
undisinfected he would find the site of his infidelity —a coliform -bacterial 
supply closet, a  Courtyard by Marriott with dried semen on the walls and 
bedspreads, the cat -scratch -feverish back seat of whatever adorable VW or 
Plym outh she no doubt drove, the spore -laden wall -to-wall of her boxlike 
starter apartment in Montgomeryville or Conshohocke n, each site overwarm 
and underventilated and suggestive of genital warts and chlamydia in its own 
unpleasant way —and what a struggle it would be to breathe, how smothering 
her flesh, how squalid and foredoomed his efforts not to condescend . . .  
He bounde d out of the elevator on sixteen, taking big cool lungfuls of 
centrally processed air.  
"Your wife's been calling," said his secretary, Maggie. "She wants you to call 
her right away."  
Gary retrieved a stack of messages from his box on Maggie's desk. "Did she 
say what it is?"  
"No, but she sounds upset. Even when I told her you weren't here, she kept 
calling."  
Gary shut himself inside his office and flipped through the mes sages. 
Caroline  had called at 1:35, 1:40, 1:50, 1:55, and 2:10; it was now 125. He 
pumped his fist in triumph. Finally, finally, some evidence of lesperation.  
He dialed home and said, "What's up?"  
223  
Caroline's voice was shaking. "Gary, something's wrong with your cell phone. 
I've been trying your cell phone and it doesn't answer. What's wrong with it?"  
"I turned it off."  
"How long has it been off? I've been trying you for an hour, and now I've got 
to go get the boys but I don't want to leave the house! I don't  know what to 
do!"  
"Caro. Tell me what's wrong."  
"There's somebody across the street."  
"Who is it?"  
"I don't know. Somebody in a car, I don't know. They've been sit ting there for 
an hour."  
The tip of Gary's dick was melting like the flame end of a candle. "Well," he 
said, "did you go see who it is?"  
"I'm afraid to," Caroline said. "And the cops say it's a city street."  
"They're right. It is a city street."  
"Gary, somebody stole the Neverest sign again!" She was practically sobbing. 
"I came home at noon and it was gone. And then I looked out and this car was 
there, and there's somebody in the front seat right now."  
"What kind of car?"  
"Big station wagon. It's old. I've never seen it before."  
"Was it there when you came home?"  
"I don't know! But now I've got to go get Jonah and I don't want to leave the 
house, with the sign missing and the car out there —" 
"The alarm system is working, though, right?"  
"But if I come home and they're still in the house and I surprise them —" 
"Caroline, honey, calm down. You'd hear the alarm —" 
"Broken glass, an alarm going off, somebody cornered, these people have 
guns —" 
"Look, look, look. Caroline? Here's what you do. Caroline?" The fear in her 
voice and the need th e fear suggested were making him so hot that he had to 
give himself a squeeze through the fabric of his pants, a pinch of reality. "Call 
me back on your cell phone," he said. "Keep me  
224                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
on the line, go out and get in the Stamper, and drive down the drive way. You 
can talk to whoever through the window. I'll be there with you the whole 
time. All right?"  
"OK. OK. I'm calling you right back."  
As Gary waited, he thought of the heat and the saltiness and the peach -bruise 
softness of Caroline's face when she'd been crying, the sound of her 
swallowing her lachrymal mucus, and the wide -open readiness of her mout h, 
then, for his. To feel nothing, not the feeblest pulse in the dead mouse from 
which his urine issued, for three weeks, to believe that she would never again 
need him and that he would never again want her, and then, on a moment's 
notice, to become light -headed with lust: this was marriage as he knew it. His 
telephone rang.  
"I'm in the car," Caroline said from the cockpit -like aural space of mobile 
phoning. "I'm backing up."  
"You can get his license number, too. Write it down before you pull up next to 
him. Let him see you getting it."  
"OK. OK."  
In tinny miniature he heard the big -animal breathing of her SUV, the rising 
om of its automatic transmission.  
"Oh, fuck, Gary," she wailed, "he's gone! I don't see him! He must have seen 
me coming and driven away!"  
"Good, though, that's good, that's what you wanted."  
"No, because he'll circle the block and come back when I'm not here!"  
Gary calmed her down and told her how to approach the house safely when 
she returned with the boys. He promised to keep his cell pho ne on and come 
home early. He refrained from comparing her mental health with his.  
Depressed? He was not depressed. Vital signs of the rambunctious American 
economy streamed numerically across his many -windowed television screen. 
Orfic Midland up a point a nd three -eighths for the day. The U.S. dollar 
laughing at the euro, buggering the yen. Virginia Lin dropped in and 
proposed selling a block of Exxon at 104. Gary could see out across the river 
to the floodplain landscape of Camden, New Jersey, whose deep r uination, 
from this height and distance, gave  
225  
the impression of a kitchen floor with the linoleum scra'ped off. The sun was 
proud in the south, a source of relief; Gary couldn't stand it when his parents 
came east and the eastern seaboard's w eather stank. The same sun was 
shining on their cruise ship now, somewhere north of Maine. In a corner of 
his TV screen was the talking head of Curly Eberle. Gary upsized the picture 
and raised the sound as Eberle con cluded: "A body -building machine for t he 
brain, that's not a bad image, Cindy." The all -business -all-the-time anchors, 
for whom financial risk was merely the boon companion of upside potential, 
nodded sagely in response. "Body -building machine for the brain, ho-kay" 
the female anchor segued, " and coming up, then, a toy that's all the rage in 
Belgium (!) and its maker says this product could be bigger than the Beanie 
Babiesl" Jay Pascoe dropped in to kvetch about the bond market. Jay's little 
girls had a new piano teacher now and the same old m other. Gary caught 
about one word of every three Jay spoke. His nerves were jan gling as on the 
long -ago afternoon before his fifth date with Caroline, when they were so 
ready to finally be unchaste that each intervening hour was like a granite 
block to be  broken by a shackled prisoner . . .  
He left work at 4:30. In his Swedish sedan he wound his way up Kelly Drive 
and Lincoln Drive, out of the valley of the Schuylkill and its haze and 
expressway, its bright flat realities, up through tunnels of shadow and gothic 
arches of early -autumn leaves along the Wissa -hickon Creek, and back into 
the enchanted arboreality of Chestnut Hill.  
Caroline's fevered imaginings notwithstanding, the house appeared to be 
intact. Gary eased the car up the driveway past the bed of hostas and 
euonymus from which, just as she'd said, another SECURITY BY NEVEREST 
sign had been stolen. Since the beginning of the year, Gary had planted and 
lost five SECURITY BY NEVEREST signs. It galled him to be flooding the 
market with worthless signag e, thereby diluting the value of SECURITY BY 
NEVEREST as a burglary deterrent. Here in the heart of Chestnut Hill, 
needless to say, the sheet -metal currency of the Neverest and Western Civil 
Defense and ProPhilaTex signs in every front yard was backed by t he full 
faith and credit of floodlights and reti nal scanners, emergency batteries, 
buried hot lines, and remotely secur - 
225  
THE CORRECTIONS  
ery reti - 
. Ar - 
able doors; but elsewhere in northwest Philly, down -through Mount Airy into 
Germantown and Nicetown where the sociopaths had their dealings and their 
dwellings, there existed a class of bleeding -heart homeowners who hated what it 
might say about their "val ues" to buy their own home -security systems but whose 
liberal "values" did not pre clude stealing Gary's SECURITY BY NEVEREST signs on 
an almost weekly basis and planting them in their own front yards . . .  
In the garage he was overcome by an Alfred -like u rge to recline in the car seat and 
shut his eyes. Turning off the engine, he seemed to switch off something in his brain 
as well. Where had his lust and energy disappeared to? This, too, was marriage as he 
knew it.  
He made himself leave the car. A constric tive band of tiredness ran from his eyes and 
sinuses to his brain stem. Even if Caroline was ready to forgive him, even if he and she 
could somehow slip away from the kids and fool around (and, realistically, there was 
no way that they could do this), he w as probably too tired to perform now anyway. 
Stretching out ahead of him were five kid -filled hours before he could be alone with 
her in bed. Simply to regain the energy he'd had until five minutes ago would require 
sleep —eight hours of it, maybe ten.  
The back door was locked and chained. He gave it the firmest, merriest knock he 
could manage. Through the window he saw Jonah come trotting over in flip -flops and 
a swimsuit, enter security code, and unbolt and unchain the door.  
"Hello there, Dad, I'm making a  sauna in the bathroom," Jonah said as he trotted 
away again.  
The object of Gary's desire, the tear -softened blond female whom he'd reassured on 
the phone, was sitting next to Caleb and watching a galactic rerun on the kitchen TV. 
Earnest humanoids in unis ex pajamas.  
"Hello!" Gary said. "Looks like everything's OK here."  
Caroline and Caleb nodded, their eyes on a different planet.  
"I guess I'll go put another sign out," Gary said.  
"You should nail it to a tree," Caroline said. "Take it off its stick and nail it to a tree."  
"N early unmanned Y>y disappointed expectation, Gary n \\ed\v\s chest with air and 
coughed. "The idea, Caroline, is that there be a certain  
:ns 
227 
class iness and subtlety to the message we're projecting? A certain word -to-
the-wise quality? When you have to chain your sign to a tree to keep it from 
getting stolen —" 
"I said nail."  
"It's like announcing to the sociopaths: We're whipped! Come and get us! 
Come  and get us!"  
"I didn't say chain. I said nail."  
Caleb reached for the remote and raised the TV volume.  
Gary went to the basement and from a flat cardboard carton took the last of 
the six signs that a Neverest representative had sold to him in bulk. 
Consid ering the cost of a Neverest home -security system, the signs were 
unbelievably shoddy. The placards were unevenly painted and attached by 
fragile aluminum rivets to posts of rolled sheet metal too thin to be 
hammered into the ground (you had to dig a hole) . 
Caroline didn't look up when he returned to the kitchen. He might have 
wondered if he'd hallucinated her panicked calls to him if there were not a 
lingering humidity in his boxer shorts and if, during his thirty seconds in the 
basement, she hadn't thrown  the dead bolt on the back door, engaged the 
chain, and reset the alarm.  
He, of course, was mentally ill, whereas she! She!  
"Good Christ," he said as he punched their wedding date into the numeric 
keypad.  
Leaving the door wide open, he went to the front ya rd and planted the new 
Neverest sign in the old sterile hole. When he came back a minute later, the 
door was locked again. He took his keys out and turned the dead bolt and 
pushed the door open to the extent the chain permitted, triggering the 
excuse -me-please alarm inside. He shoved on the door, stressing its hinges. 
He considered putting his shoulder to it and ripping out the chain. With a 
grimace and a shout Caroline jumped up and clutched her back and stumbled 
over to enter code within the thirty -second  limit. "Gary," she said, "just 
knock."  
"I was in the front yard," he said. "I was fifty feet away. Why are you setting 
the alarm?"  
"You don't understand what it was like here today," she muttered as,  
228 THE CORRECTIONS  
 7 
:n :t  
ped the  
limping,  she returned to interstellar space. "I'm feeling pretty alone here, 
Gary. Pretty alone."  
"Here I am, though. Right? I'm home now."  
"Yes. You're home."  
"Hey, Dad, what's for dinner?" Caleb said. "Can we have mixed grill?"  
"Yes," Gary said. "I will make dinner and I will do the dishes and I may also 
trim the hedge, because I, for one, am feeling good! All right, Caroline? Does 
that sound OK to you?"  
"Yes, please, sure, make dinner," she murmured, staring at the TV.  
"Good. I will make dinner." Gary clapped his hands and coughed. He felt as 
if, in his chest and his head, worn -out gears were falling off their axles, 
chewing into other parts of his internal machinery, as he demanded of his 
body a bravado, an undepressed energy, t hat it was simply not equipped to 
give.  
He needed to sleep well tonight for at least six hours. To accom plish this, he 
planned to drink two vodka martinis and hit the sack be fore ten. He upended 
the vodka bottle over a shaker of ice and brazenly let it g lug and glug, because 
he, a veep at CenTrust, had nothing to be ashamed of in relaxing after a hard 
day's work. He started a mesquite fire and drank the martini down. Like a 
thrown coin in a wide, teetering orbit of decay, he circled back into the 
kitchen and managed to get the meat ready, but he felt too tired to cook it. 
Because Caroline and Caleb had paid no attention to him when he made the 
first martini, he now made a second, for energy and general bolsterment, and 
officially con sidered it his first. Battling the vitreous lensing effects of a vodka 
buzz, he went out and threw meat on the grill. Again the weariness, again the 
deficit of every friendly neurofactor overtook him. In plain view of his entire 
family he made a third (officially: a second) mar tini and drank it down. 
Through the window he observed that the grill was in flames.  
He filled a Teflon skillet with water and spilled only some of it as he rushed 
out to pour it on the fire. A cloud of steam and smoke and aerosol grease 
went up. He flippe d all the meat scraps, exposing their charred, glossy 
undersides. There was a smell of wet burnedness such as  
• JNS 
229  
firemen leave behind. Not enough life remained in the - coals to do more than 
faintly color the raw sides of the meat scraps, t hough he left them on for 
another ten minutes.  
His miraculously considerate son Jonah had meanwhile set the table and put 
out bread and butter. Gary served the less burned and less raw bits of meat to 
his wife and children. Wielding his knife and fork clum sily, he filled his 
mouth with cinders and bloody chicken that he was too tired to chew and 
swallow and also too tired to get up and spit out. He sat with the unchewed 
bird -flesh in his mouth until he realized that saliva was trickling down his 
chin —a poo r way indeed to demonstrate good mental health. He swallowed 
the bolus whole. It felt like a tennis ball going down. His family was looking 
at him.  
"Dad, are you feeling OK?" Aaron said.  
Gary wiped his chin. "Fine, Aaron, thank you. Ticken's a little chuff . A little 
tough." He coughed, his esophagus a column of flame.  
"Maybe you want to go lie down," Caroline said, as to a child.  
"I think I'll trim that hedge," Gary said.  
"You seem pretty tired," Caroline said. "Maybe you should lie down instead."  
"Not tire d, Caroline. Just got some smoke in my eyes."  
"Gary —" 
"I know you're telling everybody I'm depressed, but, as it happens. I'm not."  
"Gary."  
"Right, Aaron? Am I right? She told you I'm clinically depressed -right?"  
Aaron, caught off guard, looked to Caroline , who shook her head ;: him 
slowly and significantly.  
"Well? Did she?" Gary said.  
Aaron lowered his eyes to his plate, blushing. The spasm of love that Gary felt 
then for his oldest son, his sweet honest vain blushing son, was intimately 
connected to the r age that was now propelling him, before he understood 
what was happening, away from the table. He v cursing in front of his kids. 
He was saying, ''Fuck this, Caroline! your whispering! I'm going to fucking go 
trim that fucking hedge!"  
 
 
230  
THE CO/?/?fCr/« S 
Jonah and Caleb lowered their heads, ducking as if under fire. Aaron seemed 
to be reading the story of his life, in particular his future, on his grease -
smeared dinner plate.  
Caroline spoke in the calm, low, quavering voice of the patently abused. "OK, 
Gary, good," she said, "just please then let us enjoy our dinner. Please just 
go." 
Gary went. He stormed outside and crossed the back yard. All the foliage near 
the house was cha lky now with outpouring indoor light, but there was still 
enough twilight in the western trees to make them silhouettes. In the garage 
he took the eight -foot stepladder down from its brackets and danced and 
spun with it, nearly knocking out the wind shield  of the Stomper before he got 
control. He hauled the ladder around to the front of the house, turned on 
lights, and came back for the electric trimmer and the hundred -foot 
extension cord. To keep the dirty cord from contact with his expensive linen 
shirt, which he belat edly realized he was still wearing, he let the cord drag 
behind him and get destructively tangled up in flowers. He stripped down to 
his T -shirt but didn't stop to change his pants for fear of losing momentum 
and lying down on the dayheat -radiating lawn and listening to the crickets 
and the ratcheting cicadas and nodding off. Sustained physical exertion 
cleared his head to some extent. He mounted the ladder and lopped the lime -
green lolling tops off yews, leaning out as far as he dared. Proba bly, finding 
himself unable to reach the twelve inches of hedge nearest the house, he 
should have turned off the clipper and come down and moved the ladder 
closer, but since it was a matter of twelve inches and he didn't have infinite 
reserves of energy a nd patience, he tried to walk the ladder toward the house, 
to kind of swing its legs and hop with it, while continuing to grip, in his left 
hand, the running clipper.  
The gentle blow, the almost stingless brush or bump, that he then delivered 
to the meaty palm part of his right thumb proved, on inspec tion, to have 
made a deep and heavily bleeding hole that in the best of all possible worlds 
an emergency physician would have looked at. But Gary was nothing if not 
conscientious. He knew he was too drunk to d rive himself to Chestnut Hill 
Hospital, and he couldn't ask Caroline to drive him there without raising 
awkward questions regarding his deci - 
231 
sion to climb a ladder and operate a power tool while intoxicated, which 
would collaterally entail admitting how much vodka he'd drunk before dinner 
and in general paint the opposite of the picture of Good Mental Health that 
he'd intended to create by comi ng out to trim the hedge. So while a swarm of 
skin -biting and fabric -eating insects attracted by the porch lights flew into 
the house through the front door that Gary, as he hurried inside with his 
strangely cool blood pooling in the cup of both hands, had  neglected to kick 
shut behind him, he closeted himself in the downstairs bathroom and 
released the blood into the sink, seeing pome granate juice, or chocolate 
syrup, or dirty motor oil, in its ferric swirls. He ran cold water on the gash. 
From outside th e unlocked bathroom door, Jonah asked if he had hurt 
himself. Gary assembled with his left hand an absorptive pad of toilet paper 
and pressed it to the wound and one -handedly applied plastic surgical tape 
that the blood and water im mediately made unsticky . There was blood on the 
toilet seat, blood on the floor, blood on the door.  
"Dad, bugs are coming in," Jonah said.  
"Yes, Jonah, why don't you shut the door and then go up and take a bath. I'll 
come up soon and play checkers."  
"Can we play chess instead?"  
"Yes."  
"You have to give me a queen, a bishop, a horse, and a rook, though."  
"Yes, go take a bath!"  
"Will you come up soon?"  
"Yes!"  
Gary tore fresh tape from the fanged dispenser and laughed at him self in the 
mirror to be sure he could still do it. Blood was soaking through the toilet 
paper, trickling down around his wrist, and loosening the tape. He wrapped 
the hand in a guest towel, and with a second guest towel, well dampened, he 
wiped the bathroom clean of blood. He opened the door a crack and listened  
to Caroline's voice upstairs, to the dishwasher in the kitchen, to Jonah's 
bathwater running. A trail of blood receded up the central hall toward the 
front door. Crouching and moving sideways in crab fashion, with his injured 
hand pressed to his  
232                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
belly, Gary swabbed up the blood with the guest towel. - Further blood was 
spattered on the gray wooden floor of the front po rch. Gary walked on the 
sides of his feet for quiet. He went to the kitchen for a bucket and a mop, and 
there, in the kitchen, was the liquor cabinet.  
Well, he opened it. By holding the vodka bottle in his right armpit he was able 
to unscrew the cap with h is left hand. And as he was raising the bottle, as he 
was tilting his head to make a late small withdrawal from the rather tiny 
balance that remained, his gaze drifted over the top of the cabinet door and 
he saw the camera.  
The camera was the size of a dec k of cards. It was mounted on an altazimuth 
bracket above the back door. Its casing was of brushed alu minum. It had a 
purplish gleam in its eye.  
Gary returned the bottle to the cabinet, moved to the sink, and ran water in a 
bucket. The camera swept thirty  degrees to follow him.  
He wanted to rip the camera off the ceiling, and, failing that, he wanted to go 
upstairs and explain to Caleb the dubious morality of spy ing, and, failing 
that, he at least wanted to know how long the camera -iad been in place; but  
since he had something to hide now, any action tie took against the camera, 
any objection he made to its presence in his kitchen, was bound to strike 
Caleb as self -serving.  
He dropped the bloody, dusty guest towel in the bucket and ap - 
:reached the back d oor. The camera reared up in its bracket to keep  
r_m centered in its field. He stood directly below it and looked into its  
rre. He shook his head and mouthed the words No, Caleb. Naturally,  
ne camera made no response. Gary realized, now, that the room was  
: ly miked for sound as well. He could speak to Caleb directly, but  
IK was afraid that if he looked up into Caleb's proxy eye and heard his  
?*rz voice and let it be heard in Caleb's room, the result would be an in - 
•ierably strong upsurge in the reality of what was happening. He  
•fcerefore shook his head again and made a sweeping motion with his  
k hand, a film director's Cut! Then he took the bucket from the sink  
c tabbed the front porch.  
Because he was drunk, the pro blem of the camera and Caleb's wit - 
gis-; of his injury and his furtive involvement with the liquor cabinet  
•mi"t --2" in Gary's head as an ensemble of conscious thoughts and  
anxieties but turned in on itself and became a kind of physical presenc e 
inside him, a hard tumorous mass descending through his stomach and 
coming to rest in his lower gut. The problem wasn't going anywhere, of 
course. But, for the moment, it was impervious to thought.  
"Dad?" came Jonah's voice through an upstairs window. "I 'm ready to play 
chess now."  
By the time Gary went inside, having left the hedge half -clipped and the 
ladder in an ivy bed, his blood had soaked through three layers of toweling 
and bloomed on the surface as a pinkish spot of plasma fil tered of its 
corpus cles. He was afraid of meeting somebody in the hall way, Caleb or 
Caroline certainly, but especially Aaron, because Aaron had asked him if he 
was feeling all right, and Aaron had not been able to lie to him, and these 
small demonstrations of Aaron's love w ere in a way the scariest part of the 
whole evening.  
"Why is there a towel on your hand?" Jonah asked as he removed half of 
Gary's forces from the chessboard.  
"I cut myself, Jonah. I'm keeping some ice on the cut."  
"You smell like al -co-hol." Jonah's voice was lilting.  
"Alcohol is a powerful disinfectant," Gary said.  
Jonah moved a pawn to K4. "I'm talking about the al -co-hol you drank, 
though."  
By ten o'clock Gary was in bed and thus arguably still in compli ance wit h his 
original plan, arguably still on track to —what? Well, he didn't exactly know. 
But if he got some sleep he might be able to see his way forward. In order not 
to bleed on the sheets he'd put his injured hand, towel and all, inside a 
Bran'nola bread bag . He turned out the nightstand light and faced the wall, 
his bagged hand cradled against his chest, the sheet and the summer blanket 
pulled up over his shoulder. He slept hard for a while and was awakened in 
the darkened room by the throbbing of his hand. The flesh on either side of 
the gash was twitching as if it had worms in it, pain fanning out along five 
carpi. Car oline breathed evenly, asleep. Gary got up to empty his bladder and 
take four Advils. When he returned to bed, his last, pathetic plan fell apart, 
because he could not get back to sleep. He had the sensation that blood was 
running out of the Bran'nola bag. He considered getting up and  
234                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
sneaking out to the garage and driving to the emergency room. He added up 
the hours this would take him and the amount of wakefulness he would have 
to burn off upon returning, and he subtracted the total from the hours of 
night remaining until he had to get up and go to work, and he concluded that 
he was better off just sleeping until six and then, if need be, stopping at the 
ER on his way to work; but this was all contingent on his ability to fall back 
asleep, and since he co uldn't do this, he reconsidered and recalculated, but 
now there were fewer min utes remaining of the night than when he'd first 
considered getting up and sneaking out. The calculus was cruel in its 
regression. He got up again to piss. The problem of Caleb' s surveillance lay, 
indigestible, in his gut. He was mad to wake up Caroline and fuck her. His 
hurt hand pulsed. It felt elephantine; he had a hand the size and weight of an 
armchair, each finger a soft log of exquisite sensitivity. And Denise kept 
looking  at him with hatred. And his mother kept yearning for her Christmas. 
And he slipped briefly into a room in which his father had been strapped into 
an electric chair and fitted with a metal helmet, and Gary's own hand was on 
the old -fashioned stirrup -like p ower switch, which he'd evidently already 
thrown, because Alfred came leap ing from the chair fantastically galvanized, 
horribly smiling, a travesty of enthusiasm, dancing around with rigid jerking 
limbs and circling the room at double -speed and then falli ng hard, face down, 
wham, like a ladder with its legs together, and lying prone there on the 
execution -room floor with every muscle in his body galvanically twitching 
and boiling — 
Gray light was in the windows when Gary got up to piss for the fourth or fif th 
time. The morning's humidity and warmth felt more like July than October. A 
haze or fog on Seminole Street confused —or disembodied —or refracted —the 
cawing of crows as they worked their way up the Hill, over Navajo Road and 
Shawnee Street, like local tee nagers heading to the Wawa Food Market 
parking lot ("Club Wa" they called it, according to Aaron) to smoke their 
cigarettes.  
He lay down again and waited for sleep.  
"—day the fifth of October, among the top news stories we're fol lowing this 
morning, with  his execution now less than twenty -four  
• 
hours away, lawyers for Khellye —" said Caroline's -clock radio before she 
swatted it silent.  
In the next hour, while he listened to the rising of his sons and the sound of 
their breakfasts and the blowing  of a trumpet line by John Philip Sousa, 
courtesy of Aaron, a radical new plan took shape in Gary's brain. He lay 
fetally on his side, very still, facing the wall, with his Bran'nola -bagged hand 
against his chest. His radical new plan was to do absolutely nothing.  
"Gary, are you awake?" Caroline said from a medium distance, the doorway 
presumably. "Gary?"  
He did nothing; didn't answer.  
"Gary?"  
He wondered if she might be curious about why he was doing noth ing, but 
already her footsteps were receding up the hall and she was calling, "Jonah, 
come on, you're going to be late."  
"Where's Dad?" Jonah said.  
"He's still in bed, let's go."  
There was a patter of little feet, and now came the first real chal lenge to 
Gary's radical new plan. From somewhere closer than the doorway Jonah 
spoke. "Dad? We're leaving now. Dad?" And Gary had to do nothing. He had 
to pretend he couldn't hear or wouldn't hear, he had to inflict his general 
strike, his clinical depression, on t he one crea ture he wished he could have 
spared. If Jonah came any closer —if, for example, he came and gave him a 
hug—Gary doubted he would be able to stay silent and unmoving. But 
Caroline was calling from downstairs again, and Jonah hurried out.  
Distantl y Gary heard the beeping of his anniversary date being en tered to 
arm the perimeter. Then the toast -smelling house was silent and he shaped 
his face into the expression of bottomless suffering and self -pity that Caroline 
wore when her back was hurting. He  understood, as he never had before, how 
much comfort this expression yielded.  
He thought about getting up, but he didn't need anything. He didn't know 
when Caroline was coming back; if she was working at the  
236 
THE CORRECTIONS  
CDF today, she m ight not return until three. It didn't matter. He would be 
here.  
As it happened, Caroline came back in half an hour. The sounds of her 
departure were reversed. He heard the approaching Stomper, the disarming 
code, the footsteps on the stairs. He sensed his  wife in the doorway, silent, 
watching him.  
"Gary?" she said in a lower, more tender voice.  
He did nothing. He lay. She came over to him and knelt by the bed. "What is 
it? Are you sick?"  
He didn't answer.  
"What is this bag for? My God. What did you do?"  
He said nothing.  
"Gary, say something. Are you depressed?"  
"Yes."  
She sighed then. Weeks of accumulated tension were draining from the room.  
"I surrender," Gary said.  
"What do you mean?"  
"You don't have to go to St. Jude," he said. "Nobody who doesn't want t o go 
has to go."  
It cost him a lot to say this, but there was a reward. He felt Caro line's warmth 
approaching, its radiance, before she touched him. The sun rising, the first 
brush of her hair on his neck as she leaned over him, the approach of her 
breath, the gentle touching -down of her lips on his cheek. She said, "Thank 
you."  
"I may ha ve to go for Christmas Eve but I'll come back for Christ - 
''Thank you." "I'm extremely depressed." "Thank you." "I surrender," Gary 
said.  
An irony, of course, was that as soon as he'd surrendered —possibly  
on as he'd confessed to his depression, almost cert ainly by the time  
-e showed her his hand and she put a proper bandage on it, and ab - 
237 
 
 
solutely no later  than the moment at which, with a locomotive as long and 
hard and heavy as an O -gauge model railroad engine, he tunneled up into wet 
and gently corrugated recesses that even after twenty years of traveling 
through them still felt unexplored (his approach w as spoon -style, from 
behind, so that Caroline could keep her lower back arched outward and he 
could harmlessly drape his bandaged hand across her flank; the screwing 
wounded, the two of them were) —he not only no longer felt depressed, he felt 
euphoric.  
The thought came to him —inappropriately, perhaps, considering the tender 
conjugal act that he was now engaged in; but he was who he was, he was Gary 
Lambert, he had inappropriate thoughts and he was sick of apologizing! —
that he could now safely ask Caroline t o buy him 4,500 shares of Axon and 
that she would gladly do it.  
She rose and dipped like a top on a tiny point of contact, her en tire, sexual 
being almost weightless on the moistened tip of his middle finger.  
He spent himself gloriously. Spent and spent a nd spent.  
They were still lying naked at the hooky -playing hour of nine -thirty on a 
Tuesday when the phone on Caroline's nightstand rang. Gary, answering, was 
shocked to hear his mother's voice. He was shocked by the reality of her 
existence.  
"I'm calling from the ship," Enid said.  
For one guilty instant, before it registered with him that phoning from a ship 
was expensive and that his mother's news could therefore not be good, Gary 
believed that she was calling because she knew that he'd betrayed her.  
THE CORRECTIONS  
TWO HUNDRED HOURS, darkness, the Gunnar Myrdal: all around the old 
man, running water sang mysteriously in metal pipes. As the ship sliced open 
the black sea east of Nova Scotia, the horizontal faintly pitched, bow to stern, 
as if des pite its great steel competence the ship were un easy and could solve 
the problem of a liquid hill only by cutting through it quickly; as if its stability 
depended on such a glossing over of nota tion's terrors. There was another 
world below —this was the p roblem. Another world below that had volume 
but no form. By day the sea was blue surface and whitecaps, a realistic 
navigational challenge, and the problem could be overlooked. By night, 
though, the mind went forth and dove down through the yielding —the 
violently lonely —nothing ness on which the heavy steel ship traveled, and in 
every moving swell you saw a travesty of grids, you saw how truly and forever 
lost a man would be six fathoms under. Dry land lacked this z -axis. Dry land 
was like being awake. Even  in chartless desert you could drop to your knees 
and pound land with your fist and land didn't give. Of course the ocean, too, 
had a skin of wakefulness. But every point on this skin was a point where you 
could sink and by sinking disappear.  
As things pit ched, so they trembled. There was a shivering in the Gunnar 
Myrdal's framework, an endless shudder in the floor and bed and birch -
paneled walls. A syncopated tremor so fundamental to the ship, and so 
similar to Parkinson's in the way it constantly waxed wi thout seeming ever to 
wane, that Alfred had located the problem within himself until he overheard 
younger, healthier passengers remarking on it.  
He lay approximately awake in Stateroom fill. Awake in a metal box that 
pitched and trembled, a dark metal box  moving somewhere in the night.  
There was no porthole. A room with a view would have cost hun dreds of 
dollars more, and Enid had reasoned that since a stateroom was  
241 
mainly used for sleeping who needed a porthole, at that price? She might 
look through it six times on the voyage. That was fifty dollars a look.  
She was sleeping now, silently, like a person feigning sleep. Alfred asleep was 
a symphony of snoring and whistling and choking, an epic of Z's. Enid was a 
haiku. She lay still for hours and then blinked awake like a light switched on. 
Sometimes at dawn in St. Jude, in the long minute it took the clock -radio to 
flip a digit, the only moving thing in the house was the eye of Enid.  
On the morning of Chip's conception she'd merely looked like  she was 
shamming sleep, but on the morning of Denise's, seven years later, she really 
was pretending. Alfred in middle age had invited such venial deceptions. A 
decade -plus of marriage had turned him into one of the overly civilized 
predators you hear abo ut in zoos, the Bengal tiger that forgets how to kill, the 
lion lazy with depression. To exert attraction, Enid had to be a still, unbloody 
carcass. If she actively reached out, ac tively threw a thigh over his, he braced 
himself against her and withheld h is face; if she so much as stepped from the 
bathroom naked he averted his eyes, as the Golden Rule enjoined the man 
who hated to be seen himself. Only early in the morning, waking to the sight 
of her small white shoulder, did he venture from his lair. Her stillness and 
self-containment, the slow sips of air she took, her purely vulnerable object -
hood, made him pounce. And feeling his padded paw on her ribs and his 
meat -seeking breath on her neck she went limp, as if with prey's in stinctive 
resignation ("Le t's get this dying over with"), although in truth her passivity 
was calculated, because she knew passivity inflamed him. He had her, and to 
some extent she wanted to be had, like an animal: in a mute mutual privacy 
of violence. She, too, kept her eyes shut . Often didn't even roll from the side 
she'd been lying on but simply flared her hip, brought her knee up in a 
vaguely proctologic reflex. Then without showing her his face he departed for 
the bathroom, where he washed and shaved and emerged to see the bed  
already made and to hear, downstairs, the percolator gulping. From Enid's 
perspective in the kitchen maybe a lion, not her husband, had voluptuously 
mauled her, or maybe one of the men in uniform she ought to have married 
had 
242 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
slipped into her bed. It wasn't a wonderful life, but a woman could sub sist on 
self-deceptions like these and on her memories (which also now curiously 
seemed like self -deceptions) of the early years when he'd been mad for her 
and had looked into her ey es. The important thing was to keep it all tacit. If 
the act was never spoken of, there would be no reason to discontinue it until 
she was definitely pregnant again, and even after pregnancy no reason not to 
resume it, as long as it was never men tioned.  
She'd always wanted three children. The longer nature denied her a third, the 
less fulfilled she felt in comparison to her neighbors. Bea Meisner, though 
fatter and dumber than Enid, publicly smooched with her husband, Chuck; 
twice a month the Meisners hire d a sitter and went dancing. Every October 
without fail Dale Driblett took his wife, Honey, someplace extravagant and 
out of state for their anniversary, and the many young Dribletts all had 
birthdays in July. Even Esther and Kirby Root could be seen at ba rbecues 
patting each other's well -marbled bottoms. It frightened and shamed Enid, 
the loving -kindness of other couples. She was a bright girl with good business 
skills who had gone directly from ironing sheets and tablecloths at her 
mother's board -inghouse  to ironing sheets and shirts chez Lambert. In every 
neighbor woman's eyes she saw the tacit question: Did Al at least make her 
feel super -special in that special way?  
As soon as she was visibly pregnant again, she had a tacit answer. The 
changes in her body were incontrovertible, and she imagined so vividly the 
flattering inferences about her love life that Bea and Esther and Honey might 
draw from these changes that soo n enough she drew the inferences herself.  
Made happy in this way by pregnancy, she got sloppy and talked about the 
wrong thing to Alfred. Not, needless to say, about sex or ful filment or 
fairness. But there were other topics scarcely less forbidden, and E nid in her 
giddiness one morning overstepped. She suggested he buy shares of a certain 
stock. Alfred said the stock market was a lot of dangerous nonsense best left 
to wealthy men and idle speculators. Enid ^gsested he nonetheless buy 
shares of a certain s tock. Alfred said he remembered Black Tuesday as if it 
were yesterday. Enid suggested he  
243 
nonetheless buy shares of a certain stock. Alfred said it would be highly 
improper to buy that stock. Enid suggested he nonetheless buy it. Al fred said 
they had no money to spare and now a third child coming. Enid suggested 
that money could be borrowed. Alfred said no. He said no in a much louder 
voice and stood up from the breakfast table. He said no so loudly that a 
decorative copper -plate bowl on the k itchen wall briefly hummed, and 
without kissing her goodbye he left the house for eleven days and ten nights.  
Who would have guessed that such a little mistake on her part could change 
everything?  
In August the Midland Pacific had made Alfred its assistant  chief engineer for 
track and structures, and now he'd been sent east to in spect every mile of the 
Erie Belt Railroad. Erie Belt district managers shuttled him around in dinky 
gas-powered motor cars, darting in bug fashion onto sidings while Erie Belt 
meg alosaurs thundered past. The Erie Belt was a regional system whose 
freight business trucks had dam aged and whose passenger business private 
automobiles had driven into the red. Although its trunk lines were still 
generally hale, its branches and spurs wer e rotting like you couldn't believe. 
Trains poked along at 10 mph on rails no straighter than limp string. Mile 
upon mile of hope lessly buckled Belt. Alfred saw crossties better suited to 
mulching than to gripping spikes. Rail anchors that had lost their heads to 
rust, bodies wasting inside a crust of corrosion like shrimps in a shell of deep -
fry. Ballast so badly washed out that ties were hanging from the rail rather 
than supporting it. Girders peeling and corrupted like German choco late 
cake, the dark s havings, the miscellaneous crumble.  
How modest —compared to the furious locomotive —a stretch of weedy track 
could seem, skirting a field of late sorghum. But without this track a train was 
ten thousand tons of ungovernable nothing. The will was in the track . 
Everywhere Alfred went in the Erie Belt's hinterland he heard young Erie Belt 
employees telling one another, "Take it easy!"  
"See ya later, Sam. Don't work too hard, now."  
"Take it easy."  
"You too, pal. Take it easy."  
 
244 
THE CORRECTIONS  
The phrase seemed to Alfred an eastern blight, a fitting epitaph for a once -
great state, Ohio, that parasitic Teamsters had sucked nearly dry, Nobody in 
St. Jude would dare tell him to take it easy. On the high prairie where he'd 
grown up, a person who too k it easy wasn't much of a man. Now came a new 
effeminate generation for whom "easygoing" was a compliment. Alfred heard 
Erie Belt track gangs yukking it up on company time, he saw flashily dressed 
clerks taking ten -minute breaks for coffee, he watched cal low draftsmen 
smoke cigarettes with insinuat ing relish while a once -solid railroad fell to 
pieces all around them. "Take it easy" was the watchword of these 
superfriendly young men, the token of their overfamiliarity, the false 
reassurance that enabled th em to ignore the filth they worked in.  
The Midland Pacific, by contrast, was clean steel and white con crete. 
Crossties so new that blue creosote pooled in their grain. The applied science 
of vibratory tamping and prestressed rebar, motion de tectors and w elded 
rail. The Midpac was based in St. Jude and served a harder -working, less 
eastern region of the country. Unlike the Erie Belt, it took pride in its 
commitment to maintaining quality service on its branch lines. A thousand 
towns and small cities across  the central tiers of states depended on the 
Midpac.  
The more Alfred saw of the Erie Belt, the more distinctly he felt the Midland 
Pacific's superior size, strength, and moral vitality in his own limbs and 
carriage. In his shirt and tie and wing tips he ni mbly took the catwalk over 
the Maurnee River, forty feet above slag barges and turbid water, grabbed the 
truss's lower chord and leaned out upside down to whack the span's principal 
girder with his favorite whacking hammer, which he carried everywhere in 
his briefcase; scabs of paint and rust as big as sycamore leaves spiraled down 
into the river. A yard engine ringing its bell crept onto the span, and Alfred, 
who had no fear of heights, leaned into a hanger brace and planted his feet in 
the match -stick tie s sticking out over the river. While the ties waggled and 
jumped he jotted on his clipboard a damning assessment of the bridge's 
compe tence.  
Maybe some of the women drivers crossing the Maumee on the neighboring 
Cherry Street bridge saw him perched there,  flat of belly  
245 
and broad of shoulder, the wind winding his cuffs around his ankles, and 
maybe they felt, as Enid had felt the first time she'd laid eyes on him, that 
here was a man. Although he was oblivious to their glances, Alfred 
experienc ed from within what they saw from without. By day he felt like a 
man, and he showed this, you might even say flaunted it, by standing no -
handedly on high narrow ledges, and working ten and twelve hours without a 
break, and cataloguing an eastern railroad's  effeminacies.  
Nighttime was a different matter. By night he lay awake on mat tresses that 
felt made of cardboard and catalogued the faults of human ity. It seemed as if, 
in every motel he stayed in, he had neighbors who fornicated like there was 
no tomorr ow—men of ill -breeding and poor discipline, women who chuckled 
and screamed. At 1 a.m. in Erie, Penn sylvania, a girl in the next room ranted 
and panted like a strumpet. Some slick, worthless fellow having his way with 
her. Alfred blamed the girl for takin g it easy. He blamed the man for his 
easygoing confidence. He blamed both of them for lacking the consideration 
to keep their voices down. How could they never once stop to think of their 
neigh bor, lying awake in the next room? He blamed God for allowing such 
people to exist. He blamed democracy for inflicting them on him. He blamed 
the motel's architect for trusting a single layer of cinder block to preserve the 
repose of paying customers. He blamed the motel manage ment for not 
keeping in reserve a room for guests who suffered. He blamed the frivolous, 
easygoing townspeople of Washington, Pennsyl vania, who had driven 150 
miles for a high -school football champi onship game and filled every motel 
room in northwest Pennsylvania. He blamed his fellow guests for their 
indifference to the fornication, he blamed all of humanity for its insensitivity, 
and it was so unfair. It was unfair that the world could be so inconsiderate to 
a man who was so considerate to the world. No man worked harder than he, 
no man made  a quieter motel neighbor, no man was more of a man, and yet 
the phonies of the world were allowed to rob him of sleep with their lewd 
transactions . . .  
He refused to weep. He believed that if he heard himself weeping, at two in 
the morning in a smoke -sme lling motel room, the world  
24B                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
might end. If nothing else, he had discipline. The power to refuse: he had 
this.  
But hi s exercising of it went unthanked. The bed in the next room thudded 
against the wall, the man groaning like a ham, the girl gasping in her 
ululations. And every waitress in every town had spherical mam -maries 
insufficiently buttoned into a monogrammed blou se and made a point of 
leaning over him.  
"More coffee, good -lookin'?"  
"Ah, yes, please."  
"You blushin', sweetheart, or is that the sun comin' up?"  
"I will take the check now, thank you."  
And in the Olm sted Hotel in Cleveland he surprised a porter and a maid 
lasciviously osculating in a stairwell. And the tracks he saw when he closed 
his eyes were a zipper that he endlessly unzipped, and the sig nals behind him 
turned from forbidding red to willing green  the instant he passed them, and 
in a saggy bed in Fort Wayne awful succubuses de scended on him, women 
whose entire bodies —their very clothes and smiles, the crossings of their 
legs —exuded invitation like vaginas, and up to the surface of his 
consciousnes s (do not soil the bed!) he raced the welling embolus of spunk, 
his eyes opening to Fort Wayne at sunrise as a scalding nothing drained into 
his pajamas: a victory, all things consid ered, for he'd denied the succubuses 
his satisfaction. But in Buffalo the  trainmaster had a pinup of Brigitte Bardot 
on his office door, and in Youngstown Alfred found a filthy magazine beneath 
the motel tele phone book, and in Hammond, Indiana, he was trapped on a 
siding while a freight train slid past him and varsity cheerlea ders did splits on 
the ball field directly to his left, the blondest girl actually bouncing a little at 
the very bottom of her split, as if she had to kiss the cleat -chewed sod with 
her cotton -clad vulva, and the caboose rocking saucily as the train finall y 
receded up the tracks: how the world seemed bent on torturing a man of 
virtue.  
He returned to St. Jude in an executive car appended to an intercity freight 
run, and from Union Station he took the commuter local to the suburbs. In 
the blocks between the s tation and his house the last leaves were coming 
down. It was the season of hurtling, hurtling toward  
247 
winter. Cavalries of leaf wheeled across the bitten lawns. He stopped in the 
street and looked at the house that he and a bank owned. The gu tters were 
plugged with twigs and acorns, the mum beds were blasted. It occurred to 
him that his wife was pregnant again. Months were rushing him forward on 
their rigid track, carrying him closer to the day he'd be the father of three, the 
year he'd pay o ff his mortgage, the season of his death.  
"I like your suitcase," Chuck Meisner said through the window of his 
commuter Fairlane, braking in the street alongside him. "For a sec ond I 
thought you were the Fuller Brush man."  
"Chuck," said Alfred, startled. "Hello."  
"Planning a conquest. The husband's out of town forever."  
Alfred laughed because there was nothing else for it. He and Chuck met in the 
street often, the engineer standing at attention, the banker relaxing at the 
wheel. Alfred in a suit and Chuck in golfwear. Alfred lean and flattopped. 
Chuck shiny -pated, saggy -breasted. Chuck worked easy hours at the branch 
he managed, but Alfred nonetheless considered him a friend. Chuck actually 
listened to what he said, seemed impressed with the work he did, an d 
recognized him as a person of singular abili ties.  
"Saw Enid in church on Sunday," Chuck said. "She told me you'd been gone a 
week already."  
"Eleven days I was on the road."  
"Emergency somewhere?"  
"Not exactly." Alfred spoke with pride. "I was inspecting  every mile of track 
on the Erie Belt Railroad."  
"Erie Belt. Huh." Chuck hooked his thumbs over the steering wheel, resting 
his hands on his lap. He was the most easygoing driver Alfred knew, yet also 
the most alert. "You do your job well, Al," he said. "Y ou're a fantastic 
engineer. So there's got to be a reason why the Erie Belt."  
"There is indeed," Alfred said. "Midpac's buying it."  
The Fairlane's engine sneezed once in a canine way. Chuck had grown up on 
a farm near Cedar Rapids, and the optimism of his nature  
248                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
was rooted in the deep, well -watered topsoil of eastern Iowa. Farmers in 
eastern Iowa never learned not to trust the world. Whereas any soil that 
might have nurtured hope in Alfred had blown away in one or an other west 
Kansan drought.  
"So," Chuck said. "I  imagine there's been a public announcement."  
"No. No announcement."  
Chuck nodded, looking past Alfred at the Lambert house. "Enid'll be happy to 
see you. I think she's had a hard week. The boys have been sick."  
"You'll keep that information quiet."  
"Al, A l, Al."  
"I wouldn't mention it to anyone but you."  
"Appreciate it. You're a good friend and a good Christian. And I've got about 
four holes' worth of daylight if I'm going to get that hedge pruned back."  
The Fairlane inched into motion, Chuck steering it into his drive way with one 
index finger, as if dialing his broker.  
Alfred picked up his suitcase and briefcase. It had been both sponta neous 
and the opposite of spontaneous, his disclosure. A spasm of good will and 
gratitud e to Chuck, a calculated emission of the fury that had been building 
inside him for eleven days. A man travels two thousand miles but he can't 
take the last twenty steps without doing something —' 
And it did seem unlikely that Chuck would actually use the i nformation — 
Entering the house through the kitchen door, Alfred saw chunks of raw 
rutabaga in a pot of water, a rubber -banded bunch of beet greens, and some 
mystery meat in brown butcher paper. Also a casual onion that looked 
destined to be fried and serve d with —liver?  
On the floor by the basement stairs was a nest of magazines and •elly glasses.  
"Al?" Enid called from the basement.  
He set down his suitcase and briefcase, gathered the magazines and ;elly 
glasses in his arms, and carried them down the steps.  
Enid parked her iron on the ironing board and emerged from the  
249 
laundry room with butterflies in her stomach —whether, from lust or from 
fear of Al's rage or from fear that she might become enraged her self she 
didn't know.  
He set her straight  in a hurry. "What did I ask you to do before I left?"  
"You're home early," she said. "The boys are still at the Y." "What is the one 
thing I asked you to do while I was gone?" "I'm catching up on laundry. The 
boys have been sick." "Do you remember," he sa id, "that I asked you to take 
care of the mess at the top of the stairs? That that was the one thing —the one 
thing —I asked you to do while I was gone?"  
Without waiting for an answer, he went into his metallurgy lab and dumped 
the magazines and jelly glasse s into a heavy -duty trash can. From the 
hammer shelf he took a badly balanced hammer, a crudely forged 
Neanderthal club that he hated and kept only for purposes of demolition, and 
methodically broke each jelly glass. A splinter hit his cheek and he swung 
more furiously, smashing the shards into smaller shards, but nothing could 
eradicate his transgression with Chuck Meis -ner, or the grass -damp triangles 
of cheerleading leotard, no matter how he hammered.  
Enid listened from her station at the ironing board. She didn't care much for 
the reality of this moment. That her husband had left town eleven days ago 
without kissing her goodbye was a thing she'd halfway succeeded in 
forgetting. With the living Al absent, she'd alchemically transmuted her base 
resentments  into the gold of longing and remorse. Her swelling womb, the 
pleasures of the fourth month, the time alone with her handsome boys, the 
envy of her neighbors all were colorful philtres over which she'd waved the 
wand of her imagination. Even as Al had come  down the stairs she'd still 
imagined apologies, homecom ing kisses, a bouquet of flowers maybe. Now 
she heard the ricochet of broken glass and glancing hammer blows on heavy -
gauge galvanized iron, the frustrated shrieks of hard materials in conflict. 
The philtres may have been colorful but unfortunately (she saw now) they 
were chemically inert. Nothing had really changed.  
It was true that Al had asked her to move the jars and magazines,  
250 
THE CORRECTIONS  
and there was probably a word for the wa y she'd stepped around those jars 
and magazines for the last eleven days, often nearly stumbling on them; 
maybe a psychiatric word with many syllables or maybe a simple word like 
"spite." But it seemed to her that he'd asked her to do more than "one thing"  
while he was gone. He'd also asked her to make the boys three meals a day, 
and clothe them and read to them and nurse them in sickness, and scrub the 
kitchen floor and wash the sheets and iron his shirts, and do it all without a 
husband's kisses or kind w ords. If she tried to get credit for these labors of 
hers, however, Al simply asked her whose labors had paid for the house and 
food and linens? Never mind that his work so satisfied him that he didn't 
need her love, while her chores so bored her that she needed his love doubly. 
In any rational accounting, his work canceled her work.  
Perhaps, in strict fairness, since he'd asked her to do "one thing" extra, she 
might have asked him to do "one thing" extra, too. She might have asked him 
to telephone her once  from the road, for example. But he could argue that 
"someone's going to trip on those magazines and hurt themselves," whereas 
no one was going to trip over his not calling her from the road, no one was 
going to hurt themselves over that. And charging long -distance calls to the 
company was an abuse of his expense account ("You have my office number if 
there's an emergency"), and so a phone call cost the household quite a bit of 
money, whereas carrying lunk into the basement cost it no money, and so she 
was always wrong, and it was demoralizing to dwell perpetually in the cellar 
of your '.vrongness, to wait perpetually for someone to take pity on you in 
your •a -rongness, and so it was no wonder, really, that she'd shopped for the 
Dinner of Revenge.  
Halfway up  the basement stairs, on her way to preparing this din ner, she 
paused and gave a sigh.  
Alfred heard the sigh and suspected it had to do with "laundry" and 'four 
months pregnant." However, his own mother had driven a team :•£ plow 
horses around a twenty -acre field when she was eight months - regnant, so he 
was not exactly sympathetic. He gave his bleeding dieek a styptic dusting of 
ammonium aluminum sulfate.  
From the front door of the house came a thumping of little feet and  
251 
a mittened knocking, Bea Meisner dropping off her human cargo. Enid 
hurried on up the stairs to accept delivery. Gary and Chipper, her fifth -grader 
and her first -grader, had the chlorination of the Y about them. With their 
damp hair they looked riparian. M uskratty, beaverish. She called thanks to 
Bea's taillights.  
As fast as they could without running (forbidden indoors), the boys 
proceeded to the basement, dropped their logs of sodden  terry cloth in the 
laundry room, and found their father in his laboratory. It was in their nature 
to throw their arms around him, but this nature had been corrected out of 
them. They stood and waited, like company subordi nates, for the boss to 
speak.  
"So!" he said. "You've been swimming."  
"I'm a Dolphin!" Gary cried. He was an unaccountably cheerful boy. "I got my 
Dolphin clip!"  
"A Dolphin. Well, well." To Chipper, to whom life had offered mainly tragic 
perspectives since he was about two years old, the b oss more gently said: 
"You, lad?"  
"We used kickboards," Chipper said.  
"He's a Tadpole," Gary said.  
"So. A Dolphin and a Tadpole. And what special skills do you bring to the 
workplace now that you're a Dolphin?"  
"Scissors kick."  
"I wish I'd had a nice big s wimming pool like that when I was grow ing up," 
the boss said, although for all he knew the pool at the Y was neither nice nor 
big. "Except for some muddy water in a cow pond I don't recall seeing water 
deeper than three feet until I saw the Platte River. I must have been nearly 
ten."  
His youthful subordinates weren't following. They shifted on their feet, Gary 
still smiling tentatively as though hopeful of an upturn in the conversation, 
Chipper frankly gaping at the laboratory, which was for bidden territo ry 
except when the boss was in it. The air here tasted like steel wool.  
Alfred regarded his two subordinates gravely. Fraternizing had al ways been a 
struggle for him. "Have you been helping your mother in the kitchen?" he 
said.  
252                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
When a subject didn't interest Chipper, as this -one didn't, he thought about 
girls, and when he thought about girls he felt a surge of hope. On the wings of 
this hope he floated from the laboratory and up the stairs.  
"Ask me nine times twenty -three," Gary told the boss.  
"All right," Alfred said. "What is nine times twenty -three?"  
"Two hundred seven. Ask me another."  
"What's twenty -three squared ?" 
In the kitchen Enid dredged the Promethean meat in flour and laid it in a 
Westinghouse electric pan large enough to fry nine eggs in tick -tacktoe 
formation. A cast aluminum lid clattered as the rutabaga water came abruptly 
to a boil. Earlier in the day a half package of bacon in the refrigerator had 
suggested liver to her, the drab liver had suggested a complement of bright 
yellow, and so the Dinner had taken shape. Un fortunately, when she went to 
cook the bacon she discovered there were only three stri ps, not the six or 
eight she'd imagined. She was now struggling to believe that three strips 
would suffice for the entire family.  
"What's that?" said Chipper with alarm.  
"Liver 'n' bacon!"  
Chipper backed out of the kitchen shaking his head in violent de nial. Some 
days were ghastly from the outset; the breakfast oatmeal was studded with 
chunks of date like chopped -up cockroach; bluish swirls of inhomogeneiry in 
his milk; a doctor's appointment after breakfast. Other days, like this one, did 
not reveal their  full ghastliness till they were nearly over.  
He reeled through the house repeating: "Ugh, horrible, ugh, horri ble, ugh, 
horrible, ugh, horrible . . ."  
"Dinner in five minutes, wash your hands," Enid called.  
Cauterized liver had the odor of fingers that h ad handled dirty coins.  
Chipper came to rest in the living room and pressed his face against the 
window, hoping for a glimpse of Cindy Meisner in her dining room. He had 
sat next to Cindy returning from the Y and smelled the chlorine on her. A 
sodden Band -Aid had clung by a few lingering bits of stickum :o her knee.  
253 
Thukkety thukkety thukkety went Enid's masher round the pot of sweet, 
bitter, watery rutabaga.  
Alfred washed his hands in the bathroom, gave the soap to Gary, and 
employed a small towel.  
"Picture a square," he said to Gary.  
Enid knew that Alfred hated liver, but the meat was full of health -bringing 
iron, and whatever Alfred's shortcomings as a husba nd, no one could say he 
didn't play by the rules. The kitchen was her domain, and he never meddled.  
"Chipper, have you washed your hands?"  
It seemed to Chipper that if he could only see Cindy again for one moment he 
might be rescued from the Dinner. He ima gined being with her in her house 
and following her to her room. He imagined her room as a haven from 
danger and responsibility.  
"Chipper?"  
"You square A, you square B, and you add twice the product of A and B," 
Alfred told Gary as they sat down at the tab le. 
"Chipper, you better wash your hands," Gary warned.  
Alfred pictured a square:  
EA 
AE 
Figure 1. Large Square & Smaller Squares  
"I'm sorry I'm a little short on bacon," Enid said. "I thought I had more."  
254 
THE CORRECTIONS  
In the bathroom Chipper was reluctant to wet his hands because he was 
afraid he would never get them dry again. He let the water run audibly while 
he rubbed his hands with a towel. His failure to glimpse Cindy through the 
window had wrecked his composure.  
"We had high fevers," Gary reported. "Chipper had an earache, too."  
Brown grease -soaked flakes of flour were impastoed on the ferrous lobes of 
liver like corrosion. The bacon also, what little there was of it, had the color of 
rust.  
Chipper trembled in the  bathroom doorway. You encountered a misery near 
the end of the day and it took a while to gauge its full extent. Some miseries 
had sharp curvature and could be negotiated readily. Others had almost no 
curvature and you knew you'd be spend ing hours turnin g the corner. Great 
whopping -big planet -sized mis eries. The Dinner of Revenge was one of these.  
"How was your trip," Enid asked Alfred because she had to some time.  
"Tiring."  
"Chipper, sweetie, we're all sitting down."  
"I'm counting to five," Alfred said.  
"There's bacon, you like bacon," Enid sang. This was a cynical, ex pedient 
fraud, one of her hundred daily conscious failures as a mother.  
"Two, three, four," Alfred said.  
Chipper ran to take his place at the table. No point in getting spanked.  
"Blessalor  this foodier use nusta thy service make asair mindful neesa others 
Jesus name amen," Gary said.  
A dollop of mashed rutabaga at rest on a plate expressed a clear yel lowish 
liquid similar to plasma or the matter in a blister. Boiled beet greens leaked 
some thing cupric, greenish. Capillary action and the thirsty crust of flour 
drew both liquids under the liver. When the liver was lifted, a faint suction 
could be heard. The sodden lower crust was unspeakable.  
Chipper considered the life of a girl. To go through life softly, to be i Meisner, 
to play in that house and be loved like a girl.  
255 
"You want to see my jail I made with Popsicle sticks?" Gary said.  
"A jail, well well," Alfred said.  
The provide nt young person neither ate his bacon immediately nor let it be 
soaked by the vegetable juices. The provident young person evacuated his 
bacon to the higher ground at the plate's edge and stored it there as an 
incentive. The provident young person ate his bite of fried onions, which 
weren't good but also weren't bad, if he needed a prelim inary treat.  
"We had a den meeting yesterday," Enid said. "Gary, honey, we can look at 
your jail after dinner."  
"He made an electric chair," Chipper said. "To go in his ja il. I helped."  
"Ah? Well well."  
"Mom got these huge boxes of Popsicle sticks," Gary said.  
"It's the Pack," Enid said. "The Pack gets a discount."  
Alfred didn't think much of the Pack. A bunch of fathers taking it easy ran the 
Pack. Pack -sponsored activitie s were lightweight: contests involving 
airplanes of balsa, or cars of pinewood, or trains of paper whose boxcars were 
books read.  
(Schopenhauer: If you want a safe compass to guide you through life . . . you cannot 
do better than accustom yourself to regar d this world as a peniten tiary, a sort of 
penal colony?)  
"Gary, say again what you are," said Chipper, for whom Gary was the glass of 
fashion. "Are you a Wolf?"  
"One more Achievement and I'm a Bear."  
"What are you now, though, a Wolf?"  
"I'm a Wolf but bas ically I'm a Bear. All's I have to do now is Conversation."  
"Conservation," Enid corrected. "All I have to do now is Conserva tion."  
"It's not Conversation?"  
"Steve Driblett made a gillateen but it didn't work," Chipper said.  
"Driblett's a Wolf."  
"Brent Person made a plane but it busted in half."  
"Person is a Bear."  
25S 
THE CORRECTIONS  
- 
IS 
:.. 
"Say broke, sweetie, not busted."  
"Gary, what's the biggest firecracker?" Chipper said.  
"M-80. Then cherry bombs."  
"Wouldn't it be neat to get an M -80 and put it in your jail and blow it up?"  
"Lad," Alfred said, "I don't see you eating your dinner."  
Chipper was growing emceeishly expansive; for the moment, the Dinner had 
no reality. "Or seven M-80s," he said, "and you blew 'em all at once, or one 
after another, wouldn't it be neat?"  
"I'd put a charge in every corner and then put extra fuse," Gary said. "I'd wind 
the fuses together and detonate them all at once. That's the best way to do it, 
isn't it, Dad. Separate the c harges and put an extra fuse, isn't it. Dad?"  
"Seven thousand hundred million M -80s," Chipper cried. He made explosive 
noises to suggest the megatonnage he had in mind.  
"Chipper," Enid said with smooth deflection, "tell Dad where we're all going 
next week. " 
"The den's going to the Museum of Transport and I get to come, too," 
Chipper recited.  
"Oh Enid." Alfred made a sour face. "What are you taking them there for?"  
"Bea says it's very interesting and fun for kids."  
Alfred shook his head, disgusted. "What doe s Bea Meisner know about 
transportation?"  
"It's perfect for a den meeting," Enid said. "There's a real steam engine the 
boys can sit in."  
"What they have," Alfred said, "is a thirty -year -old Mohawk from the New 
York Central. It's not an antique. It's not r are. It's a piece of junk. If the boys 
want to see what a real railroad is —" 
"Put a battery and two electrodes on the electric chair," Gary said.  
"Put an M -80!"  
"Chipper, no, you run a current and the current kills the prisoner."  
"What's a current?"  
A curr ent flowed when you stuck electrodes of zinc and copper in a lemon 
and connected them.  
- gUS 
257  
• 
"Say broke, sweetie, not busted."  
"Gary, what's the biggest firecracker?" Chipper said.  
"M-80. Then cherry bombs."  
"Wouldn't it be neat to get an M -80 and put it in your jail and blow it up?"  
"Lad," Alfred said, "I don't see you eating your dinner."  
Chipper was growing emceeishly expansive; for the moment, the Dinner had 
no reality. "Or seven M-80s," he said, "and you blew 'em all at once, or one 
after another, wouldn't it be neat?"  
"I'd put a charge in every corner and then put extra fuse," Gary said. "I'd wind 
the fuses together and detonate them all at once. That's the best way to do it, 
isn't it, Dad. Separate the charges and put an extra fuse, isn't it. Dad?"  
"Seven thousand hundred million M -80s," Chipper cried. He made explosive 
noises to suggest the megatonnage he had in mind.  
"Chipper," Enid said with smooth deflection, "tell Dad where we're all going 
next week."  
"The den's going to the Museum of Transport and I get to come, too," 
Chipper recited.  
"Oh Enid." Alfred made a sour face. "What are you taking them there for?"  
"Bea says it's very interesting and fun for kids."  
Alfred shook his head, disgusted. "What does Bea Meisner know about 
transportation?"  
"It's perfect for a den meeting," Enid said. "There's a real steam engine the 
boys can sit in."  
"What they have," Alfred said, "is a thirty -year -old Mohawk from the New 
York Central. It's not an antique. It's not rare. It's a piece of rank. If the boys 
want to see what a real railroad is —" 
"Put a battery and two electrodes on the electric chair," Gary said.  
"Put an M -80!"  
"Chipper, no, you run a current and the current kills the prisoner."  
"Y\Tiat's a current?"  
A current flowed when you stuck electrodes of zinc and copper in a lemon 
and connected them.  
257 
What a sour world Alfred lived in. When he caught himself in mirrors it 
shocked him how young he still looked. The set of mouth  of hemorrhoidal 
schoolteachers, the bitter permanent lip -pursing of arthritic men, he could 
taste these expressions in his own mouth some times, though he was 
physically in his prime, the souring of life.  
He did therefore enjoy a rich dessert. Pecan pie. Apple brown Betty. A little 
sweetness in the world.  
"They have two locomotives and a real caboose!" Enid said.  
Alfred believed that the real and the true were a minority that the world was 
bent on exterminating. It galled him that romantics like Enid could  not 
distinguish the false from the authentic: a poor -quality, flim -sily stocked, 
profit -making "museum" from a real, honest railroad — 
"You have to at least be a Fish."  
"The boys are all excited."  
"I could be a Fish."  
The Mohawk that was the new museum's p ride was evidently a romantic 
symbol. People nowadays seemed to resent the railroads for abandoning 
romantic steam power in favor of diesel. People didn't understand the first 
goddamned thing about running a railroad. A diesel locomotive was versatile, 
efficient, and low -maintenance. People thought the railroad owed them 
romantic favors, and then they belly ached if a train was slow. That was the 
way most people were —stupid.  
(Schopenhauer: Amongst the evils of a penal colony is the company of those 
imprison ed in it.)  
At the same time, Alfred himself hated to see the old steam engine pass into 
oblivion. It was a beautiful iron horse, and by putting the Mo hawk on display 
the museum allowed the easygoing leisure -seekers of suburban St. Jude to 
dance on its gra ve. City people had no right to pa tronize the iron horse. They 
didn't know it intimately, as Alfred did. They hadn't fallen in love with it out 
in the northwest corner of Kansas where it was the only link to the greater 
world, as Alfred had. He de spised the museum and its goers for everything 
they didn't know.  
"They have a model railroad that takes up a whole room!" Enid said 
relentlessly.  
258 
THE CORRECTIONS  
And the goddamned model railroaders, yes, the goddamned hobby ists. Enid 
knew perfectly well how he felt about these dilettantes and their pointless 
and implausible model layouts.  
"A whole room?" Gary said with skepticism. "How big?"  
"Wouldn't it be neat to put some M -80s on, um, on, um, on a model railroad 
bridge? K er-PERSSSCHT! P'kow, p'kow!"  
"Chipper, eat your dinner now" Alfred said.  
"Big big big," Enid said. "The model is much much much much much bigger 
than the one your father bought you."  
"Now," Alfred said. "Are you listening to me? Now."  
Two sides of the squa re table were happy and two were not. Gary told a 
pointless, genial story about this kid in his class who had three rabbits while 
Chipper and Alfred, twin studies in bleakness, lowered their eyes to their 
plates. Enid visited the kitchen for more rutabaga.  
"I know who not to ask if they want seconds," she said when she returned.  
Alfred shot her a warning look. They had agreed for the sake of the boys' 
welfare never to allude to his own dislike of vegetables and certain meats.  
"I'll take some," Gary said.  
Chipper had a lump in his throat, a desolation so obstructive that he couldn't 
have swallowed much in any case. But when he saw his brother happily 
devouring seconds of Revenge, he became angry and for a mo ment 
understood how his entire dinner might be scar fable in no time, his duties 
discharged and his freedom regained, and he actually picked up his fork and 
made a pass at the craggy wad of rutabaga, tangling a morsel of it in his tines 
and bringing it near his mouth. But the rutabaga anelled carious and wa s 
already cold —it had the texture and tempera -nre of wet dog crap on a cool 
morning —and his guts convulsed in a -oine -bending gag reflex.  
"I love rutabaga," said Gary inconceivably.  
"I could live on nothing but vegetables," Enid averred.  
"Alore milk," Chip per said, breathing hard.  
"Chipper, just hold your nose if you don't like it," Gary said.  
Alfred put bite after bite of vile Revenge in his mouth, chewing quickly and 
swallowing mechanically, telling himself he had endured worse than this.  
"Chip, " he said, "take one bite of each thing. You're not leaving this table till 
you do."  
"More milk."  
"You will eat some dinner first. Do you understand?"  
"Milk."  
"Does it count if he holds his nose?" Gary said.  
"More milk, please."  
"That is just about enough, " Alfred said.  
Chipper fell silent. His eyes went around and around his plate, but he had not 
been provident and there was nothing on the plate but woe. He raised his 
glass and silently urged a very small drop of warm milk down the slope to his 
mouth. He s tretched his tongue out to wel come it.  
"Chip, put the glass down."  
"Maybe he could hold his nose but then he has to eat two bites of things."  
"There's the phone. Gary, you may answer it."  
"What's for dessert?" Chipper said.  
"I have some nice fresh pineapple."  
"Oh for God's sake, Enid —" 
"What?" She blinked innocently or faux -innocently.  
"You can at least give him a cookie, or an Eskimo Pie, if he eats his dinner —" 
"It's such sweet pineapple. It melts in your mouth."  
"Dad, it's Mr. Meisner."  
Alfred leaned over Chipper's plate and in a single action of fork re moved all 
but one bite of the rutabaga. He loved this boy, and he put the cold, 
poisonous mash into his own mouth and jerked it down his throat with a 
shudder. "Eat that last bite," he said,  "take one bite of the other, and you can 
have dessert." He stood up. "I will buy the dessert if necessary."  
260 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
As he passed Enid on his way to the kitchen, she flinched and leaned away.  
"Yes," he said into the phone.  
Through the receiver came the humidity and household clutter, the warmth 
and fuzziness, of Meisnerdom.  
"Al," Chuck said, "just looking in the paper here, you know, Erie Belt stock, 
uh. Five and five -eighths seems awfully low. You sure about this Midpac 
thing?"  
"Mr. Replogle rode the motor car with me out of Cleveland. He indicated that 
the Board of Managers is simply waiting for a final re port on track and 
structures. I'm going to give them that report on Monday."  
"Midpac's kept this very quiet."  
"Chuck, I  can't recommend any particular course of action, and you're right, 
there are some unanswered questions here —" 
"Al, Al," Chuck said. "You have a mighty conscience, and we all ap preciate 
that. I'll let you get back to your dinner."  
Alfred hung up hating Ch uck as he would have hated a girl he'd been 
undisciplined enough to have relations with. Chuck was a banker and a 
thriven You wanted to spend your innocence on someone worthy of it, and 
who better than a good neighbor, but no one could be worthy of it. The re was 
excrement all over his hands.  
"Gary: pineapple?" Enid said.  
"Yes, please!"  
The virtual disappearance of Chipper's root vegetable had made him a tad 
manic. Things were 1 -1-1-looking up! He expertly paved one quadrant of his 
plate with the remaining b ite of rutabaga, grading the vellow asphalt with his 
fork. Why dwell in the nasty reality of liver and >eet greens when there was 
constructable a future in which your father r.id gobbled these up, too? Bring 
on the cookies! sayeth Chipper. Bring on the Esk imo Pie!                  / 
Enid carried three empty plates into the kitchen.  
Alfred, by the phone, was studying the clock above the sink. The —~r.e was 
that malignant fiveishness to which the flu sufferer awakens  
261 
after late -afternoon fever dreams. A time shortly after five which was a 
mockery of five. To the face of clocks the relief of order —two hands pointing 
squarely at whole numbers —came only once an hour. As every other moment 
failed to square, so every moment  held the potential for fluish misery.  
And to suffer like this for no reason. To know there was no moral order in the 
flu, no justice in the juices of pain his brain produced. The world nothing but 
a materialization of blind, eternal Will.  
(Schopenhauer: No little part of the torment of existence is that Time is continually 
pressing upon us, never letting us catch our breath but always com ing after us, like 
a taskmaster with a whip.)  
"I guess you don't want pineapple," Enid said. "I guess you're buy ing yo ur 
own dessert."  
"Enid, drop it. I wish once in your life you would let something drop."  
Cradling the pineapple, she asked why Chuck had called.  
"We will talk about it later," Alfred said, returning to the dining room.  
"Daddy?" Chipper began.  
"Lad, I just did you a favor. Now you do me a favor and stop play ing with 
your food and finish your dinner. Right now. Do you under stand me? You 
will finish it right now, or there will be no dessert and no other privileges 
tonight or tomorrow night, and you will sit here until you do finish it."  
"Daddy, though, can you —?" 
"RIGHT NOW. DO YOU UNDERSTAND ME, OR DO YOU NEED A 
SPANKING?"  
Tonsils release an ammoniac mucus when serious tears gather be hind them. 
Chipper's mouth twisted this way and that. He saw the plate in front of him 
in a new light. It was as if the food were an unbearable companion whose 
company he had been sure that his connections higher up, the strings 
pullable on his behalf, would spare him. Now came the realization that he 
and the food were in it for  the long haul.  
Now he mourned the passing of his bacon, paltry though it had been, with a 
deep and true grief.  
2B2 
THE CORRECTIONS  
DU - be- 
?late cable  
i3ns Now  
: had  
Curiously, though, he didn't outright cry.  
Alfred retired to the basement with stamping and a slam.  
Gary sat very quietly multiplying small whole numbers in his head.  
Enid plunged a knife into the pineapple's jaundiced belly. She de cided that 
Chipper was exactly like his father —at once hungry and impossible to feed. 
He turned food into shame. To prepare a square meal and then to see it 
greeted with elaborate disgust, to see the boy actually gag on his breakfast 
oatmeal: this stuck in a mother's craw. All Chipper wanted was milk and 
cookies, milk a nd cookies. Pediatrician said: "Don't give in. He'll get hungry 
eventually and eat something else." So Enid tried to be patient, but Chipper 
sat down to lunch and declared: "This smells like vomit!" You could slap his 
wrist for saying it, but then he said it with his face, and you could spank him 
for making faces, but then he said it with his eyes, and there were limits to 
correction —no way, in the end, to penetrate behind the blue irises and 
eradicate a boy's disgust.  
Lately she had taken to feeding him gr illed cheese sandwiches all day long, 
holding back for dinner the yellow and leafy green vegetables required.for a 
balanced diet and letting Alfred fight her battles.  
There was something almost tasty and almost sexy in letting the an noying 
boy be punished  by her husband. In standing blamelessly aside while the boy 
suffered for having hurt her.  
What you discovered about yourself in raising children wasn't al ways 
agreeable or attractive.  
She carried two dishes of pineapple into the dining room. Chipper's he ad was 
bowed, but the son who loved to eat reached eagerly for his dish.  
Gary slurped and aerated, wordlessly consuming pineapple.  
The dogshit -yellow field of rutabaga; the liver warped by  frying and so unable 
to lie flush with the plate; the ball of woody beet leaves col lapsed and 
contorted but still entire, like a wetly compressed bird in an eggshell, or an 
ancient corpse folded over in a bog: the spatial relations imong these foods 
no longer seemed to Chipper haphazard but were irproaching permanence, 
finality.  
The foods receded, or a new melancholy shadowed them. Chipper  
•-IONS  
2B3  
became less immediately disgusted; he ceased even to think about eat ing. 
Deeper sources of refu sal were kicking in.  
Soon the table was cleared of everything but his place mat and his plate. The 
light grew harsher. He heard Gary and his mother convers ing on trivial topics 
as she washed and Gary dried. Then Gary's foot steps on the basement stairs. 
Metronomic thock of Ping -Pong ball. More desolate peals of large pots being 
handled and submerged.  
His mother reappeared. "Chipper, just eat that up. Be a big boy now."  
He had arrived in a place where she couldn't touch him. He felt nearly 
cheerful, all hea d, no emotion. Even his butt was numb from pressing on the 
chair.  
"Dad means for you to sit there till you eat that. Finish it up now. Then your 
whole evening's free."  
If his evening had been truly free he might have spent it entirely at a window 
watching Cindy Meisner.  
"Noun adjective," his mother said, "contraction possessive noun. Conjunction 
conjunction stressed pronoun counterfactual verb pro noun I'd just gobble 
that up and temporal adverb pronoun conditional auxiliary infinitive — " 
Peculiar how unco nstrained he felt to understand the words that were spoken 
to him. Peculiar his sense of freedom from even that minimal burden of 
decoding spoken English.  
She tormented him no further but went to the basement, where Alfred had 
shut himself inside his lab a nd Gary was amassing ("Thirty -seven, thirty -
eight") consecutive bounces on his paddle.  
"Tock tock?" she said, wagging her head in invitation.  
She was hampered by pregnancy or at least the idea of it, and Gary could 
have trounced her, but her pleasure at be ing played with was so extremely 
evident that he simply disengaged himself, mentally multi plying their scores 
or setting himself small challenges like returning the ball to alternating 
quadrants. Every night after dinner he honed this skill of enduring a dull 
thing that brought a parent pleasure. It seemed to him a lifesaving skill. He 
believed that terrible harm would come to him when he could no longer 
preserve his mother's illusions.  
264 
THE CORRECTIONS  
And she looked so vulnerable tonight. The exertions of dinner and dishes had 
relaxed her hair's rollered curls. Little blotches of sweat were blooming 
through the cotton bodice of her dress. Her hands had been in latex gloves 
and were as red as tongues.  
He sliced a winner down the line and past her, the ball running all the way to 
the shut door of the metallurgy lab. It bounced up and knocked on this door 
before subsiding. Enid pursued it carefully. What silence, what darkness, 
there was behind that door. A l seemed not to have a light on.  
There existed foods that even Gary hated —Brussels sprouts, boiled okra —and 
Chipper had watched his pragmatic sibling palm them and fling them into 
dense shrubbery from the back doorway, if it was sum mer, or secrete them 
on his person and dump them in the toilet, if it was winter. Now that Chipper 
was alone on the first floor he could easily have disappeared his liver and his 
beet greens. The difficulty: his father would think that he had eaten them, 
and eating them was exac tly what he was refusing now to do. Food on the 
plate was neces sary to prove refusal.  
He minutely peeled and scraped the flour crust off the top of the liver and ate 
it. This took ten minutes. The denuded surface of the liver was a thing you 
didn't want t o see.  
He unfolded the beet greens somewhat and rearranged them.  
He examined the weave of the place mat.  
He listened to the bouncing ball, his mother's exaggerated groans and her 
nerve -grating cries of encouragement ("Ooo, good one, Gary!"). Worse than 
spanking or even liver was the sound of someone else's Ping -Pong. Only 
silence was acceptable in its potential to be end less. The score in Ping -Pong 
bounced along toward twenty -one and then the game was over, and then two 
games were over, and then three were  over, and to the people inside the game 
this was all right because fun had been had, but to the boy at the table 
upstairs it was not all right. He'd involved himself in the sounds of the game, 
investing them with hope to the extent of wishing they might n ever stop. But 
they did stop, and he was still at the table, only it was half an hour later. The 
evening devouring itself in futility. Even at the age of seven Chipper intuited  
265 
that this feeling of futility would be a fixture of his life. A dull waiting and 
then a broken promise, a panicked realization of how late it was.  
This futility had let's call it a flavor.  
After he scratched his head or rubbed his nose his fingers harbored  
something. The smell of self.  
Or again, the taste of incipient tears.  
Imagine the olfactory nerves sampling themselves, receptors regis tering their 
own configuration.  
The taste of self -inflicted suffering, of an evening trashed in spite, brought 
curious satisfactions. Other people stopped being real enough to carry blame 
for how you felt. Only you and your refusal remained. And like self -pity, or 
like the blood that filled your mouth when a tooth was pulled —the salty ferric 
juices that you swallowed and a llowed your self to savor —refusal had a flavor 
for which a taste could be acquired.  
In the lab below the dining room Alfred sat with his head bowed in the 
darkness and his eyes closed. Interesting how eager he'd been to be alone, 
how hatefully clear he'd m ade this to everyone around him; and now, having 
finally closeted himself, he sat hoping that someone would come and disturb 
him. He wanted this someone to see how much he hurt. Though he was cold 
to her it seemed unfair that she was cold in turn to him: u nfair that she could 
happily play Ping -Pong, shuffle around outside his door, and never knock 
and ask how he was doing.  
Three common measures of a material's strength were its resistance to 
pressure, to tension, and to shearing.  
Every time his wife's foots teps approached the lab he braced himself to 
accept her comforts. Then he heard the game ending, and he thought surely 
she would take pity on him now. It was the one thing he asked of her, the one 
thing — 
(Schopenhauer: Woman pays the debt of life not by wh at she does, but by what she 
suffers; by the pains of childbearing and care for the child, and by submission to her 
husband, to whom she should be a patient and cheering com panion^)  
But no rescue was forthcoming. Through the closed door he heard her retre at 
to the laundry room. He heard the mild buzz of a trans - 
THE CORRECTIONS  
former, Gary playing with the O -gauge train beneath the Ping -Pong table.  
A fourth measure of strength, important to manufacturers of rail stock and 
machine parts, was hard ness.  
With unspeakable expenditure of will Alfred turned on a light and opened his 
lab notebook.  
Even the most extreme boredom had merciful limits. The dinner table, for 
example, possessed an underside that Chipper explored by resting his chin on 
the surfa ce and stretching his arms out below. At his farthest reach were 
baffles pierced by taut wire leading to pullable rings. Complicated 
intersections of roughly finished blocks and angles were punctuated, here 
and there, by deeply countersunk screws, little c ylin drical wells with scratchy 
turnings of wood fiber around their mouths, irresistible to the probing finger. 
Even more rewarding were the patches of booger he'd left behind during 
previous vigils. The dried patches had the texture of rice paper or fly w ings. 
They were agreeably dislodgable and pulverizable.  
The longer Chipper felt his little kingdom of the underside, the more 
reluctant he became to lay eyes on it. Instinctively he knew that the visible 
reality would be puny. He'd see crannies he hadn't y et dis covered with his 
fingers, and the mystery of the realms beyond his reach would be dispelled, 
the screw holes would lose their abstract sensuality and the boogers would 
shame him, and one evening, then, with nothing left to relish or discover, he 
just might die of boredom.  
Elective ignorance was a great survival skill, perhaps the greatest.  
Enid's alchemical lab beneath the kitchen contained a Maytag with a wringer 
that swung over it, twinned rubber rollers like enormous black lips. Bleach, 
bluing, di stilled water, starch. A bulky locomotive of an iron, its power cord 
clad in a patterned knit fabric. Mounds of white shirts in three sizes.  
To prepare a shirt for pressing she sprinkled it with water and left it rolled up 
in a towel. When it was thoroughl y redampened she ironed the collar first 
and then the shoulders, working down.  
During and after the Depression she'd learned many survival skills.  
267  
Her mother ran a boardinghouse in the basin between downtown St. Jude 
and the university. Enid had a gift for math, and so she not only washed 
sheets and cleaned toilets and served meals but also handled numbers for her 
mother. By the time she'd finished high school and the war had ended, she 
was keeping all the house's books, billing the board ers, and figuring the taxes. 
With the quarters and dollars she picked up on the side —wages from baby -
sitting, tips from college boys and other long -term boarders —she paid for 
classes at night school, inching to ward a degree in accounting which she 
hoped she w ould never have to use. Already two men in uniform had 
proposed to her, each of them a rather good dancer, but neither was clearly 
an earner and both still risked getting shot at. Her mother had married a man 
who didn't earn and died young. Avoiding such a  husband was a priority with 
Enid. She intended to be comfortable in life as well as happy.  
To the boardinghouse a few years after the war came a young steel engineer 
newly transferred to St. Jude to manage a foundry. He was a full -lipped 
thick -haired well -muscled boy in a man's shape and a man's suits. The suits 
were themselves luxuriantly pleated wool beauties. Once or twice every night, 
serving dinner at the big round table, Enid glanced over her shoulder and 
caught him looking, and made him blush. Al wa s Kansan. After two months 
he found courage to take her skating. They drank cocoa and he told her that 
human beings were born to suffer. He took her to a steel -company Christmas 
party and told her that the intelligent were doomed to be tormented by the 
stupid. He was a good dancer and a good earner, however, and she kissed 
him in the elevator. Soon they were engaged and they chastely rode a night 
train to McCook, Nebraska, to visit his aged parents. His father kept a slave 
whom he was married to.  
Cleaning A l's room in St. Jude she found a much -handled volume of 
Schopenhauer with certain passages underlined. For example: The pleasure in 
this world, it has been said, outweighs the pain; or, at any rate, there is an even 
balance between the two. If the reader w ishes to see shortly whether this 
statement is true, let him compare the respective feelings of two animals, one of 
which is engaged in eating the other,  
What to believe about Al Lambert? There were the old -man things  
2S8                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
he said about himself and the young -man way he looked. Enid had chosen to 
believe the promise of his looks. Life then became a matter of waiting for his 
personality to change.  
While she waited, she ironed twenty shirts a week, plus her own skirts and 
blous es. 
Nosed in around the buttons with the iron's tip. Flattened the wrin kles, 
worked out the kinks.  
Her life would have been easier if she hadn't loved him so much, but she 
couldn't help loving him. Just to look at him was to love him.  
Every day she endeav ored to cleanse the boys' diction, smooth out their 
manners, whiten their morals, brighten their attitudes, and every day she 
faced another pile of dirty crumpled laundry.  
Even Gary was anarchic sometimes. He liked best to send the elec tric engine 
barreli ng into curves and derail it, see the black chunk of metal skid 
awkwardly and roll and spark in frustration. Second best was to place plastic 
cows and cars on the rail and engineer little tragedies.  
What gave him the real techno boner, however, was a radio -controlled toy 
automobile, much advertised on television lately, that went anywhere. To 
avoid ambiguity he planned to make it the only item on his Christmas list.  
From the street, if you paid attention, you could see the light in the windows 
dimming as Ga ry's train or Enid's iron or Alfred's experiments drained power 
off the grid. But how lifeless the house looked otherwise. In the lighted 
houses of the Meisners, of the Schumperts and the Persons and the Roots, 
people were clearly at home —whole families gr ouped around tables, young 
heads bent over homework, dens aflicker with TV, toddlers careening, a 
grandparent testing a tea bag's virtue with a third soaking. These were 
spirited, unselfconscious houses.  
Whether anybody was home meant everything to a house . It was more than a 
major fact: it was the only fact.  
The family was the house's soul.  
The waking mind was like the light in a house.  
The soul was like the gopher in his hole.  
Consciousness was to brain as family was to house.  
Aristotle: Suppose the eye w ere an animal —sight would be its S(  
To understand the mind you pictured domestic activity, the hum of related 
lives on varied tracks, the hearth's fundamental glow. You spoke of 
"presence" and "clutter" and "occupation." Or, conversely, of "va cancy" and 
"shutting down." Of "disturbance."  
Maybe the futile light in a house with three people separately ab sorbed in the 
basement and only one upstairs, a little boy staring at a plate of cold food, 
was like the mind of a depressed person.  
Gary was the first to tire of the basement. He surfaced and skirted the too -
bright dining room, as if it held the victim of a sickening disfig urement, and 
went up to the second floor to brush his teeth.  
Enid followed soon with seven warm white shirts. She, too, skirte d the dining 
room. She reasoned that if the problem in the dining room was her 
responsibility then she was horrendously derelict in not resolv ing it, and a 
loving mother could never be so derelict, and she was a lov ing mother, so the 
responsibility must not have been hers. Eventually Alfred would surface and 
see what a beast he'd been and be very, very sorry. If he had the nerve to 
blame her for the problem, she could say: "You're the one who said he had to 
sit there till he ate it."  
While she ran a bath she tucked Gary into bed. "Always be my lit tle lion," she 
said.  
"OK."  
"Is he fewocious? Is he wicious? Is he my wicious wittle wion?"  
Gary didn't answer these questions. "Mom," he said. "Chipper is still at the 
table, and it's almost nine."  
"That's betwee n Dad and Chipper."  
"Mom? He really doesn't like those foods. He's not just pretend ing."  
"I'm so glad you're a good eater," Enid said.  
"Mom, it's not really fair."  
"Sweetie, this is a phase your brother's going through. It's wonder ful you're 
so concerned , though. It's wonderful to be so loving. Always be so loving."  
She hurried to stop the water and immerse herself.  
In a dark bedroom next door Chuck Meisner imagined,  going  
 
THE CORRECTIONS  
inside her, that Bea was Enid. As he chugged to ejacu lation he was trading.  
He wondered if any exchange had a market in Erie Belt options. Buy five 
thousand shares outright with thirty puts for a downside hedge. Or better, if 
someone offered him a rate, a hundred naked calls.  
She was pregnant and trading up in cup size, A to B and eventually even C, 
Chuck guessed, by the time the baby came. Like some munici pality's bond 
rating in a tailspin.  
One by one the lights of St. Jude were going out.  
And if you sat at the dinner table long enough, whether in punish ment or in 
refusal or simply in boredom, you never stopped sitting there. Some part of 
you sat there all your life.  
As if sustained and too -direct contact with time's raw passage could scar the 
nerves permanently, like staring at the sun.  
As if too -intimat e knowledge of any interior were necessarily harm ful 
knowledge. Were knowledge that could never be washed off.  
(How weary, how worn, a house lived in to excess.)  
Chipper heard things and saw things but they were all in his head. After three 
hours, the obj ects surrounding him were as drained of flavor as old bubble 
gum. His mental states were strong by comparison and overwhelmed them. It 
would have taken an effort of will, a reawaken ing, to summon the term "place 
mat" and apply it to the visual field that he had observed so intensely that its 
reality had dissolved in the observ ing, or to apply the word "furnace" to the 
rustle in the ducts which in its recurrence had assumed the character of an 
emotional state or an actor in his imagination, an embodiment o f Evil Time. 
The faint fluctuations in the light as someone ironed and someone played and 
someone ex perimented and the refrigerator cycled on and off had been part 
of the dream. This changefulness, though barely noticeable, had been a 
torment. But it had stopped now.  
Now only Alfred remained in the basement. He probed a gel of ferroacetates 
with the electrodes of an ammeter.  
A late frontier in metallurgy: custom -formation of metals at room 
temperature. The Grail was a substance which could be poured or  
its 
271 
molded but which after treatment (perhaps with an electrical current) had 
steel's superior strength and conductivity and resistance to fatigue. A 
substance easy like plastic and hard like metal.  
The problem was urgent. A cultural war was bei ng waged, and the forces of 
plastic were winning. Alfred had seen jam and jelly jars with plastic lids. Cars 
with plastic roofs.  
Unfortunately, metal in its free state —a nice steel stake or a solid brass 
candlestick —represented a high level of order, and N ature was slatternly and 
preferred disorder. The crumble of rust. The promiscuity of molecules in 
solution. The chaos of warm things. States of disorder were vastly more likely 
to arise spontaneously than were cubes of per fect iron. According to the 
Secon d Law of Thermodynamics, much work was required to resist this 
tyranny of the probable —to force the atoms of a metal to behave themselves.  
Alfred was sure that electricity was equal to this work. The current that came 
through the grid amounted to a borrowi ng of order from a distance. At power 
plants an organized piece of coal became a flatulence of useless warm gases; 
an elevated and self -possessed reservoir of water became entropic runoff 
wandering toward a delta. Such sacrifices of or der produced the use ful 
segregation of electrical charges that he put to work at home.  
He was seeking a material that could, in effect, electroplate itself. He was 
growing crystals in unusual materials in the presence of electric currents.  
It wasn't hard science but the brute  probabilism of trial and error, a groping 
for accidents that he might profit from. One college classmate of his had 
already made his first million with the results of a chance dis covery.  
That he might someday not have to worry about money: it was a dream  
identical to the dream of being comforted by a woman, truly comforted, when 
the misery overcame him.  
The dream of radical transformation: of one day waking up and finding 
himself a wholly different (more confident, more serene) kind of person, of 
escaping  that prison of the given, of feeling divinely capable.  
He had clays and gels of silicate. He had silicone putties. He had  
272  
THE CORRECTIONS  
slushy ferric salts succumbing to their own deliquescence. Ambivalent 
acetylacetonates and tetracarbonyls with low melting points. A chunk of 
gallium the size of a damson plum.  
The head chemist at the Midland Pacific, a Swiss Ph.D. bored into 
melancholy by  a million measurements of engine -oil viscosity and Brinell 
hardness, kept Alfred in supplies. Their superiors were aware of the 
arrangement —Alfred would never have risked getting caught in something 
underhanded —and it was informally understood that if he ever came up with 
a patentable process, the Midpac would get a share of any proceeds.  
Tonight something unusual was happening in the ferroacetate gel. His 
conductivity readings varied wildly, depending on where exactly he stuck the 
ammeter's probe. Thinkin g the probe might be dirty, he switched to a narrow 
needle with which he again poked the gel. He got a reading of no conductivity 
at all. Then he stuck the gel in a different place and got a high reading.  
What was going on?  
The question absorbed and comfor ted him and held the taskmaster at bay 
until, at ten o'clock, he extinguished the microscope's illuminator and wrote 
in his notebook: STAIN BLUE CHROMATE 2%. VERY VERY 
INTERESTING.  
The moment he stepped from the lab, exhaustion hammered him. He 
fumbled to secure the lock, his analytic fingers suddenly thick and stupid. He 
had boundless energy for work, but as soon as he quit he could barely stand 
up. 
His exhaustion deepened when he went upstairs. The kitchen and dining 
room were ablaze in light, and there a ppeared to be a small boy slumped over 
the dining -room table, his face on his place mat. The scene was so wrong, so 
sick with Revenge, that for a moment Alfred honestly thought the boy at the 
table was a ghost from his own child hood.  
He groped for switche s as if the light were a poison gas he had to stop the 
flow of.  
In less hazardous dimness he gathered the boy in his arms and ear ned him 
upstairs. The boy had the weave of the place mat engraved on  
one cheek. He murmured nonsense. He was half -awake but resisting full 
consciousness, keeping his head down as Alfred undressed him and found 
pajamas in the closet.  
Once the boy was in bed, in receipt of a kiss and fast asleep, an unguessable 
amount of time trickled through the legs of the bedside chair  in which Alfred 
sat conscious of little but the misery between his temples. His tiredness hurt 
so much it kept him awake.  
Or maybe he did sleep, for suddenly he was standing up and feeling 
marginally refreshed. He left Chipper's room and went to check on Gary.  
Just inside Gary's door, reeking of Elmer's glue, was a jail of Popsi -cle sticks. 
The jail bore no relation to the elaborate house of correction that Alfred had 
imagined. It was a crude roofless square, crudely bi sected. Its floor plan, in 
fact, was  exactly the binomial square he'd evoked before dinner.  
And this, this here in the jail's largest room, this bollixed knot of semisoft 
glue and broken Popsicle sticks was a —doll's wheelbarrow? Miniature step 
stool?  
Electric chair.  
In a mind -altering haze o f exhaustion Alfred knelt and examined it. He found 
himself susceptible to the poignancy of the chair's having been made —to the 
pathos of Gary's impulse to fashion an object and seek his father's approval —
and more disturbingly to the impossibility of squar ing this crude object with 
the precise mental picture of an electric chair that he had formed at the 
dinner table. Like an illogical woman in a dream who was both Enid and not 
Enid, the chair he'd pictured had been at once completely an electric chair 
and completely Popsicle sticks. It came to him now, more forcefully than 
ever, that maybe every "real" thing in the world was as shabbily protean, 
underneath, as this electric chair. Maybe his mind was even now doing to the 
seemingly real hardwood floor on whi ch he knelt exactly what it had done, 
hours earlier, to the unseen chair. Maybe a floor became truly a floor only in 
his mental reconstruction of it. The floor's nature was to some extent 
inarguable, of course; the wood definitely existed and had measurabl e 
properties. But there was a second floor, the floor as mirrored in his  
274                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
head, and he worried that the beleaguered "reality" that he chaifrpioned was 
not the reality of an actual floor in a actual bedroom but the reality of a floor 
in his head which was idealized and no more worthy, there fore, than one of 
Enid's silly fantasie s. 
The suspicion that everything was relative. That the "real" and "au thentic" 
might not be simply doomed but fictive to begin with. That his feeling of 
righteousness, of uniquely championing the real, was just a feeling. These 
were the suspicions that ha d lain in ambush in all those motel rooms. These 
were the deep terrors beneath the flimsy beds.  
And if the world refused to square with his version of reality then it was 
necessarily an uncaring world, a sour and sickening world, a penal colony, 
and he was  doomed to be violently lonely in it.  
He bowed his head at the thought of how much strength a man would need to 
survive an entire life so lonely.  
He returned the pitiful, unbalanced electric chair to the floor of the prison's 
largest room. As soon as he le t go of the chair, it fell on its side. Images of 
hammering the jail to bits passed through his head, flashes of hiked -up skirts 
and torn -down underpants, images of shredded bras and outthrust hips, but 
came to nothing.  
Gary was sleeping in perfect silence , the way his mother did. There was no 
hope that he'd forgotten his father's implicit promise to look at the jail after 
dinner. Gary never forgot anything.  
Still, I am doing my best, Alfred thought.  
Returning to the dining room, he noticed the change in th e food on Chipper's 
plate. The well -browned margins of the liver had been care fully pared off and 
eaten, as had every scrap of crust. There was evi dence as well that rutabaga 
had been swallowed; the small speck that remained was scored with tiny tine 
mar ks. And several beet greens had been dissected, the softer leaves removed 
and eaten, the woody reddish stems laid aside. It appeared that Chipper had 
taken the contractual one bite of each food after all, presumably at great 
personal cost, and had been put  to bed without being given the dessert he'd 
earned.  
On a November morning thirty -five years earlier Alfred had found a coyote's 
bloody foreleg in the teeth of a steel trap, evidence of certain desperate hours 
in the previous night.  
There came an upwelling of pain so intense that he had to clench his jaw and 
refer to his philosophy to prevent its turning into tears.  
(Schopenhauer: Only one consideration may serve to explain the suf ferings of 
animals: that the will to live, which unde rlies the entire world of phenomena, must 
in their case satisfy its cravings by feeding upon itself)  
He turned off the last lights downstairs, visited the bathroom, and put on 
fresh pajamas. He had to open his suitcase to retrieve his tooth brush.  
Into the  bed, the museum of antique transports, he slipped beside Enid, 
settling as close to the far edge as he could. She was asleep in her sleep -
feigning way. He looked once at the alarm clock, the radium jew elry on its 
two pointing hands —closer to twelve now t han to eleven — and shut his eyes.  
Came the question in a voice like noon: "What were you talking about with 
Chuck?"  
His exhaustion redoubled. With his closed eyes he saw beakers and probes 
and the trembling needle of the ammeter.  
"It sounded like the Erie Belt," Enid said. "Does Chuck know about that? Did 
you tell him?"  
"Enid, I am very tired."  
"I'm just surprised, that's all. Considering."  
"It was an accident and I regret it."  
"I just think it's interesting," Enid said, "that Chuck is allowed to make an 
investment that we're not allowed to make."  
"If Chuck chooses to take unfair advantage of other investors, that's his 
business."  
"A lot of Erie Belt shareholders would be happy to get five and three -quarters 
tomorrow. What's unfair about that?"  
Her words had  the sound of an argument rehearsed for hours, a grievance 
nursed in darkness.  
"Those shares will be worth nine and a half dollars three weeks from now," 
Alfred said. "I know it and most people don't. That's un fair."  
"You're smarter than other people," En id said, "and you did better  
276 
THE CORRECTIONS  
in school, and now you have a better job. That's 1 unfair, too, isn't it? 
Shouldn't you make yourself stupid, to be completely fair?"  
Chewing your own leg off was not an act to be undertaken lightly  or 
performed halfway. At what point and by what process did the coyote make 
the decision to sink its teeth into its own flesh? Presumably there first came a 
period of waiting and weighing. But after that?  
"I'm not going to argue with you," Alfred said. "S ince you are awake, 
however, I want to know why Chip wasn't put to bed."  
"You were the one who said he —" 
"You came upstairs long before I did. It was not my intention that he sit there 
for five hours. You're using him against me, and I don't care for it on e bit. He 
should have been put to bed at eight."  
Enid simmered in her wrongness.  
"Can we agree that this will not happen again?" Alfred said.  
"We can agree."  
"Well then. Let's sleep."  
When it was very, very dark in the house, the unborn child could see as 
clearly as anyone. She had ears and eyes, fingers and a forebrain and a 
cerebellum, and she floated in a central place. She already knew the main 
hungers. Day after day the mother walk ed around in a stew of desire and 
guilt, and now the object of the mother's desire lay three feet away from her. 
Everything in the mother was poised to melt and shut down at a loving touch 
anywhere on her body.  
There was a lot of breathing going on. A lot of breathing but no touching.  
Sleep eluded even Alfred. Each sinusy gasp of Enid's seemed to pierce his ear 
the instant he was poised afresh to drop off.  
After an interval that he judged to have lasted twenty minutes, the bed began 
to shake with poorly rei ned sobs.  
He broke his silence, almost wailing: "What is it now?"  
"Nothing."  
"Enid, it is very, very late, and the alarm is set for six, and I am bone -weary."  
She wept stormily. "You never kissed me goodbye!"  
277  
"I'm aware of that."  
"Well, don't  I have a right? A husband leaves his wife at home alone for two 
weeks?"  
"This is water under the bridge. And frankly I've endured a lot worse."  
"And then he comes home and doesn't even say hello? He just attacks me?"  
"Enid, I have had a terrible week."  
"And leaves the dinner table before dinner's over?"  
"A terrible week and I am extraordinarily tired —" 
"And locks himself in the basement for five hours? Even though he's 
supposedly very tired?"  
"If you had had the week I had —" 
"You didn 't kiss me goodbye."  
"Grow up! For God's sake! Grow up!"  
"Keep your voice down!"  
(Keep your voice down or the baby might hear.)  
(Indeed did hear and was soaking up every word.)  
"Do you think I was on a pleasure cruise?" Alfred demanded in a whisper. 
"Everything I do I do for y ou and the boys. It's been two weeks since I had a 
minute to myself. I believe I'm entitled to a few hours in the laboratory. You 
v/ould not understand it, and you would not believe me if you did, but I have 
found something very interesting."  
"Oh, very int eresting," Enid said. Hardly the first time she'd heard this.  
"Well it is very interesting."  
"Something with commercial applications?"  
"You never know. Look what happened to Jack Callahan. This could end up 
paying for the boys' education."  
"I thought you said Jack Callahan's discovery was an accident."  
"My God, listen to yourself. You tell me Tm negative, but when it's work that 
matters to me, who's negative?"  
"I just don't understand why you won't even consider —" 
"Enough."  
"If the object is  to make money —" 
278                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
"Enough. Enough! I don't give a damn what other people do. I am not that 
kind of person."  
Twice in church the previous Sunday Enid had turned her head and caught 
Chuck Meisner staring. She was a little fuller in the bust than usual, probably 
that was all. But Chuck had blushed both times.  
"What is the reason you're so cold to me?" she said.  
"There are reasons," Alfred said, "but I will not tell you."  
"Why are you so unhappy? Why won't you tell me?"  
"I will go to the grave before I tell you. To the grave."  
"Oh, oh, oh!"  
This was a bad husband she had landed, a bad, bad, bad husband who would 
neve r give her what she needed. Anything that might have satisfied her he 
found a reason to withhold.  
And so she lay, a Tantala, beside the inert illusion of a feast. The merest 
finger anywhere would have. To say nothing of his split -plum lips. But he was 
usel ess. A wad of money stashed in a mattress and moldering and devaluing 
was what he was. A depression in the heartland had shriveled him the way it 
had shriveled her mother, who didn't understand that interest -bearing bank 
accounts were federally in sured no w, or that blue -chip stocks held for the 
long term with rein vested dividends might help provide for her old age. He 
was a bad investor.  
But she was not. She'd even been known, when a room was very dark, to take 
a real risk or two, and she took one now. Ro lled over and tickled his thigh 
with breasts that a certain neighbor had admired. Rested her cheek on her 
husband's ribs. She could feel him waiting for her to go away, but first she 
had to stroke the plain of his muscled belly, hover -gliding, touching hai r but 
no skin. To her mild surprise she felt his his his coming to life at the approach 
of her fingers. His groin tried to dodge her but the fingers were more nimble. 
She could feel him growing to manhood through the fly of his pajamas, and in 
an access of  pent -up hunger she did a thing he'd never let her do before. She 
bent sideways and took it into her mouth. It: the rapidly growing boy, the 
faintly urinary dumpling. In the skill of her hands and the swelling of her 
breasts she felt desirable and capable of anything.  
279 
The man beneath her shook with resistance. She freed her mouth 
momentarily. "Al? Sweetie?"  
"Enid. What are you —?" 
Again her open mouth descended on the cylinder of flesh. She held still for a 
moment, long enough to feel the flesh  harden pulse by pulse against her 
palate. Then she raised her head. "We could have a little extra money in the 
bank —you think? Take the boys to Disneyland. You think?"  
Back under she went. Tongue and penis were approaching an un derstanding, 
and he tasted  like the inside of her mouth now. Like a chore and all the word 
implied. Perhaps involuntarily he kneed her in the ribs and she shifted, still 
feeling desirable. She stuffed her mouth and the top of her throat. Surfaced 
for air and took another big gulp.  
"Even just to invest two thousand," she murmured. "With a four -dollar 
differential —ack!"  
Alfred had come to his senses and forced the succubus away from him.  
(Schopenhauer: The people who make money are men, not women; and from this it 
follows that women a re neither justified in having unconditional possession of it, nor 
fit persons to be entrusted with its administration.)  
The succubus reached for him again but he grabbed her wrist and with his 
other hand pulled her nightgown up.  
Maybe the pleasures of a s wing set, likewise of sky - and scuba div ing, were 
tastes from a time when the uterus held you harmless from the claims of up 
and down. A time when you hadn't acquired the mechanics, even, to 
experience vertigo. Still luxuriated safely in a warm inland sea . 
Only this tumble was scary, this tumble came accompanied by a rush of 
bloodborne adrenaline, as the mother appeared to be in some dis tress — 
"Al, not sure it's a good idea, isn't, I don't think —" 
"The book says there is nothing wrong —" 
"Uneasy about this, though. Ooo. Really. Al?"  
He was a man having lawful sexual intercourse with his lawful wife.  
"Al, though, maybe not. So."  
280                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
r 
Fighting the image of the leotarded teenaged TWAT. And all the other 
CUNTS with their TITS and their ASSES that a man might want to FUCK, 
fighting it although the room was very dark and much was allowed in the 
dark.  
"Oh, I'm so unhappy about this!" Enid quietly wailed.  
Worst was the image of the little girl curled up inside her, a girl not much 
larger than a large bug but already a witness to such harm. Wit ness to a tautly 
engorged little brain that di pped in and out beyond the cervix and then, with 
a quick double spasm that could hardly be consid ered adequate warning, spat 
thick alkaline webs of spunk into her pri vate room. Not even born and 
already drenched in sticky knowledge.  
Alfred lay catching h is breath and repenting his defiling of the baby. A last 
child was a last opportunity to learn from one's mistakes and make 
corrections, and he resolved to seize this opportunity. From the day she was 
born he would treat her more gently than he'd treated G ary or Chipper. Relax 
the law for her, indulge her outright, even, and never once force her to sit at 
the table after everyone was gone.  
But he'd squirted such filth on her when she was helpless. She'd witnessed 
such scenes of marriage, and so of course, w hen she was older, she betrayed 
him.  
What made correction possible also doomed it.  
The sensitive probe that had given him readings at the top end of the red 
zone now read zero. He pulled away and squared his shoulders to his wife. 
Under the spell of the se xual instinct (as Arthur Schopen hauer called it) he'd 
lost sight of how cruelly soon he had to shave and catch the train, but now the 
instinct was discharged and consciousness of the remaining night's brevity 
weighed on his chest like #140 rail stock, and  Enid had begun to cry again, as 
wives did when the hour was psychotically late and tampering with the alarm 
clock was not an op tion. Years ago, when they were first married, she'd 
sometimes cried in the wee hours, but then Alfred had felt such gratitude for 
the pleasure he'd stolen and the stabbing she'd endured that he never failed 
to ask why she was crying.  
Tonight, notably, he felt neither gratitude nor the remotest obliga tion to quiz 
her. He felt sleepy.  
281 
Why did wives choose night to cr y in? Crying' at night was all very well if you 
didn't have to catch a train to work in four hours and if you hadn't, moments 
ago, committed a defilement in pursuit of a satisfac tion whose importance 
now entirely escaped you.  
Maybe it took all this —ten ni ghts of wakefulness in bad motels followed by an 
evening on the emotional roller coaster and finally the run -outside -and-put-
a-bullet -through -the-roof -of-your -mouth sucking and mewling noises of a 
wife trying to cry herself to sleep at two in the goddamned  morning —to open 
his eyes to the fact that (a) sleep was a woman and (b) hers were comforts 
that he was under no obligation to refuse.  
For a man who all his life had fought off extracurricular napping like any 
other unwholesome delight, the discovery was l ife-altering —no less mo -
mentous in its way than his discovery, hours earlier, of electrical anisotro -
pism in a gel of networked ferroacetates. More than thirty years would pass 
before the discovery in die basement bore financial fruit; the discovery in the  
bedroom made existence chez Lambert more bearable immediately.  
A Pax Somnis is descended on the household. Alfred's new lover soothed 
whatever beast was left in him. How much easier than raging or sulking he 
found it to simply close his eyes. Soon everybo dy under stood that he had an 
invisible mistress whom he entertained in the fam ily room on Saturday 
afternoon when his work week at the Midpac ended, a mistress he took along 
with him on every business trip and fell into the arms of in beds that no 
longer  seemed uncomfortable in motel rooms that no longer seemed so noisy, 
a mistress he never failed to visit in the course of an evening's paperwork, a 
mistress with whom he shared a travel pillow after lunch on family summer 
trips while Enid lurchingly pilote d the car and the kids in the back seat 
hushed. Sleep was the ideally work -compatible girl he ought to have married 
in the first place. Perfectly submissive, infinitely forgiving, and so respectable 
you could take her to church and the symphony and the St.  Jude Reper tory 
Theater. She never kept him awake with her tears. She demanded nothing 
and in return for nothing gave him everything he needed to do a long day's 
work. There was no mess in their affair, no romantic oscu lation, no leakages 
or secretions, no shame. He could cheat on Enid in  
282 
 
Enid's own bed without giving her a shred of legally admissible proof, and as 
long as he kept the affair private to the extent of not dozing at dinner parties 
Enid tolerated it, as sensible wives had always done, and so it was an 
infidelity for which as th e decades passed there never seemed to come a 
reckoning . . .  
"Psst! Asshole!"  
With a jolt Alfred awakened to the tremor and slow pitching of the Gunnar 
Myrdal. Someone else was in the stateroom?  
"Asshole!"  
"'Who's there?" he asked half in challenge, half in fear.  
Thin Scandinavian blankets fell away as he sat up and peered into the 
semidarkness, straining to hear past the boundaries of his self. The partially 
deaf know like cellmates the frequencies at which their heads ring. His oldest 
companion was a con tralto like a pipe organ's middle A, a clarion blare 
vaguely localized in his left ear. He'd known this tone, at growing volumes, 
for thirty years; it was such a fixture that it seemed it should outlive him. It 
had the pristine meaninglessness of eternal o r infinite things. Was as real as a 
heartbeat but corresponded to no real thing outside him. Was a sound that 
nothing made.  
Underneath it the fainter and more fugitive tones were active. Cirrus -like 
clusterings of very high frequencies off in deep stratos phere behind his ears. 
Meandering notes of almost ghostly faintness, as from a remote calliope. A 
jangly set of mid -range tones that waxed and waned like crickets in the center 
of his skull. A low, almost rumbling drone like a dilution of a diesel engine's  
blanket alldeafeningness, a sound he'd never quite believed was real —i.e., 
unreal —until he'd retired from the Midpac and lost touch with locomotives. 
These were the sounds his brain both created and listened to, was friendly 
with.  
Outside of himself he co uld hear the psh, psh of two hands gently swinging 
on their hinges in the sheets.  
And the mysterious rush of water ail around him, in the Gunnar Myrdal's 
secret capillaries.  
And someone snickering down in the dubious space below the hori zon of the 
bedding . 
 
 
And the alarm clock pinching off each tick. It was' three in the morning and 
his mistress had abandoned him. Now, when he needed her comforts more 
than ever, she went off whoring with younger sleep ers. For thirty years she'd 
obliged  him, spread her arms and opened her legs every night at ten -fifteen. 
She'd been the nook he sought, the womb. He could still find her in the 
afternoon or early evening, but not in a bed at night. As soon as he lay down 
he groped in the sheets and sometime s for a few hours found some bony 
extremity of hers to clutch. But reliably at one or two or three she vanished 
beyond any pretending that she still belonged to him.  
He peered fearfully across the rust -orange carpeting to the Nordic blond 
wood lines of Eni d's bed. Enid appeared to be dead.  
The rushing water in the million pipes.  
And the tremor, he had a guess about this tremor. That it came from the 
engines, that when you built a luxury cruise ship you damped or masked 
every sound the engines made, one afte r another, right down to the lowest 
audible frequency and even lower, but you couldn't go all the way to zero. You 
were left with this subaudible two -hertz shaking, the irreducible remainder 
and reminder of a silence imposed on some thing powerful.  
A small  animal, a mouse, scurried in the layered shadows at the foot of Enid's 
bed. For a moment it seemed to Alfred that the whole floor consisted of 
scurrying corpuscles. Then the mice resolved themselves into a single more 
forward mouse, horrible mouse, squish able pellets of excreta, habits of 
gnawing, heedless peeings — 
"Asshole, asshole!" the visitor taunted, stepping from the darkness into a 
bedside dusk.  
With dismay Alfred recognized the visitor. First he saw the drop -ping's 
slumped outline and then he caugh t a whiff of bacterial decay. This was not a 
mouse. This was the turd.  
"Urine trouble now, he he!" the turd said.  
It was a sociopathic turd, a loose stool, a motormouth. It had intro duced 
itself to Alfred the night before and so agitated him that only Enid's 
ministrations, a blaze of electric light and Enid's soothing touch on his 
shoulder, had saved the night.  
284                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
"Leave!" Alfred commanded sternly.  
But the turd scurried up the side of the clean Nordic bed and relaxed like a 
Brie, or a leafy and manure -smelling Cabrales, on the covers. "Splat cha nce of 
that, fella." And dissolved, literally, in a gale of hilarious fart sounds.  
To fear encountering the turd on his pillow was to summon the turd to the 
pillow, where it flopped in postures of glistening well -being.  
"Get away, get away," Alfred said, planting an elbow in the carpet ing as he 
exited the bed headfirst.  
"No way, Jose," the turd said. "First I'm gonna get in your clothes."  
"No!"  
"Sure am, fella. Gonna get in your clothes and touch the uphol stery. Gonna 
smear and leave a trail. Gonna stink so bad."  
"Why? Why? Why would you do such a thing?"  
"Because it's right for me," the turd croaked. "It's who I am. Put somebody 
else's comfort ahead of my own? Go hop in a toilet to spare somebody else's 
feelings? That's  the kinda thing you do, fella. You got everything bass 
ackwards. And look where it's landed you."  
"Other people ought to have more consideration."  
"You oughtta have less. Me personally, I am opposed to all stric tures. If you 
feel it, let it rip. If you w ant it, go for it. Dude's gotta put his own interests 
first."  
"Civilization depends upon restraint," Alfred said.  
"Civilization? Overrated. I ask you what's it ever done for me? Flushed me 
down the toilet! Treated me like shit!"  
"But that's what you are," Alfred pleaded, hoping the turd might see the logic. 
"That's what a toilet is for."  
"Who you calling shit here, asshole? I got the same rights as every body else, 
don't I? Life, liberty, the pussuit of hotpussyness? That's what it says in the 
Constitution of the You Nighted —" 
"That's not right," Alfred said. "You're thinking of the Declaration of 
Independence."  
"Some old yellow piece a paper somewhere, what the ratass fuck do I care 
what exact paper? Tightasses like you been correcting every fuck ing word 
outta my mouth since I was yay big. You and all the consti - 
285 
pated fascist schoolteachers and Nazi cops. For all I care the words are 
printed on a piece of fucking toilet paper. / say it's a free country, / am in the 
majority, and you, fella, a re a minority. And so fuck you."  
The turd had an attitude, a tone of voice, that Alfred found eerily familiar but 
couldn't quite place. It began to roll and tumble on his pil low, spreading a 
shiny greenish -brown film with little lumps and fibers in it, le aving white 
creases and hollows where the fabric was bunched. Alfred, on the floor by the 
bed, covered his nose and mouth with his hands to mitigate the stench and 
horror.  
Then the turd ran up the leg of his pajamas. He felt its tickling mouselike 
feet.  
"Enid!" he called with all the strength he had.  
The turd was somewhere in the neighborhood of his upper thighs. Struggling 
to bend his rigid legs and hook his semifunctional thumbs on the waistband, 
he pulled the pajamas down to trap the turd inside the fabr ic. He suddenly 
understood that the turd was an escaped con vict, a piece of human refuse 
that belonged in jail. That this was what jail was for: people who believed that 
they, rather than society, made the rules. And if jail did not deter them, they 
deser ved death! Death! Draw ing strength from his rage, Alfred succeeded in 
pulling the ball of paja mas from his feet, and with oscillating arms he 
wrestled the ball to the carpeting, hammering it with his forearms, and then 
wedged it deep between the firm Nor dic mattress and the Nordic box spring.  
He knelt, catching his breath, in his pajama top and adult diaper.  
Enid continued to sleep. Something distinctly fairy -tale-like in her attitude 
tonight.  
"Phlblaaatth!" the turd taunted. It had reappeared on the wall  above Alfred's 
bed and hung precariously, as if flung there, beside a framed etching of the 
Oslo waterfront.  
"God damn you!" Alfred said. "You belong in jail!"  
The turd wheezed with laughter as it slid very slowly down the wall, its 
viscous pseudopods thr eatening to drip on the sheets below. "Seems to me," 
it said, "you anal retentive type personalities want everything in jail. Like, 
little kids, bad news, man, they pull your tchotchkes off your shelves, they 
drop food on the carpet, they cry in theaters, they miss the  
286                                                                                                                 THE CORRECTIONS  
pot. Put 'em in the slammer! And Polynesians, man, they track sand in i lie 
house, get fish juice on the furniture, and all those pubescent chick -ies with 
their honkers exposed? Jail 'em! And how about ten to twenty, while we're at 
it, for every horny little teenager, I mean talk about inso lence, tal k about no 
restraint. And Negroes (sore topic, Fred?), I'm 11 caring rambunctious 
shouting and interesting grammar, I'm smelling licjuor of the malt variety 
and sweat that's very rich and scalpy, and all that dancing and whoopee -
making and singers that coo  like body parts wetted with saliva and special 
jellies: what's a jail for if not to toss a Negro in it? And your Caribbeans with 
their spliffs and their potbelly toddlers and their like daily barbecues and 
ratborne hanta viruses and sugary drinks with pig  blood at the bottom? Slam 
the cell door, eat the key. And the Chinese, man, those creepy -ass weird -
name vegetables like homegrown dildos somebody forgot to wash after using, 
one-dollah, onc -dollah, and those slimy carps and skinned -alive songbirds, 
and ro me on, like, puppy -dog soup and pooty -tat dumplings and female in -
latits are national delicacies, and pork bung, by which we're referring IKTC to 
the anus of a swine, presumably a sort of chewy and bristly type Hem, pork 
bung's a thing Chinks pay money for  to eat? What say we just nuke all billion 
point two of 'em, hey? Clean that part of the world ///» already. And let's not 
forget about women generally, nothing but a trail of Kleenexes and Tampaxes 
everywhere they go. And your fairies with their doctor's -office lubricants, and 
your Mediterraneans with their whiskers and their garlic, and your French 
with their garter belts .mil raunchy cheeses, and your blue -collar ball -
scratchers with their hot rods and beer belches, and your Jews with their 
circumcised p utzes and j'Hillc fish like pickled turds, and your Wasps with 
their Cigarette boats iiiid runny -assed polo horses and go -to-hell cigars? Hey, 
funny thing, I'Yi'd, the only people that don't belong in your jail are upper -
middle -clnss northern European men.  And you're on my case for wanting 
things my way?"  
'What will it take to make you leave this room?" Alfred said.  
"I ,oosen up the old sphincter, fella. Let it fly."  
"I will never!"  
"In that case I might pay a visit to your shaving kit. I lave me a little  
287 
episode o' diarrhea on your toothbrush. Drop a couple nice globbets in your 
shave cream and tomorrow a.m. you can lather up a rich brown foam —" 
"Enid," Alfred said in a strained voice, not taking his eyes off the crafty turd, 
"I am having diff iculties. I would appreciate your assis tance."  
His voice ought to have awakened her, but her sleep was Snow White -like in 
its depth.  
"Enid dahling" the turd mocked in a David Niven accent, "I should most 
appreciate some assistance at your earliest possibl e convenience."  
Unconfirmed reports from nerves in the small of Alfred's back and behind his 
knees indicated that additional turd units were in the vicin ity. Turdish rebels 
snuffling stealthily about, spending themselves in trails of fetor.  
"Food and puss y, fella," said the leader of the turds, now barely clinging to 
the wall by one pseudopod of fecal mousse, "is what it all comes down to. 
Everything else, and I say this in all modesty, is pure shit."  
Then the pseudopod ruptured and the leader of the turds —leaving behind on 
the wall a small clump of putrescence —plunged with a cry of glee onto a bed 
that belonged to Nordic Pleasurelines and was due to be made in a few hours 
by a lovely young Finnish woman. Imagining this clean, pleasant 
housekeeper finding l umps of personal excrement spat tered on the 
bedspread was almost more than Alfred could bear.  
His peripheral vision was alive with writhing stool now. He had to hold 
things together, hold things together. Suspecting that a leak in the toilet 
might be the source of his trouble, he made his way on hands and knees into 
the bathroom and kicked the door shut behind him. Rotated with relative 
ease on the smooth tiles. Braced his back against the door and pushed his feet 
against the sink opposite him. He laughed for a mo ment at the absurdity of 
his situation. Here he was, an American execu tive sitting in diapers on the 
floor of a floating bathroom under siege by a squadron of feces. A person got 
the strangest notions late at night.  
The light was better in the ba throom. There was a science of clean liness, a 
science of looks, a science even of excretion as evidenced by ilu - 
288                                                                                                                 THE CORRECTIOHS  
 
outsized Swiss porcelain eggcup of a toilet, a regally pedestaled thing with 
finely knurled levers of control. In these more congenial surround ings Alfred 
was able to collect himself to the point of understanding i hat the turdish 
rebels were figments, t hat to some extent he had been dreaming, and that the 
source of his anxiety was simply a drainage problem.  
Unfortunately, operations were shut down for the night. There was no way to 
have a look personally at the rupture, nor any way to put a plumber's sna ke 
or video cam down there. Highly unlikely as well that a contractor could get a 
rig out to the site under conditions like these. Al -I'rcd wasn't even sure he 
could pinpoint his location on a map himself.  
There was nothing for it but to wait until morning . Absent a full ••olution, 
two half -solutions were better than no solution at all. You tackled the 
problem with whatever you had in hand.  
Couple of extra diapers: that ought to hold for a few hours. And IUTC were the 
diapers, right by the toilet in a bag.  
It was nearly four o'clock. There would be hell to pay if the district manager 
wasn't at his desk by seven. Alfred couldn't recollect the fel low's exact name, 
not that it mattered. Just call the office and whoever picked up the phone.  
It was characteristic of the modern world, though, wasn't it, how slippery 
they made the goddamned tape on the diapers.  
"Would you look at that," he said, hoping to pass off as philosophi - 
•  il  amusement his rage with a treacherous modernity. The adhesiv e strips 
might as well have been covered with Teflon. Between his dry  
I in and his shakes, peeling the backing off a strip was like picking up a 
marble with two peacock feathers.  
"Well, for goodness' sake."  
I Ic persisted in the attempt for five minutes and another five min -UtCS. I Ic 
simply couldn't get the backing off.  
"Well, for goodness' sake."  
< .1 inning at his own incapacity. Grinning in frustration and the  
• • • i win -lining sense of being watched.  
"Well, for goodness' sake," he said once more. This phrase often proved 
useful in dissipating the shaim - ofsniall failures.  
289 
How changeful a room was in the night! By the time Alfred had given up on 
the adhesive strips and simply yanked a third diaper up his thigh as far as it 
would go, which regrettably wasn't far, he was no longer in the same 
bathroom. The light had a new clinical intensity; he felt the heavy hand of a 
more extremely late hour.  
"Enid!" he called. "Can you help me?"  
With fifty y ears of experience as an engineer he could see at a glance that the 
emergency contractor had botched the job. One of the diapers was twisted 
nearly inside out and a second had a mildly spastic leg sticking through two 
of its plies, leaving most of its abso rptive capacity unrealized in a folded 
mass, its adhesive stickers adhering to nothing. Alfred shook his head. He 
couldn't blame the contractor. The fault was his own. Never should have 
undertaken a job like this under conditions like these. Poor judgment on his 
part. Trying to do damage control, blundering around in the dark, often 
created more problems than it solved.  
"Yes, now we are in a fine mess," he said with a bitter smile.  
And could this be liquid on the floor. Oh my Lord, there appeared to be some  
liquid on the floor.  
Also liquid running in the Gunnar MyrdaVs myriad pipes.  
"Enid, please, for God's sake. I am asking you for help."  
No answer from the district office. Some kind of vacation every body was on. 
Something about the color of a fall.  
Liquid  on the floor! Liquid on the floor!  
So all right, though, they paid him to take responsibility. They paid him to 
make the hard calls.  
He took a deep, bolstering breath.  
In a crisis like this the first order of business was obviously to clear a path for 
the runoff. Forget about track repair, first you had to have a gradient or you 
risked a really major washout.  
He noted grimly that he had nothing like a surveyor's transit, not even a 
simple plumb line. He'd have to eyeball it.  
How the hell had he got strande d out here, anyway? Probably not even five in 
the morning yet.  
290                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
"Remind me to call the district manager at seven," h e said.  
Somewhere, of course, a dispatcher had to be on duty. But then the problem 
was to find a telephone, and here a curious reluctance to raise his eyes above 
the level of the toilet made itself felt. Conditions in these parts were 
impossible. It could be midmorning by the time he found a lelephone. And by 
that point.  
"Uh! Such a lot of work," he said.  
There appeared to be a slight depression in the shower stall. Yes, in fact, a 
preexisting culvert, maybe some old DOT road -building project that never 
got off the ground, maybe the Army Corps was involved somehow. One of 
those midnight serendipities: a real culvert. Still, he was looking at a hell of 
an engineering problem to relocate the opera -lion to take advantage of the 
culvert.  
"Not much choice, though , I'm afraid."  
Might as well get at it. He wasn't getting any less tired. Think of i lie Dutch 
with their Delta Project. Forty years of battling the sea. Put i hings in 
perspective a little —one bad night. He'd endured worse.  
Try to build some redundancy into the fix, that was the plan. No way he'd 
trust one little culvert to handle all the runoff. There could be i backup 
farther down the line.  
"And then we're in trouble," he said. "Then we are in real trouble."  
Could be a hell  of a lot worse, in fact. They were lucky an engineer was right 
on site when the water broke through. Imagine if he hadn't I" en here, what a 
mess.  
"(lould have been a real disaster."  
I'irst order of business was to slap some sort of temporary patch on ili i- leak, 
then tackle the logistical nightmare of rerouting the whole op era I ion over 
the culvert, and then hope to hold things together until the sun came up.  
"And see what we got."  
In the faulty light he saw the liquid running one way across the Hiioi a nd 
then reversing itself slowly, as if the horizontal had lost its mind.  
"Knid!" lu - called with little hope as he commenced the sick -making  
291 
work of stopping the leakage and getting himself back on track, and the ship 
sailed on.  
Thanks to Asian® —and to young Dr. Hibbard, an outstanding, high -caliber 
young man —Enid was having her first solid night's sleep in many months.  
There were a thousand things she wanted from life, and since few were 
available at home with Alfred in St. Jude,  she had forcibly chan neled all her 
wanting into the numbered days, the mayfly lifetime, that the luxury cruise 
would last. For months the cruise had been her mind's safe parking space, the 
future that made her present bearable, and after her afternoon in  New York 
had proved deficient in the fun department, she boarded the Gunnar Myrdal 
with her hungers redoubled.  
Fun was being had buoyantly on every deck by cliques of seniors enjoying 
their retirement the way she wished Alfred would enjoy his. Although No rdic 
Pleasurelines was emphatically not a discount line, this cruise had been 
booked almost entirely by large groups such as the University of Rhode 
Island Alumni Association, American Hadassah of Chevy Chase (MD), the 
85th Airborne ("Sky Devil") Division Reunion, and the Dade County (FL) 
Duplicate Bridge League, Senior Flight. Widows in excellent health guided 
one another by the elbow to special mustering places where name tags and 
information packets were dis tributed and the preferred token of mutual 
recognition was the glass -shattering scream. Already seniors intent on 
savoring every minute of precious cruise time were drinking the frozen 
cocktail du jour, a Lingonberry Lapp Frappe, from schooners that took two 
hands to handle safely. Others crowded the rails of lower decks, the ones 
sheltered from the rain, and scanned Manhattan for a face to wave goodbye 
to. A combo in the Abba Show Lounge was playing heavy -metal polka.  
While Alfred had a final pre -dinner session in the bathroom, his third session 
insid e an hour, Enid sat in the "B" Deck lounge and lis tened to the slow 
plant -and-drag of someone's walker -aided progress across the "A" Deck 
lounge above her.  
Apparently the Duplicate League's cruise uniform  was a T -shiri  
292                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
with the text: OLD BRIDGE PLAYERS NEVER DIE, THEY JUST LOSE THEIR 
FINESSE . Enid felt the joke did not bear heavy repetition.  
She saw retirees running,  actually lifting their feet off the ground, in the direction 
of the Lingonberry Lapp Frappe.  
"Of course," she murmured, reflecting on how old everyone was, "I suppose who 
else could afford a cruise like this?"  
The seeming dachshund that a man was pulling by a leash turned out to be a tank 
of oxygen mounted on roller -skate wheels and dressed in a pet sweater.  
A very fat man walked by in a T -shirt that said TITANIC: THE BODY. You'd spent 
a lifetime being waited for impatiently and now your impatient husband' s 
minimum stay in a bathroom was fifteen minutes. OLD UROLOGISTS NEVER 
DIE, THEY JUST PETER OUT. Even on nights with a casual dress code, such as 
tonight, T -shirts were officially discouraged. Enid had put on a wool suit and 
asked Al -I red to wear a tie, a lthough given his handling of a soup spoon lately his 
neckties were little more than cannon fodder on dinner's front line. She'd made 
him pack a dozen. She was acutely conscious that Nordic I'leasurelines was 
deluxe. She expected —and had paid for, in part with IHT own money —elegance. 
Each T -shirt she saw was a specific small Sampling of her fantasy and, hence, 
pleasure.  
It rankled her that people richer than she were so often less worthy .mil 
attractive. More slobbish and louty. Comfort could be found in be ing poorer than 
people who were smart and beautiful. But to be less illlucnt than these T -shirted, 
joke -cracking fatsos — 
"I am ready," Alfred announced, appearing in the lounge. He took Knid s hand for 
the ascent by elevator to the Soren Kierkegaard Dining  Ivonm. I lolding his hand 
she felt married and, to that extent, grounded in I he 1 universe and reconciled to 
old age, but she couldn't help thinking Imw dearly she would have treasured 
holding his hand in the decades uhrn he'd stridden everywhere a pace o r two 
ahead of her. His hand " r. needy and subdued now. Even tremors of his that 
looked violent |nuvcd KI be featherweight in feel. She could sense the hand's 
readiness i" i (Mime us paddling as soon ;is ii was released, however.  
Sudi travelers as were cr uising wilhoul affiliation had been assigned  
293  
"Norwegians are fantastically boring," Mr. Soderblad said hoarsely in Enid's 
ear.  
The other two "floaters" at the table, a handsome older couple named Roth 
from Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania, had done Enid the in stinctive favor of 
engaging Alfred in conversation. Alfred's face was flushed with soup heat, the 
drama of a spoon, and also perh aps the ef fort of refusing to glance even once 
at the dazzling Soderbladian decol -letage, while he explained to the Roths the 
mechanics of stabilizing an ocean liner. Mr. Roth, a brainy -looking man in a 
bow tie and eye -bloating horn -rims, was peppering hi m with discerning 
questions and assimilating the answers so raptly he appeared almost 
shocked.  
Mrs. Roth was paying less attention to Alfred than to Enid. Mrs. Roth was a 
small woman, a handsome child in her mid -sixties. Her el bows barely cleared 
the tabl etop. She had a white -flecked black pageboy and rosy cheeks and big 
blue eyes with which she was staring at Enid unabashedly, in the way of 
someone very smart or very stupid. Such a crushlike intensity of looking 
suggested hunger. Enid sensed immedi ately that Mrs. Roth would become 
her great friend on the cruise, or else her great rival, and so with something 
like coquetry she declined to speak to her or otherwise acknowledge her 
attention. As steaks were brought to the table and devastated lobsters taken 
away she repeatedly thrust and Mr. Soderblad repeatedly parried questions 
concerning his occupation, which appeared to involve the arms trade. She 
soaked up Mrs. Roth's blue -eyed gaze along with the envy that she imagined 
the "floaters" were provoking at o ther tables. She supposed that to the hoi 
polloi in their T -shirts the "floaters" looked extremely Continental. A touch of 
distinction here. Beauty, neckties, an ascot. A certain cachet.  
"Sometimes I get so excited thinking about my morning coffee," Mr. 
Soderblad said, "I can't fall asleep at night."  
Enid's hopes that Alfred might take her dancing in the Pippi Long -stocking 
Ballroom were dashed when he stood up and announced that he was going to 
bed. It wasn't even seven o'clock yet. Who ever heard of a gro wnup going to 
bed at seven in the evening?  
"Sit down and wait for dessert," she said. "The desserts are sup posed to be 
divine."  
296  
THE CORRECTIONS  
Alfred's unsightly napkin fell from his thighs to the floor. He seemed without 
inkling of how much he was embarrassing and disap pointing her. "You stay," 
he said. "I've had enough."  
And away across the S0ren Kierkegaard broadloom he lurched, bat tling shi fts 
in the horizontal which had grown more pronounced since the ship left New 
York Harbor.  
Familiar waves of sorrow for all the fun she couldn't have with such a 
husband dampened Enid's spirits until it occurred to her that she now had a 
long evening to he rself and no Alfred to spoil her fun.  
She brightened, and brightened further when Mr. Roth departed for the Knut 
Hamsun Reading Room, leaving his wife at the table. Mrs. Roth switched 
seats to be closer to Enid.  
"We Norwegians are great readers," Mrs. Nygr en took the oppor tunity to 
remark.  
"And great yakkers," Mr. Soderblad muttered.  
"Public libraries and bookstores in Oslo are thriving," Mrs. Nygren informed 
the table. "I think it is not the same elsewhere. Reading is mostly in decline 
around the world. B ut not in Norway, hm. My Per is rending the complete 
works of John Galsworthy for the second time I his autumn. In English."  
"Nooo, Inga, nooo," Per Nygren whinnied. "Third time!"  
"My God," said Mr. Soderblad.  
"It's true." Mrs. Nygren looked at Enid and Mr s. Roth as though mil icipating 
awe. "Each year Per reads one work by every winner of the Nohcl Prize in 
Literature, and also the complete works of his favorite winner from his 
previous year's reading. And you see, each year the task IN (nines a bit more 
difficult, because there has been another winner,  
"Ii is ;i bit like raising the bar in a high jump," Per explained. "!• very year a 
bit more challenging."  
Mr. Soderblad, who by Enid's count was drinking his eighth cup of • i(lire, li -
aned close to her and said, "My God these people are boring!"  
"It is sale lo say thai I have read more deeply into Henrik Pontop -i>1.1 in dun 
most," IVr Nygren said.  
Mrs. SfxIrrNad tilled her head, smiling dreamily. "Do you know,"  
297 
she said, perhaps to Enid or to M rs. Roth, "that until one hundred years ago 
Norway was a colony of Sweden?"  
The Norwegians erupted like a batted hive.  
"Colony!? Colony??"  
"Oh, oh," Inga Nygren hissed, "I think there is a history here that our 
American friends deserve to —" 
"This is a stor y of strategic alliances!" Per declared.  
"By 'colony' what is the exact word in Swedish that you are groping for, Mrs. 
Soderblad? Since my English is obviously much stronger than yours, perhaps 
I can offer our American friends a more accurate transla tion, such as 'equal 
partner in a unified peninsular kingdom'?"  
"Signe," Mr. Soderblad observed wickedly to his wife, "I do believe you've hit 
a nerve." He raised a hand. "Waiter, refill."  
"If one chooses as a vantage point the late ninth century," Per Ny gren said, 
"and I suspect that even our Swedish friends will concede that the ascension 
of Harald the Blond is quite a reasonable 'hopping -off place' for our 
examination of the seesaw relationship of two great rival powers, or should I 
perhaps say three great powers, since Denmark as well plays a rather 
fascinating role in our story —" 
"We'd love to hear it, but maybe another time," Mrs. Roth inter rupted, 
leaning over to touch Enid's hand. "Remember we said seven o'clock?"  
Enid was only briefly bewildered. She excused herself and followed Mrs. Roth 
into the main hall, where they encountered a crush of seniors and gastric 
aromas, disinfectant aromas.  
"Enid, I'm Sylvia," said Mrs. Roth. "How do you feel about slot machines? 
I've had a physical craving all day. " 
"Oh, me too!" Enid said. "I think they're in the Stringbird Room."  
"Strindberg, yes."  
Enid admired quickness of mind but seldom credited herself with possessing 
it. "Thanks for the —you know," she said as she followed Sylvia Roth through 
the crush.  
"Rescu e. Don't mention it."  
The Strindberg Room was packed with kibitzers, low -stakes black jack 
players, and lovers of the slot. Enid couldn't remember when slu -M 
298                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
had so much fun. ihe fifth quarter she dropped brought her three plums; as if 
so much fruit upset the bowels of her machine, specie gushed from its nether 
parts. She shoveled her take into a plastic bucket. Eleven quarters later it 
happened again: three ch erries, a silver dump. White -haired players losing 
steadily at neighboring machines gave her dirty looks. I'm embarrassed, she 
told herself, although she wasn't.  
Decades of insufficient affluence had made her a disciplined in vestor. From 
her winnings she set aside the amount of her initial invest ment. Half of every 
payoff she also salted away.  
Her playing fund showed no sign of exhaustion, however.  
"So, I've had my fix," Sylvia Roth said after nearly an hour, tapping Enid on 
the shoulder. "Shall we go hea r the string quartet?"  
"Yes! Yes! It's in the Greed Room."  
"Grieg," said Sylvia, laughing.  
"Oh, that is funny, isn't it? Grieg. I'm so stupid tonight."  
"How much did you make? You seemed to be doing well."  
"I'm not sure, I didn't count."  
Sylvia smiled at h er intently. "I think you did, though. I think you counted 
exactly."  
"All right," Enid said, blushing because she was liking Sylvia so much. "It was 
a hundred thirty dollars."  
A portrait of Edvard Grieg hung in a room of actual gilt ornateness that 
recalle d the eighteenth -century splendor of Sweden's royal court. The large 
number of empty chairs confirmed Enid's suspicion that many of the cruise 
participants were low -class. She'd been on cruises where the classical 
concerts were SRO.  
Although Sylvia seemed less than knocked dead by the musicians, Kind 
thought they were wonderful. They played, from memory, popular classical 
tunes such as "Swedish Rhapsody" and excerpts from Finlandia niul Peer 
Gynt. In the middle of Peer Gynt the second violinist turned green  and left 
the room for a minute (the sea really was a bit stormy, but I iiid had a strong 
stomach and Sylvia had a patch) and then returned to his dun and manapvd 
ID lind his place ;i!>':iin without, as it were, miss -mi; a In -lit. The Iwcniy 
|icd|)lc in il ic audit -nee shouted, "Bravo!"  
299  
At the elegant reception afterward Enid spent 7.7 percent of her gambling 
earnings on a cassette tape recorded by the quartet. She tried a 
complimentary glass of Spogg, a Swedish liqueur currently enjoying a $15  
million marketing campaign. Spogg tasted like vodka, sugar, and 
horseradish, which in fact were its ingredients. As their fellow guests re acted 
to Spogg with looks of surprise and reproach, Enid and Sylvia fell to giggling.  
"Special treat," Sylvia said. "Complimentary Spogg. Try some!"  
"Yum!" Enid said in stitches, snorting for air. "Spogg!"  
Then it was on to the Ibsen Promenade for the scheduled ten o'clock ice 
cream social. In the elevator it seemed to Enid that the ship wa s suffering not 
only from a seesaw motion but also from a yaw, as if its bow were the face of 
someone experiencing repugnance. Leaving the elevator, she almost fell over 
a man on his hands and knees like half a two -man prank involving shoving. 
On the back of his T -shirt was a punch line: THEY JUST LOSE THEIR AIM.  
Enid accepted an ice cream soda from a food handler in a toque. Then she 
initiated an exchange of family data with Sylvia which quickly became an 
exchange more of questions than of answers. It was Enid's habit, when she 
sensed that family was not a person's favorite topic, to probe the sore 
relentlessly. She would sooner have died than admit that her own children 
disappointed her, but hearing of other people's disap pointing children —their 
squalid d ivorces, their substance abuse, their foolish investments —made her 
feel better.  
On the surface, Sylvia Roth had nothing to be ashamed of. Her sons were 
both in California, one in medicine and the other in comput ers, and both 
were married. Yet they seemed to be hot conversational sands to be avoided 
or crossed at a sprint. "Your daughter went to Swarthmore," she said.  
"Yes, briefly," Enid said. "So, and five grandsons, though. My good ness. How 
old is the youngest?"  
"He was two last month, and what about yo u?" Sylvia said. "Any grandkids?"  
"Our oldest son, Gary, has three sons, but so, that's interesting, a five -year 
gap between the youngest and the next youngest?"  
300                                                                                                                TH£ CORRECTIONS  
"Nearly six, actually, and your son in New York, I want to hear about him, too. 
Did you stop and see him today?"  
"Yes, he made a lovely lunch but we didn't get down to see his office nt the Wall 
Street Journal  where he has a new job because the weather vv.is bad, so, and do 
you get out much to California? To see your grand -lons?"  
Some spirit, a willingness to play the game, left Sylvia. She sat peer -ing into her 
empty soda glass. "Enid, will you do me a favor?"  she said Imally. "Come upstairs 
and have a nightcap."  
Knid's day had begun in St. Jude at five in the morning, but she never declined an 
attractive invitation. Upstairs in the Lagerkvist Tap -mi nn she and Sylvia were 
served by a dwarf in a horned helmet a nd Ir.nher jerkin who persuaded them to 
order cloudberry akvavit.  
"I want to tell you something," Sylvia said, "because I have to tell '.Mincone on 
the ship, but you can't breathe a word of this to anyone. An - you good at keeping 
secrets?"  
"It's one thi ng I do well."  
"Then, good," Sylvia said. "Three days from now there's going to be ini execution 
in Pennsylvania. So, and two days after that, on Thursday, I'd and I have our 
fortieth anniversary. And if you ask Ted, he'll tell you ili.ii s why we're on th is 
cruise, for the anniversary. He'll tell you that, I Mil its not the truth. Or it's only a 
truth about Ted and not me."  
I',11 id felt afraid.  
"The man who's being executed," Sylvia Roth said, "killed our tlmighter."  
"No."  
I 'he blue clarity of Sylvia's g aze made her seem a beautiful, lovable miMi.il (hut 
was not, however, quite human. "Ted and I," she said, "are mi iliis cruise because 
we have a problem with this execution. We have i I'loUrm with each other."  
"No! What are you telling me?" Enid shuddered.  "Oh, I can't stand i" 11 - .11 i his! 
I can't stand to hear this!"  
Sylvia quietly registered this allergy to her disclosure. "I'm sorry," In    .ml. "Ii s 
noi fair of me to ambush you. Maybe we should call it a Itluhl."  
301 
But Enid quickly regai ned her composure. She was determined not to miss 
becoming Sylvia's confidante. "Tell me everything you need to tell me," she 
said. "And I'll listen." She folded her hands in her lap like a good listener. "Go 
ahead. I'm listening."  
"Then the other thing I have to tell you," Sylvia said, "is that I'm a gun artist. I 
draw guns. You really want to hear this?"  
"Yes." Enid nodded eagerly and vaguely. The dwarf, she noticed, used a small 
ladder to fetch down bottles. "Interesting."  
For many years, Sylvia said, sh e'd been an amateur printmaker. She had a 
sun-filled studio in her house in Chadds Ford, she had a cream -smooth 
lithography stone and a twenty -piece set of German woodblock chisels, and 
she belonged to a Wilmington art guild in whose semi annual show, whil e her 
youngest child, Jordan, grew from a tomboy into an independent young 
woman, she'd sold decorative prints for prices like forty dollars. Then Jordan 
was murdered and for five years Sylvia printed, drew, and painted nothing 
but guns. Year after year on ly 
guns.  
"Terrible terrible," Enid said with open disapproval. The trunk of the wind -
splintered tulip tree outside Sylvia's studio suggested stocks and barrels.  
Every human form sought to become a hammer, a trigger guard, a cylinder, a 
grip. There was no abstraction that couldn't be tracer fire, or the smoke of 
black powder, or a hollow -point's flowering. The body was worldlike in the 
repleteness of its pos sibil ities, and just as no part of this little world was safe 
from a bullet's penetration, no form in the big world had no echo in a gun. 
Even a pinto bean was like a derringer, even a snowflake like a Browning on 
its tripod. Sylvia wasn't insane; she could for ce herself to draw a circle or 
sketch a rose. But what she hungered to draw was firearms. Guns, gun fire, 
ordnance, projectiles. She spent hours capturing in pencil the pat tern of 
gleam on nickel plating. Sometimes she also drew her hands and her wrists 
and forearms in what she guessed (for she had never held :i gun) were 
appropriate grips for a .50 caliber Desert Eagle, a nine millimeter Clock,  a 
fully automatic Ml6 with a folding aluminum stock, and other exotic weapons 
from the catalogues that she kepi   m brown envelopes in her sun -drenched 
studio. She abandoned lu -rsc-ll i<»  
rtff CORRECTIONS  
her habit like a lost soul to its hellishly fitting occupation (although Chadds 
Ford, the subtle warblers that ventured up from the Brandy -wine, the scen ts 
of warm cattail and fermenting persimmon that Octo ber winds stirred out of 
nearby hollows, staunchly resisted being made a hell of); she was a Sisypha 
who every night destroyed her own creations —tore them up, erased them in 
mineral spirits. Kindled a m erry fire in the living room.  
"Terrible," Enid murmured again. "I can't think of a worse thing that could 
happen to a mother." She signaled to the dwarf for more cloudberry akvavit.  
Some mysteries of her obsession, Sylvia said, were that she'd been raised as a 
Quaker and still went to meeting in Kennett Square; that the tools of Jordan's 
torture and murder had been one roll of nylon -reinforced "strapping" tape, 
one dish towel, two wire coat hangers, one General Electric Light 'n Easy 
electric iron, and one WMF twelve -inch serrated bread knife from Williams -
Sonoma, i.e., no guns; that the killer, a nineteen -year -old named Khellye 
Withers, had turned himself in to the Philadelphia police without (again) a 
gun being unholstered; that with a husband who earned a  huge late -career 
salary as Du Font's vice president of Compliance, and a sport -utility vehicle 
so massive that a head -on crash with a VW Cabriolet might hardly have 
dented it, and :\ six-bedroom Queen Anne —style house into whose kitchen 
and pantry Jordan' s entire Philadelphia apartment would have fit 
comfortably, Sylvia enjoyed a life of almost senseless ease and comfort in 
which her only task besides cooking for Ted, literally her only task, was to 
recover Irom Jordan's death; that she nevertheless often became so absorbed 
in rendering the tooling on a revolver butt or the veins in her arm that she 
had to drive crazily fast to avoid missing her thrice -weekly therapy with an 
M.D./Ph.D. in Wilmington; that by talking to the M.D./Ph.D., and by 
attending Wedne sday -night sessions with other Parents of Victims ol 
Violence and Thursday -night meetings with her Older Women's j'.roiip, and 
by reading the poetry and novels and memoirs and insight hooks iliar her 
friends recommended, and by relaxing with yoga and horse back riding, and 
hy voliiniccriiif; as :\ physical therapist's assistant ,H ( ihildrt -n's I lospilal, 
she suircrdcd in working through her grief even  
303 
as her compulsion to draw guns intensified; that she mentioned this 
compulsion to no one, no t even to the M.D./Ph.D. in Wilmington; that her 
friends and advisers all constantly exhorted her to "heal" herself through her 
"art"; that by "art" they meant her decorative woodcuts and lithos; that when 
she happened to see an old woodcut of hers in the bathroom or guest 
bedroom of a friend she twisted her body with shame at the fraudulence; that 
when she saw guns on TV or in a movie she writhed in a similar way and for 
similar reasons; that she was se cretly convinced, in other words, that she had 
become  a real artist, a genuinely good artist of the gun; that it was the proof 
of this artistry that she destroyed at the end of each day; that she was 
convinced that Jordan, despite having earned a B.F.A. in painting and an 
M,A. in art therapy, and despite the  encouragement and paid instruction in 
art she'd received for twenty years, had not been a good artist; that after 
achieving this objective view of her dead daughter she continued to draw 
guns and ammo; and that in spite of the rage and thirst for vengeanc e that 
her continuing obsession obviously betokened she had never once in five 
years drawn the face of Khellye Withers.  
On the October morning when these mysteries impressed them selves on her 
en masse, Sylvia took the stairs to her studio after break fast at a run. On a 
sheet of ivory Canson paper, and using a mirror so that it appeared to be her 
right hand, she drew her left hand with its thumb raised and fingers curled, 
sixty degrees behind full profile, a nearly full rear view. This hand she then 
filled  with a snub -nose .38 revolver, expertly foreshortened, whose barrel 
penetrated a pair of smirking lips above which she penciled accurately, from 
memory, the taunting eyes of Khellye Withers, over the recent exhaustion of 
whose legal appeals few tears had been shed. And at that —a pair of lips, a 
pair of eyes —Sylvia had set down her pencil.  
"It was time to move on," Sylvia said to Enid. "I saw it all of a sud den. That 
whether I liked it or not, the survivor and the artist was me. not her. We're all 
conditio ned to think of our children as more impor tant than us, you know, 
and to live vicariously through them. All of a sudden I was sick of that kind of 
thinking. I may be dead tomorrow, I  
304 
THE CORRECTIONS  
said to myself, but I'm alive now. And I c an live deliberately. I've paid the 
price, I've done the work, and I have nothing to be ashamed of.  
"And when the event, the big change in your life, is simply an insight —isn't 
that a strange thing? That absolutely nothing changes except that you see 
thing s differently and you're less fearful and less anxious and generally 
stronger as a result: isn't it amazing that a completely invisible thing in your 
head can feel realer than anything you've experienced before? You see things 
more clearly and you know that you're seeing them more clearly. And it 
comes to you that this is what it means to love life, this is all anybody who 
talks seriously about God is ever talking about. Moments like this."  
"Maybe one more?" Enid said to the dwarf, raising her glass. She wa s almost 
wholly not listening to Sylvia, but shaking her head and murmuring "Uh!" 
and "Oh!" while her consciousness stumbled through clouds of alcohol into 
such absurd realms of speculation as how the dwarf might feel against her 
hips and belly, embracing her. Sylvia turned out to be very intellectual, and 
Enid felt befriended under some what false pretenses, but while not listening 
she also had to listen, be cause she was missing certain key facts, such as 
whether Khellye Withers was black and whether Jordan had been brutally 
raped.  
From her studio Sylvia had gone straight to a Wawa Food Market and bought 
one of every dirty magazine it had in stock. Nothing sh e found in the 
magazines was sufficiently hardcore, however. She needed to see the actual 
plumbing, the literal act. She returned to Chadds Ford and switched on the 
computer that her younger son had given her to foster closeness in their time 
of loss. Her e-mailbox contained a month's backlog of filial greetings that she 
ignored. In less than five minutes she located the goods she wanted —all it 
took was a credit card —and she moused through thumbnail views until she 
found the necessary angle on the necessary  act with the necessary actors: 
black man performing oral sex on white man, camera shooting over left hip 
sixty degrees be mud full profile, crescent of high values curving over buttock, 
knuckles :•£ black fingers duskily visible in their probing on the da rk side of 
this moon. She downloaded the image and viewed it at high resolution.  
305 
She was sixty -five years old and she'd never seen a scene like this. She'd 
fashioned images all her life and she'd never appreciated their mystery. Now 
here it w as. All this commerce in bits and bytes, these ones and zeros 
streaming through servers at some midwestern univer sity. So much evident 
trafficking in so much evident nothing. A popula tion glued to screens and 
magazines.  
She wondered: How could people res pond to these images if images didn't 
secretly enjoy the same status as real things? Not that images were so 
powerful, but that the world was so weak. It could be vivid, certainly, in its 
weakness, as on days when the sun baked fallen apples in orchards an d the 
valley smelled like cider, and cold nights when Jordan had driven to Chadds 
Ford for dinner and the tires of her Cabriolet had crunched on the gravel 
driveway; but the world was fungible only as images. Nothing got inside the 
head without becoming pi ctures.  
And yet Sylvia was struck by the contrast between the online porn and her 
unfinished drawing of Withers. Unlike ordinary lust, which could be 
appeased by pictures or by pure imagination, the lust for re venge could not 
be tricked. The most graphic image couldn't satisfy it. This lust required the 
death of a specific individual, the termination of a specific history. As the 
menus said: NO SUBSTITUTIONS. She could draw her desire but not its 
fulfillment. And so she finally told herself the truth: she wanted Khellye 
Withers dead.  
She wanted him dead despite her recent interview with the Philadel phia 
Inquirer in which she'd avowed that killing someone else's child wouldn't 
bring back her own. She wanted him dead despite the reli gious fervor with 
which her M.D./Ph.D. had forbidden her to interpret Jordan's death 
religiously —for example, as a divine judgment on her own liberal politics or 
liberal parenting or senseless affluence. She wanted him dead despite 
believing that Jordan's death had been a ran dom  tragedy and that 
redemption lay not in vengeance but in reducing the incidence of random 
tragedies nationwide. She wanted him dead despite imagining a society that 
provided jobs at a decent wage for young men like him (so that he would not 
have had to bin d the wrists and ankles of his former art therapist and bully 
out of her the passwords  
308                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
for her bank card and credit  cards), a society that stanched the flow of illegal 
drugs into urban neighborhoods (so that Withers could not have spent the 
stolen money on crack, and would have had more mental clar ity when he 
returned to the apartment of his former art therapist, and would not have 
proceeded to smoke the rock and torture her, on and off, for thirty hours), a 
society in which young men had more to believe in than brand -name 
consumer goods (so that Withers would have fix ated less insanely on his 
former art therapist's C abriolet, and would have believed her when she 
insisted she'd lent the car to a friend for the weekend, and would have set less 
store by her possession of two sets of keys ("Couldn't get around that," he 
explained in his partially coerced but still legally  admissible confession, "all 
the keys right there on the kitchen table, you know what I'm saying? Couldn't 
get my ass around that fact"), and would not have repeatedly applied the 
victim's Light 'n Easy iron to her bare skin and advanced the temperature 
setting from Rayon up through Cotton/Linen while demanding to know 
where she'd parked the Cabriolet, and would not have cut her throat in a 
panic when her friend came by on Sunday evening to return the car and her 
third set of keys), a society that once and for all put an end to the phys ical 
abuse of children (so that it would have been absurd for a convicted murderer 
to claim, in the sentencing phase of his trial, that his step father had burned 
him with an electric iron when he was little —though in the cas e of Withers, 
who had no burn scars to exhibit, such testimony seemed mainly to 
underscore the convict's own lack of imagination as a liar). She wanted him 
dead despite even her realization, in therapy, that his smirk had been a 
protective mask donned by a  lonely boy sur rounded by people who hated 
him, and that if she'd only smiled at him like a forgiving mother he might 
have laid aside his mask and wept with honest remorse. She wanted him 
dead despite knowing her desire would please conservatives for whom  the 
phrase "personal responsibil ity" constituted permission to ignore social 
injustice. She wanted him dead despite being unable, for these political 
reasons, to attend the exe cution and to see with her own eyes the thing for 
which no image could substi tute.  
"But none of this," she said, "is why we're on this cruise."  
307 
"No?" Enid said as if awakening.  
"TSo. We're here "because Ted won't admit that Jordan was mur dered."  
"Is he ... ?"  
"Oh, he knows it," Sylvia said. "He just won't talk about it. He was very close 
to Jordan, closer in a lot of ways than he's ever been to me. And he grieved, 
I'll grant him that. He did grieve. He wept so much he could hardly move. But 
then one morning he was over it. He said that Jordan was gone and he wasn't 
going to live in the past. He said that starting on Labor Day he was going to 
forget she was a victim. And every day, as it got later in August, he reminded 
me that beginning after Labor Day he wouldn 't admit that she was murdered. 
Ted's a very ra tional man. His view was that human beings have been losing 
children forever and that too much grieving is stupid and self -indulgent. He 
didn't care what happened to Withers, either. He said that following th e trial 
was just another way of not getting over the murder.  
"And so, on Labor Day, he said to me, 'It may seem strange to you, but I will 
never speak of her death again, and I want you to remember that I'm telling 
you this. Will you remember this, Sylvia?  So you don't think I'm crazy later?' 
And I said, 'I don't like this, Ted, I don't accept this.' And he said he was sorry 
but he had to do it. And the next night when he got home from work I told 
him, I think it was, that Withers's lawyer was claiming his confession was 
coerced and the real killer was still at large. And Ted sort of grinned at me, in 
this way when he's pulling your leg, and he said, 'I don't know what you're 
talking about.' And so I actually said, 'I'm talking about the person who killed 
our daughter.' And he said, 'No one killed our daughter, I don't want to hear 
you say that again.' And I said, 'Ted, this is not going to work.' And he said, 
'What's not going to work?' And I said, 'Your pretending Jor dan isn't dead.' 
And he said, 'We had a  daughter and we don't now and so I guess she's dead, 
but I'm warning you, Sylvia, you do not tell me she was killed, do you 
understand me?' And ever since then, Enid, no mat ter how hard I push, he's 
never dropped his pose. And I'll tell you, I'm an inch away from divorcing 
him. Always. Except he's so unfailingly dear to me otherwise. He never gets 
angry when I talk about Withers,  
308 
THE CORRECTIONS  
: 
.: 
ie 
c- 
! m 
_:~ ;. 
US 
he just gets bluff and laughs it off, like it's some peculiar idee fixe of mine. 
And I can see that he's like our cat dragging in a dead warbler. The cat 
doesn't know you don't like dead warblers. Ted wants me to be rational like 
he is, he thinks he's doin g me a favor, and he takes me on all these trips and 
cruises, and everything's fine except that for him the most terrible thing in 
our life didn't happen and for me it did."  
"So did it happen?" Enid said.  
Sylvia drew her head back, shocked. "Thank you," sh e said although Enid had 
posed the question because she was momentarily confused, not because she 
wanted to do Sylvia a favor. "Thank you for being honest enough to ask me 
that. I do feel crazy sometimes. All my work is in my head. I'm moving 
around a mill ion little pieces of nothing, a million thoughts and feelings and 
memories inside my head, day after day, for years, there's this enormous 
scaffolding and planning, like I'm building a cathedral of toothpicks inside 
my head. And it doesn't even help to kee p a diary, because I can't make the 
words on the page have any effect on my brain. As soon as I write a thing 
down I leave it behind. It's like drop ping pennies over the side of a boat. And 
so I'm doing all this mental work without any possibility of exte rnal support, 
except for these slightly dowdy people in my Wednesday and Thursday 
groups, and meanwhile my own husband is pretending that the whole point 
of all this huge inte rior work —namely, that my daughter was murdered —isn't 
real. And so, more and mor e, literally the only beacons I still have in my life, 
my only north and south and east and west, are my emotions.  
"And Ted's right on top of that, he thinks our culture attaches too much 
importance to feelings, he says it's out of control, it's not comput ers that are 
making everything virtual, it's mental health. Everyone's trying to correct 
their thoughts and improve their feelings and work on their relationships and 
parenting skills instead of just getting married and raising children like they 
used to,  is what Ted says. We've bumped up to the next level of abstraction 
because we have too much time and money, is what he says, and he refuses to 
be a part of it. He wants to eat 'real' food and go to 'real' places and talk about 
'real' things like busi ness  and science. So he and I don't really agree at all 
anymore on what's important in life.  
"And he foxed my therapist, Enid. I had her to dinner so she could take a look 
at him, and you know those dinners the magazines say you shouldn't make 
for co mpany, where you're in the kitchen for twenty minutes before every 
course? I made one of those, a risotto milanese and then pan -fried steaks 
with a two -stage reduction, and my therapist was out in the dining room the 
whole time quizzing Ted. And when I saw  her the next day she said his 
condition was very common in rnen, he appeared to have dealt with his grief 
enough to function, and she be lieved he wasn't going to change and it was up 
to me now to accept this.  
"And you know, I'm not supposed to let myself  think magical or re ligious 
thoughts, but one thought I can't escape is that this crazy thirst for revenge 
I've had for all these years isn't really my own. It's Ted's. He won't deal with it 
himself, and somebody's got to deal with it, so I do, like I'm a  surrogate 
mother except I'm not carrying a baby, I'm carrying emotions. Maybe if Ted 
had taken more responsibility for his feelings, and been less in a hurry to go 
back to work at Du Pont, I would have stayed just like I always was, and sold 
my woodcuts a t the guild every Christmas. Maybe it was Ted's being so 
rational and businesslike that pushed me over the edge. And so maybe the 
moral of this long story which you've been a total dear to listen to, Enid, is 
that I can't stop find ing a moral to the story  no matter how hard I try not to."  
To Enid at this moment came a vision of rain. She saw herself in a house with 
no walls; to keep the weather out, all she had was tissue. And here came the 
rain from the east, and she tacked up a tissue version of Chip and  his exciting 
new job as a reporter. Here it came from the west, and the tissue was how 
handsome and intelligent Gary's boys were and how much she loved them. 
Then the wind shifted, and she ran to the north side of the house with such 
shreds of tissue as D enise afforded: how she'd married too young but was 
older and wiser now and enjoying great success as a restaurateur and hoping 
to meet the right young man! And then the rain came blasting up from the 
south, the tissue disinte grating even as she insisted that Al's impairments 
were very mild and he'd be fine if he'd just work on his attitude and get his 
drugs adjusted, and it rained harder and harder, and she was so tired, and all 
she had was tissue — 
310                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
w 
m 
m 
m 
"Sylvia?" she said.  
"Yes?"  
"I need to tell you something. It's about my husband."  
Eager, perhaps, to repay the favor of listening, Sylvia nodded with 
encouragement. But suddenly she reminded Enid of Katharine Hep burn. In 
Hepburn's eyes there had been a blank unconsciousness of privilege that 
made a once -poor woman like Enid want to kic k her patrician shins with the 
hardest -toed pumps at her disposal. It would be a mistake, she felt, to confess 
anything to this woman.  
"Yes?" Sylvia prompted.  
"Nothing. I'm sorry."  
"No, say."  
"Nothing, really, just that I must get to bed. There's certainly  lots to do 
tomorrow!"  
She rose unsteadily and let Sylvia sign for the drinks. They rode an elevator in 
silence. Too -precipitous intimacy had left in its wake a kind of dirty 
awkwardness. When Sylvia stepped out at the Upper Deck level, however, 
Enid follo wed. She couldn't bear to be seen by Sylvia as a "B" Deck sort of 
person.  
Sylvia stopped by the door of a large outside stateroom. "Where's your 
room?"  
"Just down the hall here," Enid said. But this pretense, she saw, was 
unsustainable. Tomorrow she would have to pretend she'd been confused.  
"Good night, then," Sylvia said. "Thanks again for listening."  
She waited with a gentle smile for Enid to move on. But Enid didn't move on. 
She looked around uncertainly. "I'm sorry. What deck is this?"  
"This is the Upper."  
"Oh dear, I'm on the wrong deck. I'm sorry."  
"Don't be sorry. Do you want me to walk you down?"  
"No, I got confused, I see now, this is the Upper Deck and I'm sup posed to be 
on a lower deck. A much lower deck. So, I'm sorry."  
She turn ed away but still she didn't leave. "My husband ..." She shook her 
head. "No, our son, actually. We didn't have lunch with him  
311 
today. That's what I wanted to tell you. He met us at the airport and we were 
supposed to have lunch with him and h is friend, but they just — left, I don't 
understand it, and he never came back, and we still don't know where he 
went. So, anyway."  
"That is peculiar," Sylvia agreed.  
"So, I don't want to bore you —" 
"No no no, Enid, shame on you."  
"I just wanted to straight en that out, and now I'm off to bed, so, and I'm so 
glad we met! There's a lot to do tomorrow. So. We'll see you at breakfast!"  
Before Sylvia could stop her, Enid sidled up the corridor (she needed surgery 
on her hip but imagine leaving Al at home alone while she was in the 
hospital, just imagine) castigating herself for blundering down a hall she 
didn't belong on and blurting out shameful nonsense about her son. She 
veered to a cushioned bench and slumped and did, now, burst into tears. God 
had given her the imagination to weep for the sad strivers who booked the 
most el -cheapo "B" Deck inside state rooms on a luxury cruise ship; b ut a 
childhood without money had left her unable to stomach, herself, the $300 
per person it cost to jump one category up; and so she wept for herself. She 
felt that she and Al were the only intelligent people of her generation who had 
managed not to becom e rich.  
Here was a torture that the Greek inventors of the Feast and the Stone had 
omitted from their Hades: the Blanket of Self -Deception. A lovely warm 
blanket as far as it covered the soul in torment, but it never quite covered 
everything. And the night s were getting cold now.  
She considered returning to Sylvia's room and fully unburdening herself.  
But then, through her tears, she saw a sweet thing beneath the bench beside 
her.  
It was a ten -dollar bill. Folded once. Very sweet.  
With a glance up the corri dor, she reached down. The texture of engraving 
was delicious.  
Feeling restored, she descended to the "B" Deck. Background music 
whispered in the lounge, something perky with accordions. She  
312 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
imagined she heard her name bleat ed, distantly, as she'fitted her key card in 
the lock and pushed on her door.  
She encountered resistance and pushed harder.  
"Enid," Alfred bleated from the other side.  
"Shh, Al, what on earth?"  
Life as she knew it ended with her squeeze through the half -open door. 
Diurnality yielded to a raw continuum of hours. She found Alfred naked with 
his back to the door on a layer of bedsheets spread on sec tions of morning 
paper from St. Jude. Pants and a sport coat and a tie were laid out on his bed, 
which he'd stri pped to the mattress. The ex cess bedding he'd piled on the 
other bed. He continued to call her name even after she'd turned on a light 
and occupied his field of vision. Her immediate aim was to quiet him and get 
some pajamas on him, but this took time, fo r he was terribly agitated and not 
finishing his sentences, not even making his verbs and nouns agree in 
number and person. He believed that it was morning and he had to bathe and 
dress, and that the floor by the door was a bathtub, and that the handle was  a 
faucet, and that nothing worked. Still he insisted on doing everything his 
way, which led to a pushing and pulling, an actual blow to her shoulder. He 
raged and she wept and abused him. He managed with his madly flop ping 
hands to unbutton his pajama to p as fast she could button it. She'd never 
heard him use the words "t**d" or "c**p," and the fluency with which he used 
them now illuminated years of prior silent usage in his head. He unmade her 
bed while she tried to remake his. She begged him to sit sti ll. He cried that it 
was very late and he was very confused. Even now she couldn't help loving 
him. Maybe especially now. Maybe she'd known all along, for fifty years, that 
there was this little boy in him.  Maybe all the love she'd given Chipper and 
Gary, all the love for vi'hich in the end she'd got so little in return, had merely 
been practice for this most demanding of her children. She soothed and 
berated him and silently cursed his addling medications for an hour or more, 
and finally he was asleep and her travel clock showed 5:10 and 7:30 and he 
was running his electric shaver. Not having gone properly under, she felt fine 
getting up and fine dressing and catastrophically bad going to 'reakfast, her 
tongue like a dust mop, her head like something on a s pit. 
313 
Even for a big ship the sea this morning was poor footing. The re -gurgitative 
splats outside the Kierkegaard Room were almost rhythmic, a kind of music 
of chance, and Mrs. Nygren informatively brayed about the evils of caffeine 
and the q uasi -bicamerality of the Storting, and the Soderblads arrived damp 
from intimate Swedish exertions, and some how Al proved equal to 
conversation with Ted Roth. Enid and Sylvia resumed relations stiffly, their 
emotional muscles pulled and aching from last n ight's overuse. They talked 
about the weather. An activities coordinator named Suzy Ghosh came by with 
orientative tidings and registration forms for the afternoon's outings in 
Newport, Rhode Is land. With a bright smile and anticipatory noises Enid 
signed  up for a tour of the town's historic homes, and then watched in dismay 
as every one else but the Norwegian social lepers passed along the clipboard 
without registering. "Sylvia!" she chid, her voice shaking, "you're not going on 
the tour?" Sylvia glanced at her bespectacled husband, who nodded like 
McGeorge Bundy green -lighting ground troops for Viet nam, and for a 
moment her blue eyes seemed to look inward; appar ently she had that ability 
of the enviable, of the non -midwestern, of the moneyed, to assess her desires 
without regard to social expectations or moral imperatives. "OK, yes, good," 
she said, "maybe I will." Ordinar ily Enid would have squirmed at the hint of 
charity here, but she was waiving the oral exam for gift horses today. She 
needed all the  charity she could get. And so on up the day's steep incline she 
labored, availing herself of a complimentary half -session of Swedish massage, 
watching coastal leaves senesce from the Ibsen Promenade, and downing six 
ibuprofens and a quart of coffee to pre pare for her afternoon in charm ing and 
historic Newport! In which freshly rain -laundered port of call Alfred 
announced that his feet hurt too much to venture ashore, and Enid made him 
promise not to nap or he wouldn't sleep at night, and she laughingly (f or how 
could she admit that it was life and death?) im plored Ted Roth to keep him 
awake, and Ted replied that getting the Nygrens off the ship ought to help 
with that.  
Smells of sun -warmed creosote and cold mussels, of boat fuel and football 
fields and dr ying kelp, an almost genetic nostalgia for things  
314 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
maritime and things autumnal, beset Enid as she limped from the gang way 
toward the tour bus. The day was dangerously beautiful. Big gusts and related 
clouds and a fierce lion of a sun blew the gaze around, agi tating Newport's 
white clapboard and mown greens, making them un seeable straight on. 
"Folks," the tour guide urge d, "just sit back and drink it in." But that which 
can be drunk can also drown. Enid had slept for six of the previous fifty -five 
hours, and even as Sylvia thanked her for inviting her along she found she 
had no energy for touring. The Astors and the Vande rbilts, their pleasure 
domes and money: she was sick of it. Sick of envying, sick of herself. She 
didn't understand antiques or architecture, she couldn't draw like Sylvia, she 
didn't read like Ted, she had few interests and no expertise. A capacity for 
love was the only true thing she'd ever had. And so she tuned out the tour 
guide and heeded the October angle of the yellow light, the heart -mangling 
inten sities of the season. In the wind pushing waves across the bay she could 
smell night's approach. It wa s coming at her fast: mystery and pain and a 
strange yearning sense of possibility, as though heartbreak were a thing to be 
sought and moved toward. On the bus between Rosecliff and the lighthouse, 
Sylvia offered Enid a cell phone so she could give Chip a call. Enid declined, 
since cell phones ate dollars and she thought a per son might incur charges 
simply by touching one, but she made this statement: "It's been years, Sylvia, 
since we had a relationship with him. I don't think he tells us the truth about 
what he's doing with his life. He said once he was working for the Wall Street 
Journal. Maybe I misheard him, but I think that's what he said, but I don't 
think that's really where he's working. I don't know what he does for a living 
really. You must think  it's awful of me to complain about this, when you've 
had things so much worse." In Sylvia's insistence that it wasn't awful, not at 
all, Enid glimpsed how she might confess an even more shameful thing or 
two, and how this exposure to the public elements m ight, while painful, offer 
solace. But like so many phenomena that were beautiful at a distance — 
thunderheads, volcanic eruptions, the stars and planets —this alluring pain 
proved, at closer range, to be inhuman in its scale. From Newport the 
GunnarMyrdal sailed east into sapphire vapors. The ship felt stifling  
: vs 
5/5 
to Enid after an afternoon's exposure to big skies and the tanker -size 
playpens of the superwealthy, and though she won sixty more dollars in the 
Stringbird Room she felt like a lab animal caged with other lever -yanking 
animals amid the mechanized blink and burble, and bedtime came early, and 
when Alfred began to stir she was already awake listen ing to the anxiety bell 
ringing with such force that her bed fra me vi brated and her sheets were 
abrasive, and here was Alfred turning on lights and shouting, and a next -door 
neighbor banging on the wall and shouting back, and Alfred stock -still 
listening with his face twisted in paranoid psychosis and then whispering 
conspiratorially that he'd seen a t**d run between the beds, and then the 
making and unmaking of said beds, the application of a diaper, the 
application of a second diaper to address some hallucinated exigency, and the 
balking of his nerve -damaged legs, an d the bleating of the word "Enid" until 
he nearly wore it out, and the woman with the rawly abraded name sobbing 
in the dark with the worst despair and anxiety she'd ever felt until finally —
like an overnight traveler arriving at a train station differing f rom the dismal 
ones before it only in the morning twilight, the small miracles of re stored 
visibility: a chalky puddle in a gravel parking lot, the steam twist ing from a 
sheet -metal chimney —she was brought to a decision.  
On her map of the ship, at the st ern end of the "D" Deck, was the universal 
symbol of aid for those in need. After breakfast she left her husband in 
conversation with the Roths and made her way to this red cross. The physical 
thing corresponding to the symbol was a frosted -glass door with  three words 
lettered on in gold leaf. "Alfred" was the first word and "Infirmary" was the 
third; the sense of the middle word was lost in the shadows cast by "Alfred." 
She studied it fruitlessly. No. Bel. Nob -Ell. No Bell.  
All three words retreated as the  door was pulled open by a muscular young 
man with a name tag pinned to a white lapel: Mather Hibbard, M.D. He had a 
large, somewhat coarse -skinned face like the face of the Italian -American 
actor people loved, the one who once starred as an an gel and ano ther time as 
a disco dancer. "Hi, how are you this morning?" he said, showing pearly 
teeth. Enid followed him through a vestibule into the inner office, where he 
directed her to the chair by his desk.  
316 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
the in - 
•_e 
"I'm Mrs. La mbert," she said. "Enid Lambert in Bll. I was hoping you could 
help me."  
"I hope so, too. What seems to be the problem?"  
"I'm having some trouble."  
"Mental trouble? Emotional trouble?"  
"Well, it's my husband —" 
"Excuse me. Stop? Stop?" Dr. Hibbard ducked a little and smiled impishly. 
"You say you're having the trouble?"  
His smile was adorability itself. It took hostage that part of Enid that melted 
at the sight of seal pups and kittens, and it refused to release her until, 
somewhat grudgingly, she'd smiled b ack. "My trouble," she said, "is my 
husband and my children —" 
"Sorry again, Edith. Time out?" Dr. Hibbard ducked very low, put his hands 
on his head, and peered up from between his arms. "We need to be clear: you 
are the one having trouble?"  
"No. I'm fine.  But everyone else in my —" 
"Are you anxious?"  
"Yes, but —" 
"Not sleeping?"  
"Exactly. You see, my husband —" 
"Edith? You said Edith?" " "Enid. Lambert. L -A-M-B—" 
"Enith, what's four times seven with three taken away?"  
"What? Oh. Well, twenty -five."  
"And, what day of the week is it today?"  
"Today is Monday."  
"And, what historic Rhode Island resort town did we visit yester day?"  
"Newport."  
"And, are you currently taking medication for depression, anxiety, bipolar 
disorder, schizophrenia, epilepsy, parkinsonism, or any other psychiatric or 
neurologic disorder?"  
"No."  
Dr. Hibbard nodded and sat up straight, rolled open a deep drawer in the 
console behind him, and withdrew a handful of rattling plastic - 
;- 2HS  
317 
and-foil packages. He counted off eight of them and set them on his desk in 
front of Enid. They had an expensive sheen she didn't like the looks of.  
"This is an excellent new  medication that will help you enor mously," Hibbard 
recited in a monotone. He winked at her.  
"Excuse me?"  
"Have we misunderstood each other? I believe you said, 'I am hav ing trouble.' 
And mentioned anxiety and sleep disturbance?"  
"Yes, but what I meant w as that my husband —" 
"Husband, right. Or wife. It's often the less inhibited spouse that comes to see 
me. In fact a crippling fear of asking for Asian is the con dition for which 
Asian is most commonly indicated. The drug exerts a remarkable blocking 
effec t on 'deep' or 'morbid' shame." Hibbard's smile was like a fresh dent in 
soft fruit. He had a puppy's lush eyelashes, a head that invited stroking. "This 
interests you?" he said. "I have your full attention?"  
Enid lowered her eyes and wondered if people ev er died of sleep loss. Taking 
her silence for assent, Hibbard continued: "We think of a classic CNS 
depressant such as alcohol as suppressing 'shame' or 'inhi bitions.' But the 
'shameful' admission that a person spills under the in fluence of three 
martini s doesn't lose its shamefulness in the spilling; witness the deep 
remorse that follows when the martinis have worn off. What's happening on 
the molecular level, Edna, when you drink those martinis, is that the ethanol 
interferes with the reception of exces s Fac tor 28A, i.e., the 'deep' or 'morbid' 
shame factor. But the 28A is not metabolized or properly reabsorbed at the 
receptor site. It's kept in temporary unstable storage at the transmitter site. 
So when the ethanol wears off, the receptor is flooded with 2 8A. Fear of 
humiliation and the craving for humiliation are closely linked: psychologists 
know it, Rus sian novelists know it. And this turns out to be not only 'true' but 
really true. True at the molecular level. Anyway, Asian's effect on the chem -
istry of shame is entirely different from a martini's. We're talking complete 
annihilation of the 28A molecules. Asian's a fierce predator."  
Evidently it was Enid's turn to speak now, but she'd missed a cue  
318 
THE CORRECTIONS  
somewhere. "Doctor," she said, "I'm sorry, but I haven't slept and I'm a little 
confused."  
The doctor frowned adorably. "Confused? Or confused"?"  
"Excuse me?"  
"You've told me you are 'having trouble.' You're carrying one hun dred fifty 
U.S. dollars in cash or traveler's checks . Based on your clinical responses I've 
diagnosed subclinical dysthymia with no observable de mentia, and I'm 
providing you, free of charge, with eight SampLpaks of Asian 'Cruiser,' each 
containing three thirty -milligram capsules, so that you may comfortab ly 
enjoy the remainder of your cruise and afterward follow the recommended 
thirty -twenty -ten step -down program. How ever, Elinor, I must warn you 
right away that if you are confused, as op posed to merely confused, it may 
compel me to alter my diagnosis, w hich may well jeopardize your access to 
the Asian."  
Here Hibbard raised his eyebrows and whistled a few bars of a melody that 
his faux -disingenuous smile robbed the tune of.  
"I'm not confused," Enid said. "My husband is confused."  
"If by 'confused' you mea n confused then let me express the sincere hope that 
you intend the Asian for your own use and not your hus band's. Where 
dementia is present, Asian is strongly contraindicated. Officially, therefore, I 
must insist that you use the medication only as direc ted and only under my 
strict supervision. In practice, though, I'm not naive. I understand that such a 
powerful, relief -bringing medica tion, a medication not yet available on the 
mainland, often finds its way into other hands."  
Hibbard whistled a few more  tuneless bars, a cartoon of someone minding 
his own business, while studying Enid to be sure he was amus ing her.  
"My husband gets strange at night, sometimes," she said, averting her eyes. 
"Very agitated and difficult, and I can't sleep then. I'm dead ti red all day and 
so upset. And there's so much I want to do."  
"Asian will help you," Hibbard assured her in a more sober voice. "A lot of 
travelers consider it a more important investment even than cancellation 
insurance. With all the money you've paid for the privilege  
379  
of being here, Enith, you have a right to feel your best at every mo ment. A 
quarrel with your spouse, anxiety about a pet you've left be hind, a perceived 
snub where none was intended: you can't afford these bad feelings. Think of 
it this way. If Asian prevents you from missing just one prepaid Pleasurelines 
activity due to your subclinical dys -thymia, it has paid for itself, by which I 
mea n that your flat -fee consul tation with me, at the end of which you'll 
receive eight complimentary SampLpaks of thirty -milligram Asian 'Cruiser,' 
has paid for itself."  
"What is Ashland?"  
Someone knocked on the outside door and Hibbard shuddered as if to cl ear 
his head. "Edie, Eden, Edna, Enid, excuse me one moment. I'm beginning to 
understand that you really are confused about the state -of-the-global -art 
psychopharmacology that Pleasurelines is proud to make available to its 
discerning clientele. I see you need a bit more explana tion than most of our 
cruisers, and if you'll excuse me for just one moment..."  
Hibbard took eight SampLpaks of Asian from his console, actually troubled 
to lock the console and pocket the key, and stepped into the vestibule. Enid 
heard his murmur and the husky voice of an older man replying, "Twenty -
five," "Monday," and "Newport." In  less than two minutes the doctor 
returned, carrying some traveler's checks.  
"Is this really all right, what you're doing?" Enid asked. "I mean, legally?"  
"Good Q, Enid, but guess what: it's wonderfully legal." He exam ined one of 
the checks somewhat absen tly and then tucked them all into his shirt pocket. 
"Excellent question, though. Really ace Q. Professional ethics prevent me 
from selling the drugs I prescribe, so I'm confined to dispensing free samples, 
which luckily conforms to Pleasurelines' own tutto  e incluso policy. 
Regrettably, since Asian has yet to receive full American regulatory approval, 
and since most of our cruisers are Amer ican, and since Asian's designer and 
maker, Farmacopea S.A., therefore has no incentive to provide me with 
complimenta ry samples sufficient to the extraordinary demand, I do find it 
necessary to purchase the complimentary samples in bulk. Hence my 
consulting fee, which might otherwise strike some as inflated."  
320 
THE CORRECTIONS  
to 
•- :   - 
; 
: -.: -_-e 
"What's  the actual cash value of the eight sample packs?" Enid asked.  
"Being complimentary and strictly not for resale, they have no ac tual cash 
value, Eartha. If you're asking what it costs me to provide this service to you 
free of charge, the answer is about e ighty -eight dollars, U.S."  
"Four dollars a pill!"  
"Correct. Full dosage for patients of ordinary sensitivity is thirty milligrams 
per day. In other words, one caplet. Four dollars a day to feel great: most 
cruisers consider it a bargain."  
"And tell me, tho ugh, what it is? Ashram?"  
"Asian. Named, I'm told, for a mythical creature in ancient mythol ogy. 
Mithraism, sun -worshippers, and so forth. I'd be making it up if I told you 
any more. But my understanding is Asian was a great benign Lion."  
Enid's heart lea ped in its cage. She took a SampLpak from the desk and 
examined the pills through the bubbles of hard plastic. Each tawny -gold 
caplet was scored twice for ease of splitting and emblazoned with a many -
rayed sun —or was it the silhouetted head of a richly man ed lion? ASLAN® 
Cruiser™ was the label.  
"What's it do?" she said.  
"Absolutely nothing," Hibbard replied, "if you are in perfect mental health. 
However, let's face it, who is?"  
"Oh, and if you're not?"  
"Asian provides state -of-the-art factor regulation. The  best medica tions now 
approved for American use are like two Marlboros and a rum -and-Coke, by 
comparison."  
"It's an antidepressant?"  
"Crude term. 'Personality optimizer' is the phrase I prefer."  
"And 'Cruiser'?"  
"Asian optimizes in sixteen chemical dimens ions," Hibbard said pa tiently. 
"But guess what. Optimal for a person enjoying a luxury cruise isn't optimal 
for a person functioning in the workplace. The chemical differences are pretty 
subtle, but if you're capable of fine control, why not offer it? Bes ides Asian 
'Basic,' Farmacopea sells eight custom  
321 
blends. Asian 'Ski,' Asian 'Hacker,' Asian 'Performance Ultra,' Asian 'Teen,' 
Asian 'Club Med,' Asian 'Golden Years,' and I'm forgetting what? Asian 
'California.' Very popular in Europe. The plan is to bring the number of 
blends up to twenty within two years. Asian 'Exam Buster,' Asian 'Courtship,'  
Asian 'White Nights,' Asian 'Reader's Chal lenge,' Asian 'Connoisseur Class,' 
yada yada yada. American regulatory approval would accelerate the process, 
but I'm not holding my breath. If you're asking what's specific to 'Cruiser'? 
Mainly that it switches your anxiety to the Off position. Turns that little dial 
right down to zero. Asian 'Basic' won't do that, because to function day to day 
a moderate anxiety level is desirable. I'm on 'Basic' right now, for example, 
because I'm working."  
"How —" 
"Less than o ne hour. That's the glory of it. The action is effectively 
instantaneous. That's compared with up to four weeks for some of the 
dinosaurs they're still using Stateside. Go on Zoloft today and you're lucky to 
feel better a week from Friday."  
"No, but how do  I refill the prescription at home?"  
Hibbard looked at his watch. "What part of the country are you from, Andie?"  
"The Midwest. St. Jude."  
"OK. Your best bet's going to be Mexican Asian. Or, if you have friends 
vacationing in Argentina or Uruguay, you migh t work some thing out with 
them. Obviously, if you like the medication and you want total ease of access, 
Pleasurelines hopes you'll take another cruise."  
Enid pulled a scowl. Dr. Hibbard was very handsome and charis matic, and 
she liked the idea of a pill  that would help her enjoy the cruise and take better 
care of Alfred, but the doctor seemed to her a trifle glib. Also, her name was 
Enid. E -N-I-D. 
"You're really, really, really sure this will help me?" she said. "You're really 
super certain this is the best thing for me?"  
"I 'guarantee' it," Hibbard said with a wink.  
"What does 'optimize' mean, though?" Enid said.  
"You'll feel emotionally more resil ient," Hibbard said. "More flexi ble, more 
confident, happier with yourself. Your anxiety and oversensi - 
322                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
tivity wil l disappear, as will any morbid concern about the opinion of others. 
Anything you're ashamed of now —" 
"Yes," Enid said. "Yes."  
" 'If it comes up, I'll talk about it; if not, why mention it?' That will be your 
attitude. The vicious bipolarity of shame, that  rapid cycling be tween 
confession and concealment —this is a complaint of yours?"  
"I think you understand me."  
"Chemicals in your brain, Elaine. A strong urge to confess, a strong urge to 
conceal: What's a strong urge? What else can it be but chemi cals? W hat's 
memory? A chemical change! Or maybe a structural change, but guess what. 
Structures are made of proteins! And what are proteins made of? Amines!"  
Enid had the dim worry that her church taught otherwise —some thing about 
Christ being both a hunk of fle sh hanging from a cross and also the Son of 
God —but questions of doctrine had always seemed to her forbiddingly 
complex, and Reverend Anderson at their church had such a kindly face and 
often in his sermons told jokes or quoted New Yorker cartoons or secul ar 
writers such as John Updike, and he never did anything disturbing like 
telling the congregation that it was damned, which would have been absurd 
since everyone at the church was so friendly and nice, and then, too, Alfred 
had always pooh -poohed her fait h and it was easier just to stop believing (if 
in fact she ever had be lieved) than to try to beat Alfred in a philosophical 
argument. Now Enid believed that when you were dead you were really dead, 
and Dr. Hibbard's account of things was making sense to h er. 
Nevertheless, being a tough shopper, she said: "I'm just a dumb old 
midwesterner, so, but changing your personality doesn't sound right to me." 
She made her face long and sour to be sure her disapproval wasn't 
overlooked.  
"What's wrong with change?" Hi bbard said. "Are you happy with the way you 
feel right now?"  
"Well, no, but if I'm a different person after I take this pill, if I'm different, 
that can't be right, and —" 
"Edwina, I'm completely sympathetic. We all have irrational attach ments to 
the parti cular chemical coordinates of our character and tem - 
323 
perament. It's a version of the fear of death, right? I don't know what it will 
be like not to be me anymore. But guess what. If 'I'm' not around to tell the 
difference, then what do 'I' re ally care? Being dead's only a problem if you 
know you're dead, which you never do because you're dead!"  
"But it sounds like the drug makes everybody the same."  
"Uh-uh. Beep -beep. Wrong. Because guess what: two people can have the 
same personality and still be individuals. Two people with the same IQ can 
have completely different knowledge and memories. Right? Two very 
affectionate people can have completely diffe rent ob jects of affection. Two 
identically risk -averse individuals may be avoid ing completely different risks. 
Maybe Asian does make us a little more alike, but guess what, Enid. We're all 
still individuals."  
The doctor unleashed an especially lovable sm ile, and Enid, who calculated 
that he was netting $62 per consultation, decided that she'd now received her 
money's worth of his time and attention, and she did what she'd known she 
would do since she first laid eyes on the sunny, leonine caplets. She reac hed 
into her purse and from the Pleasurelines envelope that held her slot 
winnings she took a handful of cash and counted out $150.  
"All joy of the Lion," Hibbard said with a wink as he slid the stack of 
SampLpaks across his desk. "Do you need a bag for th at?" 
With a pounding heart Enid made her way to the bow of the "B" Deck. After 
the nightmare of the previous day and nights she again had a concrete thing 
to look forward to; and how sweet the optimism of the person carrying a 
newly scored drug that she be lieved would change her head; how universal 
the craving to escape the givens of the self. No ex ertion more strenuous than 
raising hand to mouth, no act more violent than swallowing, no religious 
feeling, no faith in anything more mysti cal than cause and effect was required 
to experience a pill's transforma tive blessings. She couldn't wait to take it. 
She treaded on air all the way to Bll, where happily she saw no sign of Alfred. 
As if to acknowledge the illicit nature of her mission, she threw the dead b olt 
on the hall door. Further locked herself inside the bathroom. Raised her eyes 
to their reflected twins and, on a ceremonial impulse, returned their gaze  
324                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
as she hadn't in months or maybe years. Pushed 'one golden Asian through 
the foil backing of its SampLpak. Placed it on her tongue and swallowed it 
with water.  
For a few minutes she brushed and flossed, a bit of or al housekeep ing to pass 
the time. Then with a shudder of cresting exhaustion she went to her bed to 
lie and wait.  
Golden sunlight fell across the blankets in her windowless room.  
He nuzzled her palm with his warm velvet snout. He licked her eyelids with a  
tongue both sandpapery and slick. His breath was sweet and gingery.  
When she came awake the cool halogen lighting in the stateroom wasn't 
artificial anymore. It was the cool light of sun from behind a momentary 
cloud.  
I've taken the medication, she told h erself. I've taken the medica tion. I've 
taken the medication.  
Her new emotional flexibility received a bold challenge the next morn ing 
when she rose at seven and discovered Alfred curled up fast asleep in the 
shower stall.  
"Al, you're lying in the shower ," she said. "This is not the place to sleep."  
Having awakened him, she began to brush her teeth. Alfred opened 
undemented eyes and took stock. "Ugh, I am stiff stiff," he said.  
"What on earth are you doing in there?" Enid gurgled through a fluoride 
foam, brushing merrily away.  
"Got all turned around in the night," he said. "I had such dreams."  
She found that in the arms of Asian she had new reserves of patience for the 
wrist -straining wiggle -waggle brushstroke her denti st recommended for the 
sides of her molars. She watched with low to medium interest as Alfred 
achieved full uprightness through a multi stage process of propping, levering, 
hoisting, bracing, and controlled tipping. A lunatic dhoti of bunched and 
shredded diapers hung from his loins. "Look at this," he said, shaking his 
head. "Would you look at this."  
"I had the most wonderful night's sleep," she answered.  
"And how are our floaters this morning?" roving activities coordinator Suzy 
Ghosh asked the table in a voice like hair in a shampoo commer cial.  
"We didn't sink last night, if that's what you mean," said Sylvia Roth.  
The Norwegians quickly monopolized Suzy with a complicated in quiry 
regarding lap swimming in the larger of the Gunnar Myrdal's poo ls. 
"Well, well, Signe," Mr. Soderblad remarked to his wife at an indis creet 
volume, "this is indeed a great surprise. The Nygrens have a lengthy question 
for Miss Ghosh this morning."  
"Yes, Stig, they do always seem to have a lengthy question, don't they ? They 
are very thorough people, our Nygrens."  
Ted Roth spun half a grapefruit like a potter, stripping out its flesh. "The 
story of carbon," he said, "is the story of the planet. You're famil iar with the 
greenhouse effect?"  
"It's triple tax -free," Enid s aid. 
Alfred nodded. "I am familiar with the greenhouse effect."  
"You have to actually physically clip the coupons, which sometimes I forget," 
Enid said.  
"The earth was very hot four billion years ago," said Dr. Roth. "The 
atmosphere was unbreathable. Methane, carbon dioxide, hydro gen sulfide."  
"Of course at our age income matters more than growth."  
"Nature hadn't learned to break down cellulose. When a tr ee fell, it lay on the 
ground and got buried by the next tree that fell. This was the Carboniferous. 
The earth a lush riot. And in the course of millions and millions of years of 
trees falling on trees, almost all the carbon got taken from the air and buri ed 
underground. And there it stayed until yester day, geologically speaking."  
"Lap swimming, Signe. Do you suppose that this is similar to lap dancing?"  
"Some people are disgusting," said Mrs. Nygren.  
"What happens to a log that falls today is that funguse s and mi - 
328 
THE CORRECTIONS  
lap 
mi- 
crobes digest it, and all the carbon goes back into the sky. There can never be 
another Carboniferous. Ever. Because you can't ask Nature to unlearn how to 
biodegrade cellulose."  
"It's called Orfic Midland no w," Enid said.  
"Mammals came along when the world cooled off. Frost on the pumpkin. 
Furry things in dens. But now we have a very clever mammal that's taking all 
the carbon from underground and putting it back into the atmosphere."  
"I think we own some Orfi c Midland ourselves," Sylvia said.  
"As a matter of fact," Per Nygren said, "we, too, own Orfic Mid land."  
"Per would know," said Mrs. Nygren.  
"I daresay he would," said Mr. Soderblad.  
"Once we burn up all the coal and oil and gas," said Dr. Roth, "we'll ha ve an 
antique atmosphere. A hot, nasty atmosphere that no one's seen for three 
hundred million years. Once we've let the carbon genie out of its lithic 
bottle."  
"Norway has superb retirement benefits, hm, but I also supplement my 
national coverage with a p rivate fund. Per checks the price of each stock in 
the fund every morning. There are quite a number of American stocks. How 
many, Per?"  
"Forty -six at present," Per Nygren said. "If I am not mistaken, 'Orfic' is an 
acronym for the Oak Ridge Fiduciary Invest ment Corpora tion. The stock has 
maintained its value quite well and pays a handsome dividend."  
"Fascinating," said Mr. Soderblad. "Where is my coffee?"  
"But, Stig, do you know," said Signe Soderblad, "I am quite sure we also have 
this stock, Orfic Midland ." 
"We own a great many stocks. I can't remember every name. At the same 
time, too, the print in the newspaper is very tiny."  
"The moral of the story is don't recycle plastic. Send your plastic to a landfill. 
Get that carbon underground."  
"If it had been u p to Al, we'd still have every penny in passbook savings."  
"Bury it, bury it. Stopper the genie in the bottle."  
:HS 
327 
"I happen to have an eye condition that makes it painful for me to read," said 
Mr. Soderblad.  
"Oh, really?" said Mrs. Nygren acidly. "What is the medical name of this 
condition?"  
"I like a cool autumn day," said Dr. Roth.  
"Then again," said Mrs. Nygren, "I suppose that to learn the condi tion's name 
would itself necessitate painful reading."  
"This is a small planet."  
"There is lazy eye, of course, but to have two lazy eyes at once —" 
"That is not really possible," said Mr. Nygren. "The 'lazy eye' syn drome, or 
amblyopia, is a condition in which one eye assumes the work of the other. 
Therefore, if one  eye is lazy, the other is by definition —" 
"Per, shut up," said Mrs. Nygren.  
"Inga!"  
"Waiter, refill."  
"Imagine the Uzbek upper middle class," said Dr. Roth. "One of the families 
had the same Ford Stomper we have. In fact the only dif ference between our 
upper middle class and their upper middle class was that none of them, not 
even the richest family in town, had indoor plumbing."  
"I am aware," said Mr. Soderblad, "that as a nonreader I am morally inferior 
to all Norwegians. I accept this."  
"Flies like aro und something four days dead. Bucket of ashes that you 
sprinkle in the hole. Even the little way you can see down into it is farther 
than you want to. And a glittering Ford Stomper parked in their driveway. 
And they're videotaping us videotaping them."  
"At the same time, in spite of my disability, I do manage to enjoy a pleasure 
or two in life."  
"How empty, though, Stig, our pleasures must be," said Signe Soderblad, 
"compared to those of the Nygrens."  
"Yes, they do seem to experience the deep and lasting pl easures of the mind. 
At the same time, Signe, this is a very flattering dress you are wearing this 
morning. Even Mr. Nygren has been admiring this dress, in spite of the deep 
and lasting pleasures he finds elsewhere."  
"Per, come along," said Mrs. Nygren. " We are being insulted."  
328                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
"Stig, did you hear? The Nygrens have been insulted and are leav ing us."  
"It is a g reat pity. They are such fun to be with."  
"Our children are all easterners now," Enid said. "Nobody seems to like the 
Midwest anymore."  
"Biding my time here, fella," said a familiar voice.  
"The cashier at the Du Pont executive dining room was an Uzbek girl . I've 
probably seen Uzbeks at the IKEA store in Plymouth Meeting. These aren't 
extraterrestrials we're talking about. Uzbeks wear bifocals. They fly on 
planes."  
"We're stopping in Philadelphia on the way home so we can eat at her new 
restaurant. It's called the Generator?"  
"Enid, my gosh, that's her place? Ted and I were there two weeks ago."  
"It's a small world," Enid said.  
"We had a terrific dinner. Really memor ably good."  
"So in effect we've spent six thousand dollars to be reminded of what a pit 
toilet smells like."  
"I'll never forget it," Alfred said.  
"And are grateful for that pit toilet! In terms of the actual benefits of foreign 
travel. In terms of what TV and books can't give you. In terms of what you 
can only experience firsthand. Take away the pit toilet and we'd feel like we'd 
wasted six thousand dollars."  
"Shall we go rot our brains on the Sun Deck?"  
"Oh, Stig, let's. I am intellectually exhausted."  
"Thank God for poverty. Thank God for driving on the left side of the road. 
Thank God for Babel. Thank God for strange voltages and oddly shaped 
plugs." Dr. Roth lowered his glasses and peered over them, observing the 
Swedish exodus. "I note in passing tha t every dress that woman owns is 
designed for quick removal."  
"I've never seen Ted so eager to get to breakfast," Sylvia said. "And lunch. 
And dinner."  
"Stunning northern scenery," Roth said. "Isn't that what we're here for?"  
Alfred lowered his eyes uncomf ortably. A little fishbone of prudery  
was stuck in Enid's throat as well. "Do you think he really has an eye 
problem?" she managed to say.  
"His eye is excellent in at least one respect."  
"Ted, though, stop."  
"That the Swedish bombshell is a stale  cliche is itself a stale cliche."  
"Please stop."  
The retired vice president of Compliance pushed his glasses back up his nose 
and turned to Alfred. "I wonder if we're depressed because there's no frontier 
anymore. Because we can't pretend anymore there's a place no one's been. I 
wonder if aggregate depression is on the rise, worldwide."  
"I feel so wonderful this morning. Slept so well."  
"Lab rats become listless in overcrowded conditions."  
"You do, Enid, seem transformed. Just tell me this isn't related to  that doctor 
on the 'D' Deck. I hear stories."  
"Stories?"  
"The so -called cyber frontier," said Dr. Roth, "but where's the wilderness?"  
"A drug called Asian," Sylvia said.  
"Asian?"  
"The so -called space frontier," said Dr. Roth, "but I like this earth. It's a good 
planet. There's a scarcity of atmospheric cyanide, sulfuric acid, ammonia. 
Which is a boast by no means every planet can make."  
"Grandmother's little helper, I think they call it."  
"But even in your big quiet house you feel crowded if there's a big quiet house 
at the antipodes and every point in between."  
"All I ask is a little privacy," Alfred said.  
"No beach between Greenland and the Falklands that isn't threat ened with 
development. No acre uncleared."  
"Oh dear, what time is it?" Enid said. "We don't want to miss that lecture."  
"Sylvia's different. She likes the hubbub at the docks."  
"I do like the hubbub," Sylvia said.  
"Gangways, portholes, stevedores. She likes the blast of the horn. To me this 
is a f loating theme park."  
330 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
"You have to put up with a certain amount of fantasy," Alfred said. "It can't be 
helped."  
"Uzbekistan didn't agree with my stomach," Sylvia said.  
"I like all the waste up here," said Dr. Roth. "Good to se e such vast useless 
mileage."  
"You romanticize poverty."  
"I beg your pardon?"  
"We've traveled in Bulgaria," Alfred said. "I don't know about Uzbekistan, but 
we've traveled in China. Everything, as far as you could see from the 
railroad —if it were up to me,  I'd tear it all down. Tear it down and start over. 
The houses don't have to be pretty, just make them solid. Get the plumbing 
indoors. A good concrete wall and a roof that doesn't leak —that's what these 
people need. Sewers. Look at the Ger mans, what they  did to rebuild. There's a 
model of a country."  
"Wouldn't want to eat a fish out of the Rhine, though. If I could even find a 
fish in it."  
"That's a lot of environmentalist nonsense."  
"Alfred, you're too smart a man to call it nonsense."  
"I am in need of a  bathroom."  
"Al, when you're done, why don't you take a book outside and read for a 
while. Sylvia and I are going to the investment lecture. You just sit. In the 
sun. And relax relax relax."  
He had good days and bad days. It was as if when he lay in bed fo r a night 
certain humors pooled in the right or wrong places, like marinade around a 
flank steak, and in the morning his nerve endings either had enough of what 
they needed or did not; as if his mental clarity might depend on something as 
simple as whether  he'd lain on his side or on his back the night before; or as 
if, more disturbingly, he were a damaged transistor radio which after a 
vigorous shaking might function loud and clear or spew nothing but a static 
laced with unconnected phrases, the odd strain  of music.  
Still, even the worst morning was better than the best night. In the morning 
every process quickened, speeding his meds to their destina tions: the canary -
yellow spansule for incontinence, the small pink  
537  
Turns -like thing for the shakes, the white oblong to discourage nausea, the 
wan blue tablet to squelch hallucinations from the small pink Turns -like 
thing. In the morning the blood was crowded with commuters, the glucose 
peons, lactic and ureic sanitation workers, hemoglobinous de -liverymen 
carrying loads of freshly brewed oxygen in their dented vans, the stern 
foremen like insulin, the enzymic middle managers and exec utive 
epinephrine, leukocyte cops and EMS workers, expensive consul tants 
arriving in the ir pink and white and canary -yellow limos, everyone riding the 
aortal elevator and dispersing through the arteries. Before noon the rate of 
worker accidents was tiny. The world was newborn.  
He had energy. From the Kierkegaard Room he lopingly careened thro ugh a 
red-carpeted hallway that had previously vouchsafed him a comfort station 
but this morning seemed all business, no M or W in sight, just salons and 
boutiques and the Ingmar Bergman Cinema. The problem was that his 
nervous system could no longer be re lied on for an accurate assessment of his 
need to go. At night his solution was to wear protection. By day his solution 
was to visit a bathroom hourly and al ways to carry his old black raincoat in 
case he had an accident to hide. The raincoat had the adde d virtue of 
offending Enid's romantic sensi bilities, and his hourly stops the added virtue 
of lending structure to his life. Simply holding things together —simply 
keeping the ocean of night terrors from breaching the last bulkhead —was his 
ambition now.  
Throngs of women were streaming toward the Longstocking Ball room. A 
strong eddy in their current swept Alfred into a hallway lined with the 
staterooms of onboard lecturers and entertainers. At the end of this hall a 
men's room beckoned.  
An officer in epaulets was using one of the two urinals. Afraid of failing to 
perform under scrutiny, Alfred entered a stall and slid the bolt and found 
himself face to face with an ordure -strafed toilet which fortu nately said 
nothing, merely stank. He ex ited and tried the next stall, but here something 
did scurry on the floor —a mobile turd, ducking for cover —and he didn't dare 
enter. In the meantime the officer had flushed, and as he turned from his 
urinal Alfred recognized his blue cheeks and rose -tinted  eyeglasses, his 
pudenda -pink lips. Hanging from his still -open zipper was twelve inches or 
more of limp tan tubing. A  
332                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
- IT, 
ce. t: - 
.   ' lil - 
yellow grin opened between his blue cheeks. He said, "I left a little treasure in 
your bed, Mr. Lambert. To replace the one I took."  
Alfred reeled out of the bathroom and fled up a staircase, higher and higher, 
up seven n ights to the open air of the Sports Deck. Here he found a bench in 
hot sunlight. From the pocket of his raincoat he took a map of Canada's 
maritime provinces and tried to fix himself within a grid, identify some 
landmarks.  
Three old men in Gore -Tex parkas were standing at the rail. Their voices 
were inaudible one moment and fully distinct the next. Appar ently the wind 
had pockets in its fluid mass, small spaces of stillness through which a 
sentence or two might find a way.  
"Here's a fellow with a map," a m an said. He came over to Alfred looking 
happy in the way of all men in the world except Alfred. "Excuse me, sir. What 
do you reckon we're looking at up here on the left?"  
"That is the Gaspe Peninsula," Alfred answered firmly. "There should be a 
large town coming up around the bend."  
"Thank you very much."  
The man returned to his companions. As if the ship's location mat tered to 
them greatly, as if only the quest for this information had brought them to 
the Sports Deck to begin with, all three immediately d eparted for a lower 
deck, leaving Alfred alone on top of the world.  
The protective sky was thinner in this country of northern water. Clouds ran 
in packs resembling furrows in a field, gliding along beneath the sky's 
enclosing dome, which was noticeably lo w. One approached Ultima Thule 
here. Green objects had red coronas. In the forests that stretched west to the 
limit of visibility, as in the purposeless rushing of the clouds, as in the air's 
supernal clarity, there was nothing local.  
Odd to glimpse infini ty precisely in a finite curve, eternity precisely in the 
seasonal.  
Alfred had recognized the blue -cheeked man in the bathroom as the man 
from Signals, as betrayal personified. But the blue -cheeked man from Signals 
couldn't possibly afford a luxury cruise,  and this wor ried him. The blue -
cheeked man came from the distant past but was walking and talking in the 
present, and the turd was a creature from the night but was afoot in broad 
daylight, and this worried him a lot.  
333 
According to Ted Roth,  holes in the ozone layer started at the poles. It was 
during the long Arctic night that the earth's shell first weakened, but once the 
shell was punctured the damage spread out ward, encroaching even on the 
sunny tropics —even the equator —and soon no spot on the globe was safe.  
Meanwhile an observatory in the far nether regions had sent out a feeble 
signal, an ambiguous message.  
Alfred received the signal and wondered what to do about it. He felt shy of 
bathrooms now, but he couldn't very well drop his trou sers out here in the 
open. The three men might return at any moment.  
Beyond a protective railing to his right was a collection of thickly painted 
planes and cylinders, two navigational spheres, an inverted cone. Since he 
was not afraid of heights, nothing prevented him from ignoring the strongly 
worded warning in four languages, squeezing past the railing, and stepping 
out onto the sandpapery metal surface to seek, as it were, a tree to pee 
behind. He was high above everything and invisible.  
But too late.  
Both legs of his trousers were very soaked, the left leg nearly to his ankle. 
Warm -cold wetness all over everything.  
And where a town should have appeared on the coast, the land in stead was 
dropping away. Gray waves marched across strange waters, and the t remor of 
the engines became more labored, less easy to ignore. The ship either had not 
reached the Gaspe Peninsula or had already passed it. The data he'd 
transmitted to the men in parkas was faulty. He was lost.  
And from the deck immediately below him cam e a windborne giggle. It came 
again, a trilling squeal, a northern lark.  
He edged away from the spheres and cylinders and leaned out past the outer 
railing. A few yards farther astern was a small "Nordic" sun bathing area, 
sequestered behind cedar fencing,  and a man standing where no passenger 
was permitted to stand could see right over the fencing and behold Signe 
Soderblad, her chill -stippled arms and thighs and belly, the plump twin 
cloudberries into which a suddenly gray win ter sky had drawn her nipple s, 
the quaking ginger fur between her legs.  
334                                                                                                                                 THE 
CORRECTIONS  
 
He 
le 
The day world floated on the night world and the night world tried to swamp 
the day world and he worked and worked to keep the day world watertight. 
But there had been a grievous breach.  
Came another cloud then, larger, denser, that turned the gulf below i t to a 
greenish black. Ship and shadow in collision.  
And shame and despair — 
Or was it the wind catching the sail of his raincoat?  
Or was it the ship's pitching?  
Or the tremor in his legs?  
Or the corresponding tremor of the engines?  
Or a fainting spell?  
Or vertigo's standing invitation?  
Or the relative warmth of open water's invitation to someone soaked and 
freezing in the wind?  
Or was he leaning, deliberately, to glimpse again the gingery mons?  
"How fitting it is," said internationally noted investment coun selor Jim 
Crolius, "to be talking money on a Nordic Pleasurelines Luxury Fall Color 
Cruise. Folks, it's a beautiful sunny morning, isn't it?"  
Crolius was speaking from a lectern beside an easel on which the ti tle of his 
talk—"Surviving the Corrections" —was written in purple ink. His question 
brought murmurs of assent from the first few rows in front of him, the people 
who'd arrived early for good seats. Someone up there even said: "Yes, Jim\n 
Enid felt ever so much better this morning, but a few atmospheri c 
disturbances still lingered in her head, for example a squall now consist ing of 
(a) resentment of the women who'd come to the Longstocking Ballroom 
absurdly early, as if the potential lucrativeness of Jim Crolius's advice might 
somehow decline with one' s distance from him, and (b) particular 
resentment of the pushy New York kind of woman who el bowed in ahead of 
everyone to establish a first -name relationship with a lecturer (she was sure 
that Jim Crolius could see right through their presumption and hol low 
flattery, but he might be too polite to ignore them and focus on less pushy 
and more deserving midwestern women such as Enid), and (c) intense 
irritation with Alfred for having stopped  
• :ns 
335 
in a bathroom twice on the way to breakfast, wh ich had prevented her from 
leaving the Kierkegaard Room early and securing a good front -row seat 
herself.  
Almost as soon as the squall had gathered it disappeared, however, and the 
sun shone strongly again.  
"Well, I hate to break it to you folks in the bac k," Jim Crolius was saying, "but 
from where / stand, up here by the windows, I can see some clouds on the 
horizon. Those could be friendly little white clouds. Or they could be dark 
rain clouds. Appearances can be deceiving! From where I stand I may think I 
see a safe course ahead, but I'm no expert. I may be piloting the ship straight 
into a reef. Now, you wouldn't want to sail on a ship without a captain, would 
you? A captain who's got all the maps and gadgets, all the bells and whistles, 
the whole nine y ards. Right? You got your radar, you got your sonar, you got 
your Global Positioning System," Jim Crolius was counting off each 
instrument on his fingers. "You got your satellites up in outer space! It's all 
pretty technical. But somebody's got to have tha t information, or we could all 
be in big trouble. Right? This is a deep ocean. This is your life. So what I'm 
saying is you may not want to master all that technical stuff personally, all the 
bells and whistles, the whole nine yards. But you better hope yo u've got a 
good captain when you go cruising the high seas of high finance."  
There was applause from the front rows.  
"He must literally think we're eight years old," Sylvia Roth whis pered to Enid.  
"This is just his introduction," Enid whispered back.  
"Now , another way this is fitting," Jim Crolius continued, "is that we're here 
to see the changing leaves. The year has its rhythms —winter, spring, 
summer, fall. The whole thing is cyclical. You got your up swings in the 
spring, you got your downturns in the fall. It's just like the market. Cyclical 
business, right? You can have a bull market for five, ten, even fifteen years. 
We've seen it in our lifetime. But we've also seen corrections. I may look like 
I'm just a kid, but I've even seen a genuine market break in my lifetime. Scary 
stuff. Cyclical business. People, we've got a lot of green out there right now. 
It's been a long, glorious  
33B 
THE CORRECTIONS  
summer. In fact, let me see a show of hands here, how many of you are 
paying for this cruise, either entirely or in part, on the strength of your 
investments?"  
Forest of raised hands.  
Jim Crolius nodded with satisfaction. "Well, folks, I hate to break it t o you, 
but those leaves are starting to turn. No matter how green things are for you 
right now, it's not going to survive the winter. Of course, every year is 
different, every cycle's different. You never know exactly when that green is 
going to turn. But we're here, every one of us, because we're foresighted 
people. Every person in this room has proved to me she's a smart investor, 
just by virtue of being here. You know why? Because it was still summer 
when you left home. Every person in this room had the foresight to know that 
something was going to change on this cruise. And the question we all have —
I'm speaking in metaphors here —the question is: Will all that glorious green 
out there turn to glorious gold? Or will it all just wither on the branch in the 
winter of our discontent?"  
The Longstocking Ballroom was electric with excitement now. There were 
murmurs of "Marvelous! Marvelous!"  
"More matter and less art," Sylvia Roth said dryly.  
Death, Enid thought. He was talking about death. And all the peo ple cl apping 
were so old.  
But where was the sting of this realization? Asian had taken it away.  
Jim Crolius turned now to the easel and flipped over the first of its big 
newsprint pages. The second page was headed WHEN THE CLIMATE 
CHANGES, and the categories —Fun ds, Bonds, Common Stock, etc. — drew a 
gasp from the front row out of all proportion to the informa tional content. 
For an instant it seemed to Enid as if Jim Crolius were doing a technical 
market analysis of the kind that her broker in St. Jude had told he r never to 
pay attention to. Discounting the minimal effects of wind drag at low 
velocities, something "plummeting" (a thing of value "plunging" in a "free 
fall") experienced an acceleration due to gravity of 32 feet per second 
squared, and, acceleration b eing the second -order derivative of distance, the 
analyst could integrate once over the distance the object had fallen (roughly 
30 feet) to calculate its  
537  
velocity (42 feet per second) as it passed the center of a window 8 feet tall, 
and assum ing a 6 -foot -long object, and also assuming for simplic ity's sake a 
constant velocity over the interval, derive a figure of approx imately four -
tenths of a second of full or partial visibility. Four -tenths of a second wasn't 
much. If you were looking asid e and mentally adding up the hours until the 
execution of a young killer, all that registered was something dark flashing 
by. But if you happened to be gazing directly at the window in question and 
you happened as well to be feeling un -precedentedly calm, four -tenths of a 
second was more than enough time to identify the falling object as your 
husband of forty -seven years; to notice that he was wearing the awful black 
raincoat which had lost its shape and should never have been worn in public 
but which he'd willfully packed for the trip and willfully carried with him 
everywhere; to experience not only the certainty that something terrible had 
happened but also a peculiar sense of intrusion, as if you were witnessing an 
event that nature had never intended yo u to witness, like the impact of a me -
teorite or the copulation of whales; and even to observe the expression on 
your husband's face, to register its almost youthful beauty, its pecu liar 
serenity, for who could have anticipated the grace with which the ra ging man 
would fall?  
He was remembering the nights he'd sat upstairs with one or both of his boys 
or with his girl in the crook of his arm, their damp bath -smelling heads hard 
against his ribs as he read aloud to them from Black Beauty or The 
Chronicles of Narnia. How his voice alone, its palpable res onance, had made 
them drowsy. These were evenings, and there were hundreds of them, maybe 
thousands, when nothing traumatic enough to leave a scar had befallen the 
nuclear unit. Evenings of plain vanilla closen ess in his black leather chair; 
sweet evenings of doubt between the nights of bleak certainty. They came to 
him now, these forgotten counterexamples, because in the end, when you 
were falling into water, there was no solid thing to reach for but your 
child ren.  
338 
THE CORRECTIONS  
ROBIN PASSAFARO was a Philadelphian from a family of troublemakers and 
true believers. Robin's grandfather and her uncles Jimmy and Johnny were 
all unreconstructed Teamsters; the grandfathe r, Fazio, had served under the 
Teamsters boss Frank Fitzsimmons as a national vice president and had run 
the biggest Philly local and mishandled the dues of its 3,200 members for 
twenty years. Fazio had survived two racke teering indictments, a coronary, a  
laryngectomy, and nine months of chemotherapy before retiring to Sea Isle 
City on the Jersey coast, where he still hobbled out onto a pier every morning 
and baited his crab traps with raw chicken.  
Uncle Johnny, Fazio's eldest son, got along well on two ki nds of dis ability 
("chronic and severe lumbar pain," the claim forms stated), his seasonal 
cash -only house -painting business, and his luck or talent as an online day 
trader. Johnny lived near Veterans Stadium with his wife and their youngest 
daughter in a  vinyl -sided row house that they'd ex panded until it filled their 
tiny lot, from the sidewalk to the rear prop erty line; a flower garden and a 
square of Astroturf were on the roof.  
Uncle Jimmy ("Baby Jimmy") was a bachelor and the site manager for IBT 
Document Storage, a cinder -block mausoleum that the Inter national 
Brotherhood of Teamsters, in more optimistic times, had built on the 
industrial banks of the Delaware and later, because only three (3) loyal 
Teamsters had ever opted for interment in its tho usand fireproof vaults, 
converted into a long -term repository for corporate and legal paper. Baby 
Jimmy was famous in local NA circles for having hooked himself on 
methadone without ever trying heroin.  
Robin's father, Nick, was Fazio's middle child and the  only Passa -faro of his 
generation who never got with the Teamster program. Nick was the family 
brain and a committed Socialist; the Teamsters with their Nixonian and 
Sinatran allegiances were anathema to him. Nick married an Irish girl and 
pointedly moved  out to racially integrated Mount Airy  
341 
and embarked on a career of teaching high -school social studies in the city 
district, daring principals to fire him for his ebullient Trotskyism.  
Nick and his wife, Colleen, had been told that they were infertile. They 
adopted a year -old boy, Billy, a few months before Colleen be came pregnant 
with Robin —the first of three daughters. Robin was a teenager before she 
learned that Billy was adopted, bu t her earliest emotional memories from 
childhood, she told Denise, were of feeling helplessly privileged.  
There was probably a good diagnostic label for Billy, corresponding to 
abnormal EEG waveforms or troubled red nodules or black lacunae on his 
CAT scan  and to hypothetical causes like severe neglect or cere bral trauma in 
his preadoptive infancy; but his sisters, Robin especially, knew him simply as 
a terror. Billy soon figured out that no matter how cruel he was to Robin, she 
would always blame herself.  If she lent him five dollars, he made fun of her 
for thinking he would pay it back. (If she complained to her father, Nick just 
gave her another five.) Billy chased her with the grasshoppers whose legs he'd 
clipped the ends off, the frogs he'd bathed in C lorox, and he told her —he 
meant it as a joke —"I hurt them because of you." He put turds of mud in 
Robin's dolls' underpants. He called her Cow Clueless and Robin No -Breast. 
He stuck her forearm with a pencil and broke the lead off deep. The day after 
a new  bicycle of hers disappeared from the garage, he turned up with a good 
pair of black roller skates that he said he'd found on Germantown Avenue 
and that he used to rocket around the neighbor hood in the months while she 
was waiting for another bike.  
Their father, Nick, had eyes for every injustice in the First and Third Worlds 
except those of which Billy was the author. By the time Robin started high 
school, Billy's delinquency had driven her to padlock her closet, stuff Kleenex 
in the keyhole of her bedroo m door, and sleep with her wallet beneath her 
pillow; but even these measures she took more sadly than angrily. She had 
little to complain of and she knew it. She and her sisters were poor and happy 
in their big falling -down house on Phil -Ellena Street, an d she went to a good 
Quaker high school and then to an excellent Quaker college, both on full 
scholarships, and she  
342 
THE CORRECTIONS  
young anarchist Billy Passafaro over the years drew'ever more severe 
sentences for his crimes —probation, commu nity service, experimental penal 
boot camp, and finally the state pen at Graterfbrd. Robin and her father often 
argued about the justice of these sentences, Nick stroking his Lenin -like 
goatee and asserting that, although not a violent man himself, he was not 
opposed to violence in the service of ideals, Robin challenging him to specify 
what political ideal, exactly, Billy had ad vanced by stabbing a Penn 
undergrad with a broken pool cue.  
The year before Denise met Robin, Billy was released on parole and at tended 
a ribbon -cutting ceremony for a Community Computing Center in the poor 
near -north neighborhood of Nicetown. One of the many policy coups of 
Mayor Goode's popular two -term successor was the commercial exploitation 
of the city's public schools. The ma yor had shrewdly cast the deplorable 
neglect of the schools as a business oppor tunity ("Act Fast, Be Part of Our 
Message of Hope," his letters said),  
and the N ------ Corporation had responded to his pitch by assuming  
responsibility for the city's severely underfunded school athletic pro grams. 
Now the mayor had midwifed a similar arrangement with the  
W------  Corporation, which was donating to the city of Philadelphia  
sufficient units of its famous Global Desktop to "em power" every class room 
in the city, plus five Community Computing Centers in blighted  
northern and western neighborhoods. The agreement granted W ------  
the exclusive right to employ for promotional and advertising purposes all 
classroom activities within the school district of Philadelphia, includ ing but 
not limited to all Global Desktop applications. Critics of the  
mayor alternately denounced the "sellout" and complained that W ------  
was donating its slow and crash -prone Version 4.0 Desktops to the schoo ls 
and its nearly useless Version 3.2 technology to the Community Computing 
Centers. But the mood in Nicetown on that September afternoon was 
buoyant. The mayor and W ------ 's twenty -eight -year -old corporate -image 
vice president, Rick Hamburg, joined hands on big shears to cut ribbon. 
Local politicians of color said children and tomorrow. They said digital and 
democracy and history.  
Outside the white tent, the usual crowd of anarchists, eyed warily by a police 
detail that was later criticized as having been too small,  
344                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
openly carried banners and placards and privately, in the pockets of their 
cargo pants, carried powerful  bar magnets with which they hoped, amid the 
cake -eating and punch -drinking and confusion, to erase much data from the 
center's new Global Desktops. Their banners said REFUSE IT and 
COMPUTERS ARE THE OPPOSITE OF REVOLUTION and THIS HEAVEN 
GIVES ME MIGRAINE . Billy Passafaro, neady shaved and wearing a short -
sleeve white button -down, carried a four -foot length of two -by-four on which 
he'd written WELCOME TO PHILADELP HIA !! When the official ceremonies ended 
and the scene became more appealingly anarchic, Billy  edged into the crowd, 
smiling and holding aloft his message of goodwill, until he was close enough 
to die dignitaries diat he could swing the two -by-four like a baseball bat and 
break Rick Flamburg's skull. Three further blows demolished Hamburg's 
nose, j aw, collarbone, and most of his teetii before the mayor's bodyguard 
tackled Billy and a dozen cops piled on.  
Billy was lucky the tent was too crowded for the cops to shoot him. He was 
also lucky, given the obvious premeditation of his crime and the politic ally 
awkward shortage of white inmates on deadi row, that Rick Flamburg didn't 
die. (Less clear was whether Flamburg himself, an unmarried Dartmoudi 
grad whom the attack left palsied, dis figured, slurred of speech, blind in one 
eye, and prone to incapacit ating headaches, felt lucky about this.) Billy was 
indicted for attempted mur der, first -degree assault, and assault with a deadly 
weapon. He categori cally rejected any plea agreement and chose to represent 
himself in court, dismissing as "accommodationis t" bodi his court -appointed 
counsel and the old Teamster attorney who offered to bill his family fifty an 
hour.  
To die surprise of nearly everyone but Robin, who had never doubted her 
brother's intelligence, Billy mounted an articulate self -defense. He arg ued 
that the mayor's "sale" of the children of Philadel phia into die 
"technoslavery" of the W ------ Corporation represented a  
"clear and present public danger" to which he'd been justified in re sponding 
violently. He denounced die "unholy connivance" of A meri can business and 
American government. He compared himself to the Minutemen at Lexington 
and Concord. When Robin, much later,  
showed Denise the trial transcript, Denise imagined bringing Billy and her 
brother Chip together over dinner and lis tening while they com pared notes 
about "the bureaucracy," but this dinner would have to wait until Billy had 
served seventy percent of his twelve -to-eighteen -year sentence at Graterford.  
Nick Passafaro had taken a leave of absence and loyally attended his  son's 
trial. Nick went on TV and said everything you'd expect from an old red: 
"Once a day the victim's black, and there's silence; once a year the victim's 
white, and there's an outcry," and "My son will pay dearly  
for his crime, but W ------ will never pa y for its crimes," and "The Rick  
Flamburgs of the world have made billions selling phony violence to 
America's children." Nick concurred in most of Billy's courtroom argu ments 
and was proud of his performance, but after the photos of Flam -burg's 
injuries were introduced in court, he began to lose his grip. The deep V -
shaped indentations in Flamburg's cranium, nose, jaw, and clav icle spoke to 
a savagery of exertion, a madness, that didn't square well with idealism. Nick 
stopped sleeping as the trial progre ssed. He stopped shaving and lost his 
appetite. At Colleen's insistence, he saw a psychiatrist and came home with 
medications, but even then he woke her in the night. He shouted, "I won't 
apologize!" He shouted, "It's a war!" Eventually his dosages were up ped, and 
in April the school dis trict retired him.  
Because Rick Flamburg had worked for the W ------ Corporation,  
Robin felt responsible for all of this.  
Robin had become the Passafaro ambassador to Rick Flamburg's family, 
showing up at the hospital until Flamburg's parents had spent their anger 
and suspicion and recognized that she was not her brother's keeper. She sat 
by Flamburg and read Sports Illustrat ed to him. She walked alongside his 
walker as he shuffled up a corridor. On the night of the second of his 
reconstructive surgeries, she took his parents to dinner and listened to their 
(frankly boring) stories about their son. She told them how quick Bill y had 
been, how in fourth grade he'd already had the spelling and handwriting 
skills to forge a plausible note excus ing him from school, and what a fund of 
dirty jokes and important re productive information he was, and how it felt to 
be a smart girl and see 
346  
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
your equally smart brother make himself more stupid by the year, as if 
specifically to avoid becoming a person like you: how mysterious it all was 
and how sorry she felt about what he'd done to their son.  
On the eve of B illy's trial, Robin invited her mother to go to church. Colleen 
had been confirmed as a Catholic, but she hadn't taken communion in forty 
years; Robin's own church experience was confined to weddings and 
funerals. Nevertheless, on three consecutive Sundays , Colleen agreed to be 
picked up in Mount Airy and driven to her child hood parish, St. Dymphna's, 
in North Philly. Leaving the sanctuary on the third Sunday, Colleen told 
Robin, in the faint brogue she'd retained all her life, "That'll do for me, 
thanks."  After that, Robin went by her self to mass at St. Dymphna's and, by 
and by, to confirmation classes.  
Robin could afford the time for these good works and acts of devo tion 
because of the W ------ Corporation. Her husband, Brian Callahan,  
was the son of a lo cal small -time manufacturer and had grown up com -
fortably in Bala -Cynwyd, playing lacrosse and developing sophisticated tastes 
in expectation of inheriting his father's small specialty -chemical company. 
(Callahan pere in his youth had profitably developed a com pound that could 
be thrown into Bessemer converters and patch their cracks and ulcers while 
their ceramic walls were still hot.) Brian had married the prettiest girl in his 
college class (in his opinion, this was Robin), and soon after graduation he' d 
become president of High Temp Products. The company was housed in a 
yellow -brick building in an industrial park near the Tacony -Palmyra Bridge; 
by coincidence, its nearest living commercial neighbor was IBT Document 
Storage. The cerebral drain of running  High Temp Products being minimal, 
Brian spent his executive afternoons noodling around with computer code 
and Fourier analysis, blasting on his presidential boom box certain cult 
California bands to which he was partial (Fibulator, Thinking Fellers Union,  
the Minutemen, the Nomatics), and writing a piece of software that in the 
fullness of time he quietly patented, quietly found a VC backer for, and one 
day, on the advice of this backer, quietly sold to the W ------ Corporation for 
$19,500,000.  
Brian's produ ct, called Eigenmelody, processed any piece of recorded music 
into an eigenvector that distilled the song's tonal and  
•• 
347 
melodic essence into discrete, manipulable coordinates. An Eigen -melody 
user could select a favorite Moby song, and Eigenmelody would 
spectroanalyze her choice, search a recorded -music database for songs with 
similar eigenvectors, and produce a list of kin dred sounds that the user might 
otherwise have never found: the Au Pairs, Laura Nyro, Thomas Mapfumo, 
Pokrovsky's wailing version of Les Noces. Eigen melody was parlor game, 
musicological tool, and record -sales -enhancer rolled into one. Brian had 
worked en ough kinks out of it that the behe moth of W ------ , belatedly 
scrambling for a piece of the online music -distribution action, came running 
to him with a big wad of monopoly money in its outstretched hand.  
It was characteristic of Brian, who hadn't mentione d the impending sale to 
Robin, that on the evening of the day the deal went through he didn't breathe 
a word of it until the girls were in bed in their modest yuppie row house near 
the Art Museum and he and she were watching a Nova show about sunspots.  
"Oh, by the way," Brian said, "neither of us ever has to work again."  
It was characteristic of Robin —her excitability —that on receiving this news 
she laughed until she got the hiccups.  
Alas, there was justice in Billy's old epithet for Robin: Cow Clue less. R obin 
was under the impression that she already had a good life with Brian. She 
lived in her town house, grew vegetables and herbs in her little back yard, 
taught "language arts" to ten - and eleven -year -olds at an experimental school 
in West Philly, sent he r daughter Sinead to an excellent private elementary 
school on Fairmount Avenue and her daughter Erin to the preschool program 
at Friends' Select, bought soft -shell crabs and Jersey tomatoes at the Reading 
Terminal Market, took weekends and Augusts at Bria n's family's house at 
Cape May, socialized with old friends who had children of their own, and 
burned off enough sexual energy with Brian (she ideally liked it daily, she 
told Denise) to keep her halfway calm.  
Cow Clueless was therefore shocked by Brian's next question. He asked her 
where she thought they should live. He said he was thinking of Northern 
California. He was also thinking of Provence, New York, and London.  
THE CORRECTIONS  
: 
"We're happy here," Robin said. "Why go someplace where we d on't know 
anybody and everybody's a millionaire?"  
"Climate," Brian said. "Beauty, safety, culture. Style. None of which are 
Philly's long suit. I'm not saying let's move. I'm just saying tell me if there's 
anyplace you'd like to go, even for a summer."  
"I like it here."  
"So we'll stay here," he said. "Until you feel like going someplace else."  
She was naive enough, she told Denise, to think this ended the dis cussion. 
She had a good marriage, stably founded on childrearing, eating, and sex. It 
was true that she and Brian had different class backgrounds, but High Temp 
Products wasn't exactly E. I. Du Pont de Nemours, and Robin, holding 
degrees from two elite sch ools, wasn't your typical proletarian. Their few real 
differences came down to style, and these differences were mostly invisible to 
Robin, because Brian was a good husband and a nice guy and because, in her 
cow innocence, Robin couldn't imagine that style  had anything to do with 
happiness. Her musical tastes ran to John Prine and Etta James, and so 
Brian played Prine and James at home and saved his Bartok and Defunkt and 
Flaming Lips and Mission of Burma for blasting on his boom box at High 
Temp. That Robi n dressed like a grad student in white sneakers and a purple 
nylon shell and oversized round wireframes of a kind last worn by 
fashionable people in 1978 didn't altogether disappoint Brian, because he 
alone among men got to see her naked. That Robin was hi gh-strung and had 
a penetrating screechy voice and a kookaburra laugh seemed, likewise, a 
small price to pay for a heart of gold and an eye -popping streak of lechery 
and a racing metabolism that kept her movie -actress thin. That Robin never 
shaved her armp its and too sel dom washed her glasses —well, she was the 
mother of Brian's children, and as long as he could play his music and tinker 
with his tensors by himself, he didn't mind indulging in her the anti -style that 
liberal women of a certain age wore as a  badge of feminist identity. This, at 
any rate, was how Denise imagined Brian had solved the problem of style 
until the money from W ------ came rolling in.  
(Denise, though only three years younger than Robin, could not  
 
conceive  of wearing  a  pu rple  nylon parka  o'r  failing to  shave  her armpits. 
She didn't even own white sneakers.)  
Robin's first concession to her new wealth was to spend the summer house -
hunting with Brian. She'd grown up in a big house and she wanted her girls to 
grow up in o ne, too. If Brian needed twelve -foot ceilings and four baths and 
mahogany details throughout, she could live with that. On the sixth of 
September they signed a contract on a grand brownstone on Panama Street, 
near Rittenhouse Square.  
Two days later, with a ll the strength in his prison -built shoulders,  
Billy Passafaro welcomed W ----- 's corporate -image vice president to  
Philadelphia.  
What Robin needed to know and couldn't find out, in the weeks following the 
attack, was whether, by the time he lettered his me ssage on a two -by-four, 
Billy had learned of Brian's windfall and knew which company she and Brian 
owed their sudden wealth to. The answer mat tered, mattered, mattered. 
However, it was pointless to ask Billy. She knew she wouldn't get the truth 
from Billy , she'd get whatever answer he believed would hurt her worst. Billy 
had made it abundantly clear to Robin that he would never stop sneering at 
her, never address her as a peer, until she could prove to him that her life was 
as fucked -up and miserable as hi s. And it was precisely this totemic role she 
seemed to play for him, precisely the fact that he'd singled her out as the 
arche typical possessor of the happy normal life he couldn't have, that made 
her feel as if hers were the head he'd swung for when he brained Rick 
Flamburg.  
Before the trial she asked her father if he'd told Billy that Brian  
had sold Eigenmelody to W ----- . She didn't want to ask him, but she  
couldn't not. Nick, because he gave Billy money, was the only person in the 
family still in regul ar communication with him. (Uncle Jimmy had promised 
to shoot the desecrator of his shrine, the little prick nephew, if he ever 
showed his little prick Elvis -hating face again, and eventually Billy had stolen 
once too often from everybody else; even Nick's  par ents, Fazio and Carolina, 
who had long insisted that there was nothing wrong with Billy but, in Fazio's 
words, "attentive deficiency disorder," no longer let their grandson inside 
their Sea Isle City house.)  
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
 
Nick unfortuna tely grasped the import of Robin's question right away. 
Choosing his words carefully, he replied that, no, he didn't recall saying 
anything to Billy.  
"It's better if you just tell me the truth, Dad," Robin said.  
"Well ... I ... I don't think there's any co nnection there . . . uh, Robin."  
"Maybe it wouldn't make me feel guilty. Maybe it would just piss me off."  
"Well . . . Robin . . . those . . . those feelings often amount to the same thing 
anyway. Guilt, anger, same thing . . . right? But don't you worry a bout Billy."  
She hung up wondering whether Nick was trying to protect her from her 
guilt, trying to protect Billy from her anger, or simply spacing out under the 
strain. She suspected it was a combination of all three. She suspected that 
during the summer her father had mentioned Brian's windfall to Billy and 
that father and son had then traded snidenesses  
and bitternesses about the W ------  Corporation and bourgeois Robin  
and leisure -class Brian. She suspected this, if nothing else, because of how 
badly Bri an and her father got along. Brian was never as outspoken with his 
wife as he was with Denise ("Nick's the worst kind of coward," he remarked 
to her once), but he made no secret of hating Nick's bad -boy disquisitions on 
the uses of violence and his teeth -sucking satisfac tion with his so -called 
socialism. Brian liked Colleen well enough ("She sure got a raw deal in that 
marriage," he remarked to Denise) but shook his head and left the room 
whenever Nick began holding forth. Robin didn't let herself imagine what her 
father and Billy had said about her and Brian. But she was pretty sure that 
things were said and that Rick Flamburg had paid the price. Nick's response 
to the trial photographs of Flamburg lent further credence to this view.  
During the trial, as h er father fell apart, Robin studied the cate chism at St. 
Dymphna's and made two further claims on Brian's new money. First she 
quit her job at the experimental school. She was no longer satisfied to work 
for parents paying $23,000 a year per child (althou gh, of course, she and 
Brian were paying nearly that much to school Sinead and Erin). And then she 
embarked on a philanthropic  
project. In a badly blighted section of Point Breeze, less than a mile south of 
their new house, she bought a vacant ci ty block with a single derelict row 
house standing on one corner. She also bought five truck -loads of humus and 
good liability insurance. Her plan was to hire local teenagers at minimum 
wage, teach them the rudiments of organic gar dening, and let them sha re the 
profits from whatever vegetables they could sell. She threw herself into her 
Garden Project with a manic in tensity that was scary even by Robin 
standards. Brian found her awake at her Global Desktop at 4 a.m., tapping 
both feet and comparing vari eties of turnip.  
With a different contractor coming to Panama Street every week to make 
improvements, and with Robin disappearing into a utopist sink of time and 
energy, Brian reconciled himself to remaining in the dismal city of his 
childhood. He decided to have some fun of his own. He began eating lunch at 
the good restaurants of Philadelphia, one after another, and comparing each 
to his current favorite, Mare Scuro. When he was sure that he still liked Mare 
Scuro best, he called the chef and made a proposal.  
"The first t ruly cool restaurant in Philly," he said. "The kind of place that 
makes a person say, 'Hey, / could live in Philly —if I had to.' I don't care if 
anybody else actually feels that way. I just want a place that makes me feel 
that way. So whatever they're payi ng you now, I will double. And then you go 
to Europe and eat for a couple of months at my expense. And then come back 
and design and operate a truly cool restaurant."  
"You're going to lose vast amounts of money," Denise replied, "if you don't 
find an experienced partner or an exceptionally good man -ager."  
"Tell me what to do, and I'll do it," Brian said.  
" 'Double,' you said?"  
"You've got the best place in the city."  
" 'Double' is intriguing."  
"So say yes."  
"Well, it might happen," Denise said. "But you're still probably go - 
352 
THE CORRECTIONS  
ing to lose vast amounts of money. You're certainly overpaying your chef."  
Denise had always had trouble saying no whe n she felt wanted in the right 
way. Growing up in suburban St. Jude, she'd been kept at safe dis tances from 
anybody who might have wanted her in this way, but after she finished high 
school she worked for a summer in the Signal Depart ment of the Midland 
Pacific Railroad, and here, in a big sunny room with twin rows of drafting 
tables, she became acquainted with the de sires of a dozen older men.  
The brain of the Midland Pacific, the temple of its soul, was a Depression -era 
limestone office building with r ounded rooftop cren -ellations like the edges 
of a skimpy waffle. Higher -order consciousness had its cortical seat in the 
boardroom and executive dining room on the sixteenth floor and in the 
offices of the more abstract departments (Operations, Legal, Publ ic 
Relations) whose vice presidents were on fifteen. Down at the reptile -brain 
bottom of the building were billing, payroll, personnel, and data storage. In 
between were mid -level skill functions such as Engineering, which 
encompassed bridges, track, build ings, and signals.  
The Midland Pacific lines were twelve thousand miles long, and for every 
signal and every wire along the way, every set of red and amber lights, every 
motion detector buried in ballast, every flashing cantilever crossing guard, 
every agg lomeration of timers and relays housed in a ventless aluminum 
shed, there were up -to-date circuit diagrams in one of six heavy -lidded filing 
tanks in the tank room on the twelfth floor of headquarters. The oldest 
diagrams were drawn freehand in pencil on v ellum, the newest with 
Rapidograph pens on preprinted Mylar blanks.  
The draftsmen who tended these files and liaised with the field en -sineers 
who kept the railroad's nervous system healthy and untangled were Texan 
and Kansan and Missourian natives: intell igent, uncultured, rwangy men 
who'd come up the hard way from no -skill jobs in signal eangs, chopping 
weeds and digging postholes and stringing wire until, 3y virtue of their 
aptitude with circuits (and also, as Denise later real - 
353 
ized, by vi rtue of being white), they'd been singled out for training and 
advancement. None had more than a year or two of college, most only high 
school. On a summer day when the sky got whiter and the grass got browner 
and their former gangmates were battling heats troke in the field, the 
draftsmen were happy indeed to sit in cushioned roller chairs in air so cool 
they all kept cardigans handy in their personal drawers.  
"You'll find that some of the men take coffee breaks," Alfred told Denise in 
the pink of the risin g sun, as they drove downtown on her first morning. "I 
want you to know they're not paid to take coffee breaks. I expect you not to 
take coffee breaks yourself. The railroad is doing us a favor by hiring you, and 
it's paying you to work eight hours. I want  you to remember that. If you apply 
yourself with the same en ergy you brought to your schoolwork and your 
trumpet -playing, you'll be remembered as a great worker."  
Denise nodded. To say she was competitive was to put it mildly. In the high -
school band the re had been two girls and twelve boys in the trumpet section. 
She was in the first chair and boys were in the next twelve. (In the last chair 
was a part -Cherokee girl from downstate who hit middle C instead of high E 
and helped cast that pall of dissonance  that shadows every high -school 
band.) Denise had no great passion for music, but she loved to excel, and her 
mother believed that bands were good for children. Enid liked the discipline 
of bands, the upbeat nor mality, the patriotism. Gary in his day had been an 
able boy trumpeter and Chip had (briefly, honkingly) attempted the bassoon. 
Denise, when her time came, asked to follow in Gary's footsteps, but Enid 
didn't think that little girls and trumpets matched. What matched little girls 
was flutes. But the re was never much satisfaction for Denise in competing 
with girls. She'd insisted on the trumpet, and Alfred had backed her up, and 
eventually it had dawned on Enid that rental fees could be avoided if Denise 
used Gary's old trumpet.  
Unlike sheet music, un fortunately, the signal diagrams that Denise was given 
to copy and file that summer were unintelligible to her. Since she couldn't 
compete with the draftsmen, she competed with the boy who'd worked in 
Signals the previous two summers, Alan Jamborets. the c orporation counsel's 
son; and since she had no way to gauge Jam - 
354 
THE CORRECTIONS  
borets's performance, she worked with an intensity that she was certain 
nobody could match.  
"Denise, whoa, God, damn," Laredo Bob, a sweating Texan, said while s he 
was cutting and collating blueprints.  
"What?"  
"You gonna burn yourself out going that fast."  
"Actually, I enjoy it," she said. "Once I'm in the rhythm."  
"Thing is, though," Laredo Bob said, "you can leave some of that for 
tomorrow."  
"I don't enjoy it that much."  
"OK, well, but y'all take a coffee break now. You hear me?"  
Draftsmen were yipping as they trotted toward the hallway.  
"Coffee time!"  
"Snack cart's here!"  
"Coffee time!"  
She worked with undiminished speed.  
Laredo Bob was the low man to whom dru dge work fell when there was no 
summer help to relieve him. Laredo Bob ought to have to been chagrined that 
Denise —in full view of the boss —was performing in half an hour certain 
clerical tasks to which he liked to devote whole morn ings while he chewed up  
a Swisher Sweet cigar. But Laredo Bob be lieved that character was destiny. 
To him Denise's work habits were simply evidence that she was her daddy's 
daughter and that soon enough she would be an executive just like her daddy 
while he, Laredo Bob, would g o on performing clerical tasks at the speed 
you'd expect from somebody fated to perform them. Laredo Bob further 
believed that women were angels and men were poor sinners. The angel he 
was married to revealed her sweet, gracious nature mainly by forgiving his 
tobacky habit and feeding and clothing four children on a single small ish 
income, but he was by no means surprised when the Eternal Femi nine turned 
out to have supernatural abilities in the area of labeling and alphabetically 
sorting thousand -count b oxes of card -mounted micro form. Denise seemed to 
Laredo Bob an all -around marvelous and purty creature. Before long he 
began singing a rockabilly chorus ("Denise -uh-why -you -done, what -you -
did?") when she arrived in the morning and  
355  
when she returned from her lunch break in the little treeless city park across 
the street.  
The chief of draftsmen, Sam Beuerlein, told Denise that next sum mer they 
would have to pay her not to come to work, since she was doing the work of 
two this summer.  
A grinning Arkansan, Lamar Parker, who wore enormous thick glasses and 
had precancers on his forehead, asked her if her daddy had told her what a 
rascally, worthless crew the men of Signals were.  
"Just worthless," Denise said. "He never said rascally."  
Lamar cackled and puffed on his Tareyton and repeated her remark in case 
the men around him hadn't heard it.  
"Heh -heh-heh," the draftsman named Don Armour muttered with 
unpleasant sarcasm.  
Don Armour was the only man in Signals who seemed not to love Denise.  He 
was a solidly built, short -legged Vietnam vet whose cheeks, close -shaved, 
were nearly as blue and glaucous as a plum. His blazers were tight around his 
massive upper arms; drafting tools seemed toy -sized in his hand; he looked 
like a teenager stuck at a first -grader's desk. Instead of resting his feet on the 
ring of his high wheeled chair, like everyone else, he let his feet dangle, his 
toe-tips dragging on the floor. He draped his upper body across the drafting 
surface, bringing his eyes to within inch es of his Rapidograph pen. After 
working for an hour like this, he went limp and pressed his nose into Mylar 
or buried his face in his hands and moaned. His coffee breaks he often passed 
pitched for ward like a murder victim, his forehead on his table, his  plastic 
aviator glasses in his fist.  
When Denise was first introduced to Don Armour, he looked away and gave 
her a dead -fish handshake. When she worked at the far end of the drafting 
room, she could hear him murmuring things while the men around him 
chuck led; when she was close to him he kept silent and smirked fiercely at his 
tabletop. He reminded her of the smartasses who haunted the back rows of 
classrooms.  
She was in the women's room one morning in July when she heard Armour 
and Lamar outside the bathr oom door by the drinking fountain  
356                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
where Lamar rinsed out his coffee mugs. She stood by the door and strained 
to hea r. 
"Remember we thought old Alan was a crazy worker?" Lamar said.  
"I'll say this for Jamborets," Don Armour said. "He was a hell of a lot easier 
on the eyes."  
"Hee hee."  
"Hard to get much work done with somebody as good -looking as Alan 
Jamborets walking ar ound all day in little skirts."  
"Alan was a pretty boy, all right."  
There was a groan. "I swear to God, Lamar," Don Armour said, "I'm this close 
to filing a complaint with OSHA. This is cruel and un usual. Did you see that 
skirt?"  
"I seen it. But shush now."  
"I'm going crazy."  
"This is a seasonal problem, Donald. It's like to take care of itself in two 
months."  
"If the Wroths don't fire me first."  
"Say, what makes you so sure this merger's going through?"  
"I sweated eight years in t he field to get to this office. It's about time 
something else came along and fucked things up."  
Denise was wearing a short electric -blue thrift -store skirt that in truth she 
was surprised was in compliance with her mother's Islamic female dress 
code. To t he extent that she accepted the idea that Lamar and Don Armour 
had been talking about her—and the idea did have an undeniable strange 
headache -like residency status in her brain —she felt all the more keenly 
snubbed by Don. She felt as if he were having a party in her own house 
without inviting her.  
When she returned to the drafting room, he cast a skeptical eye around the 
room, sizing up everyone but her. As his gaze skipped past her, she felt a 
curious need to push her fingernails into the quick or to pin ch her own 
nipples.  
It was the season of thunder in St. Jude. The air had a smell of Mexican 
violence, of hurricanes or coups. There could be morning thunder from 
unreadably churning skies, ominous dull reports from  
 
 
south -county municipalities that nobody you knew had ever been to. And 
lunch -hour thunder from a solitary anvil wandering through oth erwise semi -
fair skies. And the more serious thunder of midafternoon, as solid sea -green 
waves of cloud rolled up in the southwest, the sun shining al l the brighter 
locally and the heat bearing down more ur gently, as if aware that time was 
short. And the great theater of a good dinnertime blowout, storms crowded 
into the fifty -mile radius of the radar's sweep like big spiders in a little jar, 
clouds bo oming at each other from the sky's four corners, and wave upon 
wave of dime -sized rain drops arriving like plagues, the picture in your 
window going black -and-white and fuzzy, trees and houses lurching in the 
flashes of lightning, small kids with swimsuits  and drenched towels running 
home headlong, like refugees. And the drumming late at night, the rolling 
caissons of summer on the march.  
And every day the St. Jude press carried rumblings of an impending merger. 
The Midpac's importunate twin -brother suitors , Hillard and Chauncy Wroth, 
were in town talking to three unions. The Wroths were in Washington 
countering Midpac testimony before a Senate sub committee. The Midpac had 
reportedly asked the Union Pacific to be its white knight. The Wroths 
defended their postacquisitional restruc turing of the Arkansas Southern. The 
Midpac's spokesman begged all concerned St. Judeans to write or call their 
congressmen . . .  
Denise was leaving the building for lunch under partly cloudy skies when the 
top of a utility pole a  block away from her exploded. She saw bright pink and 
felt the blast of thunder on her skin. Secretaries ran screaming through the 
little park. Denise turned on her heel and took her book and her sandwich 
and her plum back up to the twelfth floor, where e very day two tables of 
pinochle formed. She sat down by the windows, but it seemed pretentious or 
unfriendly to be reading War and Peace. She divided her attention between 
the crazy skies outside and the card game nearest her.  
Don Armour unwrapped a sandwi ch and opened it to a slice of bologna on 
which the texture of bread was lithographed in yellow mus tard. His shoulders 
slumped. He wrapped the sandwich up again loosely  
THE CORRECTION  
in its foil and looked at Denise as if she were the latest to rment of his day.  
"Meld sixteen."  
"Who made this mess?"  
"Ed," Don Armour said, fanning cards, "you gotta be careful with those 
bananas."  
Ed Alberding, the most senior draftsman, had a body shaped like a bowling 
pin and curly gray hair like an old lady's pe rm. He was blinking rapidly as he 
chewed banana and studied his cards. The banana, peeled, lay on the table in 
front of him. He broke off another dainty bite.  
"Awful lot of potassium in a banana," Don Armour said.  
"Potassium's good for you," Lamar said from across the table.  
Don Armour set his cards down and regarded Lamar gravely. "Are you 
joking? Doctors use potassium to induce cardiac arrest."  
"OP Eddie eats two, three bananas every day," Lamar said. "How's that heart 
of yours feelin', Mr. Ed?"  
"Let's just play the hand here, boys," Ed said.  
"But I'm terribly concerned about your health," Don Armour said.  
"You tell too many lies, mister."  
"Day after day I see you ingesting toxic potassium. It's my duty as a friend to 
warn you."  
"Your trick, Don."  
"Put a card down, Don."  
"And in return all I get," Armour said in an injured tone, "is suspi cion and 
denial."  
"Donald, you in this game or just k eepin' that seat warm?"  
"Of course, if Ed were to keel over dead of cardiac arrest, due to acute long -
term potassium poisoning, that would make me fourth high est in seniority 
and secure me a place in Little Rock with the Arkansas Southern slash 
Midland Pa cific, so why am I even mentioning this? Please, Ed, eat my 
banana, too."  
"Hee hee, watch your mouth," Lamar said.  
"Gentlemen, I believe these tricks are all mine."  
"Son of a gun!"  
359 
Shuffle, shuffle. Slap, slap.  
"Ed, you know, they got compute rs down in Little Rock," Don Armour said, 
never glancing at Denise.  
"Uh-oh," Ed said. "Computers?"  
"You go down there, I'm warning you, they're going to make you learn to use 
one."  
"Eddie'll be asleep with angels before he learns computers," Lamar said.  
"I beg to differ," Don said. "Ed's going to go to Little Rock and learn 
computer drafting. He's going to make somebody else sick to their stomach 
with his bananas."  
"Say, Donald, what makes you so sure you ain't going to Little Rock 
yourself?"  
Don shook his head. "We'd spend two, three thousand dollars less a year if we 
lived in Little Rock, and pretty soon I'd be making a couple thousand a year 
more. It's cheap down there. Patty could work maybe half days, let the girls 
have a mother again. We could buy some  land in the Ozarks before the girls 
got too old to enjoy it. Someplace with a pond. You think anybody's gonna let 
that happen to me?"  
Ed was sorting his cards with the nervous twitches of a chipmunk. "What do 
they need computers for?" he said.  
"To replace  useless old men with," Don said, his plum face splitting open with 
an unkind smile.  
"Replace us?"  
"Why do you think the Wroths are buying us out and not the other way 
around?"  
Shuffle, shuffle. Slap, slap. Denise watched the sky stick forks of lightning 
into the salad of trees on the Illinois horizon. While her head was turned, 
there was an explosion at the table.  
"Jesus Christ, Ed," Don Armour said, "why don't you just go ahead and lick 
those before you put them down?"  
"Easy there, Don," said Sam Beuerlei n, the chief of draftsmen.  
"Am I alone in this turning my stomach?"  
"Easy. Easy."  
Don threw his cards down and shoved off in his rolling chair so  
360                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
violently that the praying -mantis drafting light creaked and swayed. 
"Laredo," he called, "come take my cards. I gotta  get some banana -free air."  
"Easy."  
Don shook his head. "It's say it now, Sam, or go crazy when the buyout 
happens."  
"You're a smart man, Don," Beuerlein said. "You'll land on your feet no 
matter what."  
"I don't know about smart. I'm not half as smart as E d. Am I, Ed?"  
Ed's nose twitched. He tapped the table with his cards impatiently.  
"Too young for Korea, too old for my war," Don said. "That's what I call 
smart. Smart enough to get off the bus and cross Olive Street every morning 
for twenty -five years without getting hit by a car. Smart enough to get back 
on it every night. That's what counts for smart in this world."  
Sam  Beuerlein raised his voice. "Don, now, you listen to me. You go take a 
walk, you hear? Go outside and cool down. When you get back, you may 
decide you owe Eddie an apology."  
"Meld eighteen," Ed said, tapping the table.  
Don pressed his hand into the small of his back and limped up the aisle, 
shaking his head. Laredo Bob came over with egg salad in his mustache and 
took Don's cards.  
"No need for apologies," Ed said. "Let's just play the hand here, boys."  
Denise was leaving the women's room after lunch when D on Ar mour stepped 
off the elevator. He had a shawl of rain marks on his shoulders. He rolled his 
eyes at the sight of Denise, as if at some fresh persecution.  
"What?" she said.  
He shook his head and walked away.  
"What? What?"  
"Lunch hour's over," he said.  "Aren't you supposed to be working?"  
Each wiring diagram was labeled with the name of the line and the milepost 
number. The Signal Engineer hatched plans for corrections, and the 
draftsmen sent paper copies of the diagrams into the field, high - 
lighting additions in yellow pencil and subtractions in red. The field 
engineers then did the work, often improvising their own fixes and shortcuts, 
and sent the copies back to headquarters torn and yellowed and greasily 
fingerprinted, with pinches of red Arkansas dust or bits of Kansas weed chaff 
in their folds, and the draftsmen recorded the cor rections in black ink on the 
Mylar and vellum originals.  
Through the long afternoon, as the perch -belly white of the sky turned the 
color of a fish's flanks and b ack, Denise folded the thousands of offprints 
she'd cut in the morning, six copies of each in the pre scribed folds that fit in 
the field engineer's binder. There were signals at mileposts 16.2 and 17.4 and 
20.1 and 20.8 and 22.0 and so on up to the town o f New Chartres at 74.35, 
the end of the line.  
On the way out to the suburbs that night she asked her father if the Wroths 
were going to merge the railroad with the Arkansas Southern.  
"I don't know," Alfred said. "I hope not."  
Would the company move to Litt le Rock?  
"That seems to be their intention, if they get control."  
What would happen to the men in Signals?  
"I'd guess some of the more senior ones would move. The younger ones —
probably laid off. But I don't want you talking about this."  
"I won't," Denise said.  
Enid, as on every other Thursday night for the last thirty -five years, had 
dinner waiting. She'd stuffed green peppers and was abubble with 
enthusiasm about the coming weekend.  
"You'll have to take the bus home tomorrow," she told D enise as they sat 
down at the table. "Dad and I are going to Lake Fond du Lac Estates with the 
Schumperts."  
"What is Lake Fond du Lac Estates?"  
"It is a boondoggle," Alfred said, "that I should have known better than to get 
involved with. However, your mot her wore me down."  
"Al," Enid said, "there are no strings attached. There is no pressure to go to 
any of the seminars. We can spend the whole weekend doing any thing we 
want."  
"There's bound to be pressure. The developer can't keep givir.r away free 
weeken ds and not try to sell some lots."  
362 
THE CORRECTIOHS  
"The brochure said no pressure, no expectation, no strings at tached."  
"I am dubious," Alfred said.  
"Mary Beth says there's a wonderful winery near Bordentown that we can 
tour. And we can all  swim in Lake Fond du Lac! And the brochure says there 
are paddleboats and a gourmet restaurant."  
"I can't imagine a Missouri winery in mid -July is going to be appealing," 
Alfred said.  
"You just have to get in the spirit of things," Enid said. "The Driblet ts went 
last October and had so much fun. Dale said there was no pressure at all. 
Very little pressure, he said."  
"Consider the source."  
"What do you mean?"  
"A man who sells coffins for a living."  
"Dale's no different than anybody else."  
"I said I am dubious. But I will go." Alfred added, to Denise: "You can take 
the bus home. We'll leave a car here for you."  
"Kenny Kraikmeyer called this morning," Enid told Denise. "He wondered if 
you're free on Saturday night."  
Denise shut one eye and wi dened the other. "What did you say?"  
"I said I thought you were."  
"You what?"  
"I'm sorry. I didn't realize you had plans."  
Denise laughed. "My only plan at the moment is to not see Kenny 
Kraikmeyer."  
"He was very polite," Enid said. "You know, it doesn't h urt to go on one date 
if somebody takes the trouble to ask you. If you don't have fun, you don't 
have to do it again. But you ought to start saying yes to some body. People will 
think nobody's good enough for you."  
Denise set down her fork. "Kenny Kraikmeyer literally turns my stomach."  
"Denise," Alfred said.  
"That's not right," Enid said, her voice trembling. "That's not something I 
want to hear you saying."  
"OK, I'm sorry I said that. But I'm not free on Saturday. Not for  
 
Kenny Kraikmeyer. Who, if he wants to go out, might consider asking me."  
It occurred to Denise that Enid would probably enjoy a weekend with Kenny 
Kraikmeyer at Lake Fond du Lac, and that Kenny would probably have a 
better time there tha n Alfred would.  
After dinner she hiked over to the oldest house in the suburb, a high -
ceilinged cube of antebellum brick across the street from the boarded -up 
commuter rail station. The house belonged to the high -school drama teacher, 
Henry Dusinberre, who 'd left his campy Abyssin ian banana and gaudy 
crotons and tongue -in-cheek potted palms in his favorite student's care while 
he spent a month with his mother in New Orleans. Among the bordelloish 
antiques in Dusinberre's parlor were twelve ornate champagne  glasses, each 
with an ascending column of air bubbles captured in its faceted crystal stem, 
that he allowed only Denise, of all the young thespians and literary types who 
gravitated to his liquor on Saturday nights, to drink from. ("Let the little 
beasts use plastic cups," he would say as he arranged his wasted limbs in his 
calfskin club chair. He had fought two rounds against a cancer now offi cially 
in remission, but his glossy skin and protuberant eyes suggested that all was 
not well oncologically. "La mbert, extraordinary creature," he said, "sit here 
where I can see you in profile. Do you realize the Japanese would worship 
you for your neck? Worship you.") It was in Dusinberre's house that she'd 
tasted her first raw oyster, her first quail egg, her fir st grappa. Dusinberre 
steeled her in her resolve not to suc cumb to the charms of any (his phrase) 
"pimpled adolescents." He bought dresses and jackets on approval in antique 
stores, and if they fit Denise he let her keep them. Fortunately, Enid, who 
wishe d that Denise would dress more like a Schumpert or a Root, held 
vintage clothing in such low esteem that she actually believed that a spotles -
embroidered yellow satin party dress with buttons of tiger -eye aga:^ had cost 
Denise (as she claimed) ten dollars at the Salvation Army. Over Enid's bitter 
objections she'd worn this dress to her senior prom with Peter Hicks, the 
substantially pimpled actor who'd played Tom to her Amanda in The Glass 
Menagerie. Peter Hicks, on prom night, had been invited to join her and 
Dusinberre in drinking from the rococo cham - 
THE CORRECTIOKS  
pagne glasses, but Peter was driving and stuck with his plastic cup of Coke.  
After she watered the plants, she sat in Dusinberre's calfskin chair and 
listened to New Order. She wish ed she felt like dating someone, but the boys 
she respected, like Peter Hicks, didn't move her romanti cally, and the rest 
were in the mold of Kenny Kraikmeyer, who, though bound for the Naval 
Academy and a career in nuclear science, fancied himself a hips ter and 
collected Cream and Jimi Hendrix "vinyl" (his word) with a passion that God 
had surely intended him to bring to building model submarines. Denise was a 
little worried by the degree of her revulsion. She didn't understand what 
made her so very mean.  She was unhappy to be so mean. There seemed to be 
something wrong with the way she thought about herself and other people.  
Whenever her mother pointed this out, though, she had no choice but to nuke 
her.  
The next day she was taking her lunch hour in the p ark, sunning herself in 
one of the tiny sleeveless tops that her mother was unaware she wore to work 
beneath her sweaters, when Don Armour appeared from nowhere and 
dropped onto the bench beside her.  
"You're not playing cards," she said.  
"I'm going crazy,"  he said.  
She returned her eyes to her book. She could feel him looking at her body 
pointedly. The air was hot but not so hot as to account for the heat on his side 
of her face.  
He took his glasses off and rubbed his eyes. "This is where you come and sit 
every day."  
"Yes."  
He wasn't good -looking. His head seemed too large, his hair was thinning, 
and his face had the dusky nitrite red of a wiener or bologna, except where 
his beard made it blue. But she recognized an amusement, a brightness, an 
animal sadness  in his expression; and the saddle curves of his lips were 
inviting.  
He read the spine of her book. "Count Leo Tolstoy," he said. He shook his 
head and laughed silently.  
"What?"  
"Nothing," he said. "I'm just trying to imagine what it's like to be  you."  
"What do you mean?"  
"I mean beautiful. Smart. Disciplined. Rich. Going to college. What's it like?"  
She had a ridiculous impulse to answer him by touching him, to let him feel 
what it was like. There was no other way, really, to answer.  
She shrugged  and said she didn't know.  
"Your boyfriend must feel very lucky," Don Armour said.  
"I don't have a boyfriend."  
He flinched as if this were difficult news. "I find that puzzling and 
surprising."  
Denise shrugged again.  
"I had a summer job when I was seven teen," Don said. "I worked for an old 
Mennonite couple that had a big antique store. We used this stuff called 
Magic Mixture —paint thinner, wood alcohol, acetone, tung oil. It would clean 
up the furniture without stripping it. I'd breathe it all day and co me home 
flying. Then around midnight I'd get this wicked headache."  
"Where'd you grow up?"  
"Carbondale. Illinois. I had this idea that the Mennonites were un derpaying 
me, in spite of the free highs. So I started borrowing their pickup at night. I 
had a gi rlfriend who needed rides. I crashed the pickup, which was how the 
Mennonites found out I'd been using it, and my then -stepdad said if I 
enlisted in the Marines he would deal with the Mennonites and their 
insurance company, otherwise I was on my own with t he cops. So I joined the 
Marines in the middle of the sixties. It just seemed like the thing to do. I've 
got a real knack for timing."  
"You were in Vietnam."  
Don Armour nodded. "If this merger goes through, I'm back to where I was 
when I was discharged. Pl us three kids and another set of skills that no one 
wants."  
"How old are your kids?"  
"Ten, eight, and four."  
"Does your wife work?"  
366 
THE CORRECTIOHS  
 
 
 
n c 
"She's a school nurse. She's at her parents' in Indiana. They've got five acres 
and a p ond. Nice for the girls."  
"Are you taking some vacation?"  
"Two weeks next month."  
Denise had run out of questions. Don Armour sat bent over with his hands 
pressed flat between his knees. He sat like this for a long time. From the side, 
she could see his tr ademark smirk wearing through his impassivity; he 
seemed like a person who would always make you pay for taking him 
seriously or showing concern. Finally Denise stood up and said she was going 
inside, and he nodded as if this were a blow he'd been expectin g. 
It didn't occur to her that Don Armour was smiling in embarrass ment at the 
obviousness of his play for her sympathies, the staleness of his pickup lines. 
It didn't occur to her that his performance at the pinochle table the day 
before had been staged f or her benefit. It didn't occur to her that he'd guessed 
she was eavesdropping in the bathroom and had let himself be overheard. It 
didn't occur to her that Don Ar mour's fundamental mode was self -pity and 
that he might, in his self -pity, have hit on many girls before her. It didn't 
occur to her that he was already plotting —had been plotting since he first 
shook hands with her —how to get into her skirt. It didn't occur to her that he 
averted his eyes not simply because her beauty caused him pain but because  
Rule #1 in every manual advertised at the back of men's magazines ("How to 
Make Her WILD for You —Every Time!") was Ignore Her. It didn't oc cur to 
her that the differences of class and circumstance that were caus ing her 
discomfort might be, for Don Armou r, a provocation: that she might be an 
object he desired for its luxury, or that a fundamentally self -pitying man 
whose job was in jeopardy might take a variety of satis factions in bedding the 
daughter of his boss's boss's boss. None of this occurred to D enise then or 
after. She was still feeling responsible ten years later.  
What she was aware of, that afternoon, were the problems. That Don Armour 
wanted to put his hands on her but couldn't was a prob lem. That through an 
accident of birth she had everythi ng while the man who wanted her had so 
much less —this lack of parity —was a big 
367 
problem. Since she was the one who had everything, the problem was clearly 
hers to solve. But any word of reassurance she could give him, any gesture of 
solidarity  she could imagine making, felt condescending.  
She experienced the problem intensely in her body. Her surfeit of gifts and 
opportunities, in comparison to Don Armour's, manifested itself as a physical 
botheration —a dissatisfaction that pinching the sen sitive parts of herself 
might address but couldn't fix.  
After lunch she went to the tank room, where the originals of all signal 
tracings were stored in six heavy -lidded steel tanks resembling elegant 
Dumpsters. Over the years, the big cardboard folders in the tanks had 
become overloaded, collecting lost tracin gs in their bulging lower depths, and 
Denise had been given the satisfying task of restoring order. Draftsmen 
visiting the tank room worked around her while she relabeled folders and 
unearthed long -lost vellums. The biggest tank was so deep that she had to  lie 
on her stomach on the tank beside it, her bare legs on cold metal, and dive in 
with both arms to reach the bot tom. She dropped the rescued tracings on the 
floor and reached in for more. When she surfaced for air she became aware 
that Don Armour was k neeling by the tank.  
His shoulders were muscled like an oarsman's and stretched his blazer tight. 
She didn't know how long he'd been here or what he'd been looking at. Now 
he was examining an accordion -pleated vellum, a wiring plan for a signal 
tower at Mi lepost 101.35 on the McCook line. It had been drawn freehand by 
Ed Alberding in 1956.  
"Ed was a kid when he drew this. It's a beautiful thing."  
Denise climbed down from the tank, smoothed her skirt, and dusted herself 
off. 
"I shouldn't be so hard on Ed," D on said. "He's got talents I'll never have."  
He seemed to be thinking less about Denise than she'd been think ing about 
him. He uncrumpled another tracing, and she stood looking down at a boyish 
whorl of his pencil -gray hair. She took a step closer and lea ned a little closer 
yet, eclipsing her view of him with her chest.  
"You're kind of in my light," he said.  
"Do you want to have dinner with me?"  
368 
THE CORRECTIONS  
•B'C 
He sighed heavily. His shoulders slumped. "I'm'supposed to drive to Indiana 
for the weekend."  
"OK."  
"But let me think about it."  
"Good. Think about it."  
She sounded cool, but her knees were unsteady as she made her way to the 
women's room. She locked herself in a stall and sat and worried wh ile, 
outside, the elevator bell faintly chimed and the afternoon snack cart came 
and went. Her worrying had no content. Her eyes simply alighted on 
something, the chrome bolt on the door of the stall or a square of tissue on 
the floor, and the next thing s he knew, she'd been staring at it for five 
minutes and had thought about nothing. Nothing. Nothing.  
She was cleaning up the tank room, five minutes before day's end, when Don 
Armour's broad face loomed up at her shoulder, his eyelids drooping sleepily 
behi nd his glasses. "Denise," he said. "Let me take you to dinner."  
She nodded quickly. "OK."  
In a rough neighborhood, mostly poor and black, just north of downtown was 
an old -fashioned soda shop and diner that Henry Dusin -berre and his 
student thespians patro nized. Denise had appetite for nothing more than iced 
tea and french fries, but Don Armour ordered a hamburger platter and a milk 
shake. His posture, she noticed, was a frog's. His head sank into his shoulders 
as he bent to the food. He chewed slowly, as i f with irony. He cast bland 
smiles around the room, as if with irony. He pushed his glasses up his nose 
with fingers whose nails, she noticed, were bitten to the pink.  
"I would never come to this neighborhood," he said.  
"These couple of blocks are pretty s afe."  
"See, for you, that's true," he said. "A place can sense if you under stand 
trouble. If you don't understand it, you get left alone. My prob lem is I 
understand it. If I had come to a street like this when I was your age, 
something ugly would have ha ppened."  
"I don't see why."  
"It's just the way it was. I would look up, and suddenly there would  
369  
be three strangers who hated my guts. And I hated theirs. This is a world you 
can't even see if you're an effective and happy person. A per son l ike you walks 
right through it. It's waiting for someone like me to come along so I can have 
the shit beat out of me. It's had me picked out from a mile away."  
Don Armour drove a big American sedan similar to Denise's mother's, only 
older. He piloted it pa tiently onto an artery and headed west at a low speed, 
amusing himself by slouching at the wheel ("I'm slow; my car is bad") while 
other drivers roared by on the left and right.  
Denise directed him to Henry Dusinberre's house. The sun was still shining, 
low in the west above the plywood -eyed train station, when they mounted the 
stairs to Dusinberre's porch. Don Armour looked up at the surrounding trees 
as if even the trees were so mehow better, more expensive, in this suburb. 
Denise had her hand on the screen door be fore she realized that the door 
behind it was open.  
"Lambert? Is that you?" Henry Dusinberre came out of the gloom of his 
parlor. His skin was waxier than ever, his eye s more protuberant, and his 
teeth seemed larger in his head. "My mother's doctor sent me home," he said. 
"He wanted to wash his hands of me. I think he's had enough of death."  
Don Armour was retreating toward his car, head down.  
"Who's the incredible hulk? " Dusinberre said.  
"A friend from work," Denise said.  
"Well, you can't bring him in. I'm sorry. I won't have hulks in the house. 
You'll have to find someplace else."  
"Do you have food? Are you all right here?"  
"Yes, run along. I feel better already, being back. That doctor and I were 
mutually embarrassed by my health. Apparently, child, I'm quite without 
white blood cells. The man was shaking with fear. He was con vinced that I 
was going to die right there in his office. Lambert, I felt so sorry for him!" A  
dark hole of mirth opened in the sick man's face. "I tried to explain to him 
that my white -blood -cell needs are entirely nugatory. But he seemed intent 
on regarding me as a medical curiosity. I had lunch with Mother and took a 
taxi to the airport."  
"You'r e sure you're OK."  
 
370 
THE CORRECTIONS  
; 
"Yes. Go, with my blessing. Be foolish. But not in my house. Go."  
It was unwise to be seen with Don Armour at her house before dark, with 
observant Roots and curious Dribletts coming and going on the stre et, so she 
directed him to the elementary school and led him into the field of grass 
behind it. They sat amid the electronic menagerie of bug sounds, the genital 
intensity of certain fragrant shrubs, the fad ing heat of a nice July day. Don 
Armour put his arms around her belly, his chin on her shoulder. They 
listened to the dull pops of small -bore fireworks.  
In her house after dark, in the frost of its air -conditioning, she tried to move 
him quickly toward the stairs, but he tarried in the kitchen, he linge red in the 
dining room. She was pierced by the unfairness of the impression that the 
house was obviously making. Although her parents weren't wealthy, her 
mother so yearned for a certain kind of elegance and had worked so hard to 
achieve it that to Don Arm our the house looked like the house of rich people. 
He seemed reluctant to tread on the carpeting. He stopped and took proper 
note, as possibly no one else ever had, of the Waterford goblets and candy 
dishes that Enid kept on display in the breakfront. His  eyes fell on each 
object, the music boxes, the Parisian street scenes, the matching and 
beautifully upholstered furniture, as they'd fallen on Denise's body —was it 
just today? Today at lunch?  
She put her large hand in his larger hand, knitted her fingers into his, and 
pulled him toward the stairs.  
In her bedroom, on his knees, he planted his thumbs on her hip bones and 
pressed his mouth to her thighs and then to her whatever; she felt returned to 
a childhood world of Grimm and C. S. Lewis where a touch cou ld be 
transformative. His hands made her hips into a woman's hips, his mouth 
made her thighs into a woman's thighs, her whatever into a cunt. These were 
the advantages of being wanted by someone older —to feel less like an 
ungendered marionette, to be given  a guided tour of the state of her 
morphology, to have its usefulness elu cidated by a person for whom it was 
just the ticket.  
Boys her own age wanted something, but they didn't seem to know exactly 
what. Boys her own age wanted approximately. Her function — 
the role she'd played on more than one lousy date —was to help them learn 
more specifically what they wanted, to unbutton her shirt and give them 
suggestions, to (as it were) flesh out their rather rudimentary ideas.  
Don Armour wanted her minute ly, inch by inch. She appeared to make 
brilliant sense to him. Simply possessing a body had never much helped her, 
but seeing it as a thing that she herself might want —imag ining herself as Don 
Armour on her knees, desiring the various parts of herself —mad e her 
possession of it more forgivable. She had what the man expected to find. 
There was no anxiety to his location and appreci ation of each feature.  
When she unhooked her bra, Don bowed his head and shut his eyes.  
"What is it?"  
"A person could die of how beautiful you are."  
This she liked, yes.  
Her feeling when she took him in her hands was a preview of her feeling a few 
years later, as a young cook, when she handled her first truffles, her first foie 
gras, her first sacs of roe.  
On her eighteenth birthday her theater friends had given her a hollowed -out 
Bible containing a nip of Seagram's and three candy -colored condoms, which 
came in handy now.  
Don Armour's head, looming above her, was a lion's head, a jack -o'-lantern. 
When he came, he roared. His subsiding sighs overtook one another, 
overlapped almost. Oh, oh, oh, oh. She'd never heard anything like it.  
There was blood in proportion to her pain,  which had been fairly bad, and in 
reverse proportion to her pleasure, which had been mainly in her head.  
In the dark, after she'd grabbed a dirty towel from the laundry bas ket in the 
hall closet, she pumped her fist at having achieved non -virginity befor e she 
left for college.  
Less wonderful was the presence of a large and somewhat bloody man in her 
bed. It was a single bed, the only bed she'd ever slept in, and she was very 
tired. This perhaps explained why she made a fool of her - 
372                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
self by standing in the middle of her room, with a towel wrapped around her, 
and unexpectedly weeping.  
She loved Don Armour for getting u p and wrapping his arms around her and 
not minding that she was a child. He put her to bed, found a pajama top for 
her, helped her into it. Kneeling by the bed, he drew the sheet up over her 
shoulder and stroked her head as she had to assume he often strok ed his 
daughters' heads. He did this until she was nearly asleep. Then the theater of 
his stroking expanded into regions that she had to assume were off -limits 
with his daughters. She tried to stay half -asleep, but he came at her more 
insistently, more scr atchily. Everything he did either tickled or hurt, and 
when she made so bold as to whimper, she had her first experience of a man's 
hands pressing on her head, pushing her southward.  
Thankfully, when he was done, he didn't try to spend the night. He left h er 
room and she lay utterly still, straining to hear what he was doing and 
whether he was coming back. Finally —she may have dozed —she heard the 
click of the front door's latch and the whinny of his big car's starter.  
She slept until noon and was showering  in the downstairs bathroom shower 
stall, trying to comprehend what she'd done, when she heard the front door 
again. Heard voices.  
She madly rinsed her hair, madly toweled off, and burst out of the bathroom. 
Her father was lying down in the den. Her mother  was rins ing out the 
insulated picnic hamper in the kitchen sink.  
"Denise, you didn't eat any of the dinner I left you!" Enid cried. "It doesn't 
look like you've touched a single thing."  
"I thought you guys were coming back tomorrow."  
"Lake Fond du Lac wa s not what we expected," Enid said. "I don't know what 
Dale and Honey were thinking. It was a big nothing."  
At the bottom of the stairs were two overnight bags. Denise ran past them 
and up to her bedroom, where condom wrappers and bloody linens were 
visibl e from the doorway. She closed the door behind her.  
The rest of her summer was ruined. She was absolutely lonely both at work 
and at home. She hid the bloody sheet and the bloody towel in her closet and 
despaired of dealing with them. Enid was naturally su r- 
373 
 
veillant and had myriad idle synapses to devote" to such tasks as noticing 
when her daughter had her period. Denise hoped to come forward 
apologetically with the ruined towel and sheet at the appropriate time, two 
weeks hence. But Enid ha d brainpower to spare for the counting of linens.  
"I'm missing one of my good monogrammed bath towels."  
"Oh, shoot, I left it at the pool."  
"Denise, why you took a good monogrammed bath towel, when we have so 
many other towels . . . And then, of all the to wels to lose! Did you call the 
pool?"  
"I went back and looked."  
"Those are very expensive towels."  
Denise never made mistakes like the one she was claiming to have made. The 
injustice would have rankled less if it had served a greater pleasure —if she 
could  have gone to Don Armour and laughed about it and sought his 
consolation. But she didn't love him and he didn't love her.  
At work now the friendliness of the other draftsmen was suspect; it all 
seemed liable to lead to fucking. Don Armour was too embarrass ed, or 
discreet, to even meet her eyes. He spent his days in a torpor of unhappiness 
with the Wroth brothers and unfriendliness to everyone around him. There 
was nothing left for Denise at work but work, and now its dullness was a 
burden, now she hated it.  By the end of a day, her face and neck hurt from 
holding back tears and working at speeds that only a person working happily 
could maintain without discomfort.  
This, she told herself, was what happened when you acted on an impulse. She 
was amazed that she 'd given all of two hours' thought to her decision. She'd 
taken a liking to Don Armour's eyes and mouth, she'd determined that she 
owed him the thing he wanted —and this was all she remembered thinking. A 
dirty and appealing possibility had oc curred to her  (I could lose my virginity 
tonight), and she'd leaped at the chance.  
She was too proud to admit to herself, let alone to Don Armour, that he 
wasn't what she wanted. She was too inexperienced to know she simply could 
have said, "Sorry —big mistake." She felt a responsibility  
374                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
to give him more of what he wanted. She expected'that an affair, if you too k 
the trouble to start it, went on for quite a while.  
She suffered for her reluctance. The first week in particular, while she worked 
herself up to proposing to Don Armour that they get to gether again on Friday 
night, her throat ached steadily for hours o n end. But she was a trouper. She 
saw him on the next three Fridays, telling her parents that she was dating 
Kenny Kraikmeyer. Don Armour took her to dinner at a strip -mall family 
restaurant and then back to his flimsy little house in a tornado -alley exurb , 
one of fifty small towns that St. Jude in its endless sprawl was swallowing. 
His house embarrassed him to the point of loathing. No houses in Denise's 
suburb had ceilings so low or hardware so cheap, or doors too light to slam 
properly, or window sashes and window tracks made of plastic. To soothe her 
lover and shut him up on the topic ("your life vs. mine") that she least en -
joyed, and also to fill some hours that would otherwise have passed awk -
wardly, she pulled him down on the Hide -A-Bed in his junk -swamped 
basement and brought her perfectionism to bear on a whole new world of 
skills.  
Don Armour never said how he'd explained to his wife his cancella tion of 
their weekend plans in Indiana. Denise couldn't stand to ask one question 
about his wife.  
She en dured criticism from her mother for another mistake that she would 
never have made: failing to soak a bloody sheet immediately in cold water.  
On the first Friday of August, moments after Don Armour's two -week 
vacation started, he and Denise doubled back in to the office and locked 
themselves in the tank room. She kissed him and put his hands on her tits 
and tried to work his fingers for him, but his hands wanted to be on her 
shoulders; they wanted to press her to her knees.  
His stuff got up into her nasal passages.  
"Are you coming down with a cold?" her father asked her a few minutes later, 
while they were driving past the city limits.  
At home, Enid gave her the news that Henry Dusinberre ("your friend") had 
died at St. Luke' s on Wednesday night.  
Denise would have felt even guiltier if she hadn't visited Dusinberre  
375  
in his house as recently as Sunday. She'd found him in the grip of an in tense 
irritation with his next -door neighbor's baby. "I'm doing without white  blood 
cells," he said. "You'd think they could shut their goddamn windows. My God, 
that infant has lungs! I suspect they're proud of those lungs. I suspect it's like 
those bikers who disconnect their muf flers. Some spurious, savage token of 
manhood." Dus inberre's skull and bones were pushing ever closer to his skin. 
He discussed the cost of mailing a three -ounce package. He told Denise a 
meandering, incorrect story about an "octoroon" to whom he'd briefly been 
engaged. ("If I was surprised that she was on ly seventh -eighths white, 
imagine her sur prise that I was only one -eighth straight.") He spoke of his 
lifelong cru sade on behalf of fifty -watt lightbulbs. ("Sixty's too bright," he 
said, "and forty is too dim.") For years, he'd lived with death and kept it in its 
place by making it trivial. He still managed a reasonably wicked laugh, but in 
the end the struggle to hold fast to the trivial proved as desperate as any 
other. When Denise said goodbye and kissed him, he seemed not to 
apprehend her personally. He smiled with downcast eyes, as if he were a 
special child whose beauty was to be admired and whose tragic situation 
pitied.  
She never saw Don Armour again either.  
On Monday, August 6, after a summer of give and take, Hillard and Chauncy 
Wroth reached agr eement with the principal rail workers' unions. The unions 
had made substantial concessions for the promise of less paternalistic, more 
innovative management, thus sweetening the Wroths' $26/share tender offer 
for the Midland Pacific with a potential near -term savings of $200 million. 
The Midpac's board of managers wouldn't vote officially for another two 
weeks, but the conclusion was foregone. With chaos looming, a letter came 
down from the president's office accepting the resignations of all summer 
employ ees, effective Friday, August 17.  
Since there were no women (besides Denise) in the drafting room, her co -
workers prevailed on the Signal Engineer's secretary to bake a farewell cake. 
It came out on her last afternoon of work. "I reckon it's a major victor y," 
Lamar said, munching, "that we finally made you take a coffee break."  
376  
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
Laredo Bob dabbed at his eyes with a handkerchief the size of a pillowcase.  
Alfred passed along a compliment in the car that night.  
"Sam Beuerlein," h e said, "tells me you're the greatest worker he's ever seen."  
Denise said nothing.  
"You made a deep impression on those men. You opened their eyes to the 
kind of work a girl can do. I didn't tell you this before, but I had the feeling 
the men were dubious about getting a girl for the summer. I think they 
expected a lot of chattering and not much substance."  
She was glad of her father's admiration. But his kindness, like the kindness of 
the draftsmen who weren't Don Armour, had become inac cessible to her. I t 
seemed to fall upon her body, to refer to it somehow; and her body rebelled.  
Denise -uh-why -you-done, what -you-did?  
"Anyhow," her father said, "now you've had a taste of life in the real world."  
Until she actually got to Philadelphia, she'd looked forward to going to school 
near Gary and Caroline. Their big house on Seminole Street was like a home 
without home's sorrows, and Caroline, whose beauty could make Denise 
breathless with the sheer privil ege of speaking to her, was always good for 
reassurance that Denise had every right to be driven crazy by her mother. By 
the end of her first semester of college, though, she found that she was letting 
Gary leave three messages on her telephone for every m essage she returned. 
(Once, just once, there was a message from Don Armour which she likewise 
did not return.) She found herself declining Gary's offers to pick her up at her 
dorm and re turn her after dinner. She claimed she had to study, and then, 
instea d of studying, she watched TV with Julia Vrais. It was a hat trick of 
guilt: she felt bad for lying to Gary, worse for blowing off her work, and worst 
of all for distracting Julia. Denise could always pull an all -nighter, but Julia 
was useless after ten o' clock. Julia had no motor and no rudder. Julia could 
not explain why her fall schedule consisted of Intro Italian, Intro Russian, 
Eastern Religion, and Music Theory; she accused Denise  
377 
of having had unfair outside help in choosing her'balance d academic diet of 
English, history, philosophy, and biology.  
Denise for her part was jealous of the college "men" in Julia's life. Initially 
both she and Julia had been besieged. An inordinate number of the junior 
and senior "men" who banged their trays d own beside them in the dining hall 
were from New Jersey. They had middle -aged faces and megaphonic voices 
with which they compared math curricula or reminisced about that time they 
went to Rehoboth Beach and got so wasted. They had only three questions for  
Julia and Denise: (1) What's your name? (2) What dorm are you in? and (3) 
Do you want to come to our party on Friday? Denise was amazed by the 
rudeness of this summary exam and no less amazed by Julia's fascination 
with these Teaneck na tives with monster  digital wristwatches and merging 
eyebrows. Julia wore the heads -up look of a squirrel convinced that 
somebody has stale bread in his pocket. Leaving a party, she would shrug and 
tell Denise: "He's got drugs, so I'm going with him." Denise began to spend 
Friday nights studying by herself. She acquired a rep as an ice queen and pos -
sible lesbian. She lacked Julia's ability to melt at the windowside chorus ing of 
her name at three in the morning by the entire college soccer team. "I'm so 
embarrassed," Julia w ould moan, in an agony of happi ness, as she peered 
around the lowered blind. The "men" outside the window had no idea how 
happy they were making her and therefore, in Denise's strict undergraduate 
judgment, did not deserve to have her.  
Denise spent the ne xt summer in the Hamptons with four of her dissolute 
college hallmates and lied to her parents about every aspect of her situation. 
She slept on a living -room floor and made good money as a dishwasher and 
prep drone at the Inn at Quogue, working elbow to e lbow with a pretty girl 
from Scarsdale named Suzie Sterling and falling in love with the life of a 
cook. She loved the crazy hours, the intensity of the work, the beauty of the 
product. She loved the deep stillness that underlay the din. A good crew was 
like an elective family in which everyone in the little hot world of the kitchen 
stood on equal footing, and every cook had weirdnesses concealed in her past 
or in his charac ter, and even in the midst of the most sweaty togetherness 
each family member enjoy ed privacy and autonomy: she loved this.  
378                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
Suzie Sterling's father, Ed, had given Suzie and Denise several lifts into  
Manhattan before the night in August when Denise was biking home and 
almost rode right into him where he stood, by his BMW, smoking a Dunhill 
arid hoping that she might come by alone. Ed Ster ling was an entertainment 
lawyer. He pleaded inability to live without Denise. She hid her (borrowed) 
bike in some bushes by the road. That the bike was stolen by the time she 
came back for it the next day, and that she swore to its owner that she'd 
chained it to the usual post, ought to have given her fair warning of  the 
territory she was entering. But she was excited by what she did to Sterling, by 
the dramatic hydraulic phys iology of his desire, and when she returned to 
school in September she decided that a liberal -arts college did not compare 
well to a kitchen. S he didn't see the point of working hard on papers that only 
a professor ever saw; she wanted an audience. She also resented that the 
college was making her feel guilty about her privileges while granting certain 
lucky identity groups plenary indulgences fr om guilt. She felt guilty enough 
already, thank you. Almost every Sunday she took the cheap slow prole tarian 
combo of SEPTA and New Jersey Transit to New York. She put up with Ed 
Sterling's paranoid one -way telephone communications and his last -minute 
postponements and his chronic distraction and his jaw -taxing performance 
anxieties and her own shame at being taken to cheap ethnic restaurants in 
Woodside and Elmhurst and Jackson Heights so as not to be seen by anyone 
Sterling knew (because, as he told her often —running both hands through his 
mink -thick hair —he knew everybody in Manhattan). While her lover teetered 
closer to ut ter freakout and inability to see her anymore, Denise ate 
Uruguayan T -bones, Sino -Colombian tamales, thumbnail crayfish in red Thai 
curry, and alder -smoked Russian eels. Beauty or excellence, as typified for 
her by memorable food, could redeem almost any humiliation. But she never 
stopped feeling guilty about the bike. Her insistence that she'd chained it to 
the usual post.  
The third t ime she got involved with a man twice her age, she mar ried him. 
She was determined not to be a squishy liberal. She'd quit school and worked 
to save money for a year, had taken six months in France and Italy, and had 
returned to Philly to cook at a throng ed fish - 
379  
 
 
and-pasta place off Catharine Street. As soon as she'd picked up some skills, 
she offered her services at Cafe Louche, which was then the most exciting 
place in town. Emile Berger hired her on the spot, on the basis of her knife 
work and her looks. Within a week, he was complaining to her about the 
borderline competence of every person in his kitchen ex cept her and him.  
Arrogant, ironic, devoted Emile became her asylum. She felt infi nitely adult 
with him. He said he'd had enough of marriage his first time  around, but he 
obligingly took Denise to Atlantic City and (in the words of the Barbera 
D'Alba she'd been drunk on when she proposed to him) made an honest 
woman of her. At Cafe Louche they worked like partners, experience flowing 
from his head into hers.  They sneered at their pretentious old rival, Le Bee -
Fin. They impulse -bought a three -story town house on Federal Street, in a 
mixed black and white and Vietnamese neighborhood near the Italian 
Market. They talked about flavor the way Marxists talked about  revolution.  
When Emile had finally taught her everything he would ever teach her, she 
tried to teach him a thing or two — like, let's freshen up the menu, how about, 
let's maybe try that with a vegetable stock and a little bit of cumin, how about 
— and ra n smack into that wall of irony and ironclad opinion that she'd loved 
as long as she was on the happy side of it. She felt more skilled and ambitious 
and hungry than her white -haired husband. She felt as if, while working and 
sleeping and working and sleep ing, she'd aged so rapidly that she'd passed 
Emile and caught up with her parents. Her circumscribed world of round -
the-clock domestic and workplace togetherness seemed to her identical to her 
parents' uni verse of two. She had old -person aches in her youn g hips and 
knees and feet. She had scarred old -person hands, she had a dry old -person 
vagina, she had old -person prejudices and old -person politics, she had an 
old-person dislike of young people and their consumer electronics and their 
diction. She said to  herself: "I'm too young to be so old." Whereupon her 
banished guilt came screaming back up out of its cave  
ful to his unchanging self, and she was the one who'd insisted they get 
married.  
380 
THE CORRECTIONS  
By amicable agreement she left his ki tchen and signed on with a competitor, 
Ardennes, which needed a sous -chef and which, in her opinion, was superior 
to Cafe Louche in all things except the art of being excellent without seeming 
to try. (Unperspiring virtuosity was undeniably Emile's great g ift.) 
At Ardennes she conceived a desire to strangle the young woman who 
prepped and held down garde manger. The woman, Becky Hemer -ling, was 
a culinary -institute grad with wavy blond hair and a petite flat body and fair 
skin that turned scarlet in the kit chen heat. Everything about Becky 
Hemerling sickened Denise —her C.I.A. education (Denise was an autodidact 
snob), her overfamiliarity with more senior cooks (especially with Denise), 
her vocal adoration of Jodie Foster, the stupid fish -and-bicycle texts on  her 
T-shirts, her overuse of the word "fuck ing" as an intensifier, her self -
conscious lesbian "solidarity" with the "latinos" and "Asians" in the kitchen, 
her generalizations about "right -wingers" and "Kansas" and "Peoria," her 
facility with phrases like  "men and women of color," the whole bright aura of 
entitlement that came of basking in the approval of educators who wished 
that they could be as marginalized and victimized and free of guilt as she was. 
What is this person doing in my kitchen? Denise won dered. Cooks were not 
supposed to be political. Cooks were the mitochondria of humanity; they had 
their own separate DNA, they floated in a cell and powered it but were not 
really of it. Denise suspected that Becky Hemerling had chosen the cooking 
life to make a political point: to be one tough chick, to hold her own with the 
guys. Denise loathed this motivation all the more for har boring a speck of it 
herself. Hemerling had a way of looking at her that suggested that she 
(Hemerling) knew her better than s he knew her self—an insinuation at once 
infuriating and impossible to refute. Lying awake beside Emile at night, 
Denise imagined squeezing Hemerling's neck until her blue, blue eyes bugged 
out. She imagined pressing her thumbs into Hemerling's windpipe unt il it 
cracked.  
Then one night she fell asleep and dreamed that she was strangling Becky 
and that Becky didn't mind. Becky's blue eyes, in fact, invited further 
liberties. The strangler's hands relaxed and traveled up along Becky's jawline 
and past her ears  to the soft skin of her temples. Becky's  
381 
lips parted and her eyes fell shut, as if in bliss, as the strangler stretched her 
legs out on her legs and her arms out on her arms . . .  
Denise couldn't remember being sorrier to wake from a dream.  
"If you can have this feeling in a dream," she said to herself, "it must be 
possible to have it in reality."  
As her marriage foundered —as she became for Emile one more flashy trend -
chasing crowd -pleaser from Ardennes, and as he became for her the parent 
she betrayed with every word she spoke or swal lowed —she took comfort in 
the idea that her trouble with Emile was his gender. This idea dulled the edge 
of her guilt. It got her through the terrible Announcement she had to make, it 
got Emile out the door, it propelled her through an incredibly awkward first 
date with Becky Hemerling. She glommed on to the belief that she was gay, 
she held it close and thereby spared herself just enough guilt that she could 
let Emile be the one to leave the house, she could liv e with buying him out 
and staying, she could allow him that moral advantage.  
Unfortunately, as soon as he was gone, Denise had second thoughts. She and 
Becky enjoyed a lovely and instructive honeymoon and then began to fight. 
And fight, and fight. Their fi ghting life, like the sex life that so briefly 
preceded it, was a thing of ritual. They fought about why they were fighting so 
much, whose fault it was. They fought in bed late at night, they drew on 
unguessed reservoirs of something like libido, they were  hungover from 
fighting in the morning. They fought their little brains out. Fought fought 
fought. Fought on the stairway, fought in public, fought on car seats. And 
although they got off regularly —climaxed in red -faced screaming fits, 
slammed doors, kicke d walls, collapsed in wet -faced paroxysms —the lust for 
combat was never gone for long. It bound them together, overcame their 
mutual dislike. As a lover's voice or hair or curving hip keeps triggering the 
need to stop everything and fuck, so Becky had a sc ore of provocations that 
reliably sent Denise's heart rate through the roof. The worst was her 
contention that Denise, at heart, was a liberal collectivist pure les bian and 
was simply unaware of it.  
"You're so unbelievably alienated from yourself," Becky said. "You are 
obviously a dyke. You obviously always were."  
382 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
"I'm not anything," Denise said. "I'm just me."  
She wanted above all to be a private person, an independent indi vidual. She 
didn't want to belong to any group, l et alone a group with bad haircuts and 
strange resentful clothing issues. She didn't want a label, she didn't want a 
lifestyle, and so she ended where she'd started: wanting to strangle Becky 
Hemerling.  
She was lucky (from a guilt -management perspective) t hat her di vorce was in 
the works before she and Becky had their last, unsatisfying fight. Emile had 
moved to Washington to run the kitchen at the Hotel Belinger for a ton of 
money. The Weekend of Tears, when he returned to Philly with a truck and 
they div ided their worldly goods and packed up his share of them, was long 
past by the time Denise decided, in reac tion to Becky, that she wasn't a 
lesbian after all.  
She left Ardennes and became chef at Mare Scuro, a new Adriatic seafood 
place. For a year she tu rned down every guy who asked her for a date, not just 
because she wasn't interested (they were waiters, purvey ors, neighbors) but 
because she dreaded being seen in public with a man. She dreaded the day 
Emile found out (or the day she had to tell him, le st he find out accidentally) 
that she'd fallen for another man. It was better to work hard and see nobody. 
Life, in her experience, had a kind of velvet luster. You looked at yourself 
from one perspective and all you saw was weirdness. Move your head a lit tle 
bit, though, and every thing looked reasonably normal. She believed she 
couldn't hurt any body as long as she was only working.  
On a bright morning in May, Brian Callahan came by her house on Federal 
Street in his old Volvo station wagon, which was the  color of pistachio ice 
cream. If you were going to buy an old Volvo, pale green was the color to get, 
and Brian was the kind of person who wouldn't buy a vintage car in any but 
the best color. Now that he was rich, of course, he could have had any car he 
wanted custom -painted. But, like Denise, Brian was the kind of person who 
considered this cheating.  
When she got in the car, he asked if he could blindfold her. She looked at the 
black bandanna he was holding. She looked at his wedding ring.  
 
383 
"Trust me," he said. "It's worth being surprised b'y."  
Even before he'd sold Eigenmelody for $19.5 million, Brian had mo ved 
through the world like a golden retriever. His face was meaty and less than 
handsome, but he had winning blue eyes and sandy hair and little -boy 
freckles. He looked like what he was —a former Haver -ford lacrosse player 
and basically decent man to whom n othing bad had ever happened and 
whom you therefore didn't want to disappoint.  
Denise let him touch her face. She let his big hands get in her hair and tie the 
knot, let him disable her.  
The wagon's engine sang of the work involved in propelling a chunk of  metal 
down a road. Brian played a track from a girl -group al bum on his pullout 
stereo. Denise liked the music, but this was no sur prise. Brian seemed intent 
on playing and saying and doing nothing that she didn't like. For three weeks 
he'd been phoning her and leaving low -voiced messages. ("Hey. It's me.") She 
could see his love coming like a train, and she liked it. Was vicariously excited 
by it. She didn't mistake this excitement for attraction (Hemerling, if she'd 
done noth ing else, had made Denise s uspicious of her feelings), but she 
couldn't help rooting for Brian in his pursuit of her; and she'd dressed, this 
morning, accordingly. The way she'd dressed was hardly even fair.  
Brian asked her what she thought of the song.  
"Eh." She shrugged, testing t he limits of his eagerness to please. "It's OK."  
"I'm fairly stunned," he said. "I was pretty sure you'd love this."  
"Actually I do love it."  
She thought: What is my problem?  
They were on bad road with stretches of cobblestone. They crossed railroad 
tracks  and an undulating stretch of gravel. Brian parked. "I bought the option 
on this site for a dollar," he said. "If you don't like it, I'm out a buck."  
She put her hand to the blindfold. "I'm going to take this off."  
"No. We're almost there."  
He gripped her arm in a legitimate way and led her across warm gravel and 
into shadow. She could smell the river, feel the quiet of its nearness, its 
sound -swallowing liquid reach. She heard keys and a pad - 
384                                                                                                                                   THE 
CORRECTIONS  
lock, the squawk of heavy -duty hinges. Cold industrial air from a pent -up 
reservoir flowed over her bare shoulders and between her bare legs. The 
smell was of a cave with no organic content.  
Brian led her up four flights of metal stairs, unpadlocked another door, and 
led her into a warmer space where the reverb had train -station or cathedral 
grandeur. The air tasted of dry molds that fed on dry mold s that fed on dry 
molds.  
When Brian unblinded her, she knew immediately where she was. The 
Philadelphia Electric Company in the seventies had decommis sioned its 
dirty -coal power plants —majestic buildings, like this one just south of Center 
City, that Deni se slowed down to admire whenever she drove by. The space 
was bright and vast. The ceiling was sixty feet up, and Chartres -like banks of 
high windows punctuated the northern and southern walls. The concrete 
floor had been serially repatched and deeply goug ed by materials even harder 
than itself; it was more like a terrain than a floor. In the middle of it were the 
exoskeletal remains of two boiler -and-turbine units that looked like house -
size crickets stripped of limbs and feelers. Eroded black electromotiv e 
oblongs of lost capability. At the river end of the space were giant hatches 
where the coal had come in and the ashes had gone out. Traces of absent 
chutes and ducts and staircases brightened the smoky walls.  
Denise shook her head. "You can't put a resta urant in here."  
"I was afraid you'd say that."  
"You're going to lose your money before I have a chance to lose it myself."  
"I might get some bank funding, too."  
"Not to mention the PCBs and asbestos we're inhaling as we speak."  
"There you're wrong," Brian said. "This place wouldn't be available if it 
qualified for Superfund money. Without Superfund money, PECO can't 
afford to tear it down. It's too clean."  
"Bummer for PECO." She approached the turbines, loving the space 
regardless of its suitability. The in dustrial decay of Philadelphia, the rotting 
enchantments of the Workshop of the World, the survival of mega ruins in 
micro times: she recognized the mood from having been  
385 
born into a family of older people who kept mothballed wool and iron th ings 
in ancient boxes in the basement. She'd gone to school in a bright modernity 
and come home every day to an older, darker world.  
"You can't heat it, you can't cool it," she said. "It's a utility -bill nightmare."  
Brian, retriever, watched her intently. "My architect says we can run a floor 
along the entire south wall of windows. Come out about fifty feet. Glass it in 
on the other three sides. Put the kitchen underneath. Steam -clean the 
turbines, hang some spots, and let the main space just be itself."  
"This is so totally a money pit."  
"Notice there aren't any pigeons," Brian said. "No puddles."  
"But figure a year for the permits, another year to build, another year to get 
inspected. That's a long time to pay me for nothing."  
Brian replied that he was aimi ng for a February opening. He had architect 
friends and contractor friends, and he foresaw no trouble with "L&I" —the 
dreaded city office of Licenses and Inspections. "The com missioner," he said, 
"is a friend of my dad's. They golf every Thursday."  
Denise laughed. Brian's ambition and competence, to use a word of her 
mother's, "tickled" her. She looked up at the arching tops of the windows. "I 
don't know what kind of food you think is going to work in here."  
"Something decadent and grand. That's your proble m to solve."  
When they returned to the car, the greenness of which was of a piece with the 
weeds around the empty gravel lot, Brian asked if she'd made plans for 
Europe. "You should take at least two months," he said. "I have an ulterior 
motive here."  
"Yes ?" 
"If you go, then I can go for a couple of weeks myself. I want to eat what you 
eat. I want to hear how you think."  
He said this with disarming self -interest. Who wouldn't want to travel in 
Europe with a pretty woman who knew her food and wine? If you, not he, 
were the lucky devil who got to do it, he would be as de lighted for you as he 
expected you, now, to be delight ed for him. This was his tone.  
386 
THE COKRECTIOHS  
The part of Denise that suspected she might have better sex with Brian than 
she'd had with other men, the part of her that recognized her own ambition 
in him, agreed to take six weeks in Europe a nd con nect with him in Paris.  
The other, more suspicious part of her said: "When am I going to meet your 
family?"  
"How about next weekend? Come out and see us at Cape May."  
Cape May, New Jersey, consisted of a core of overdecorated Victo rians and 
fashion ably shabby bungalows surrounded by new printed -circuit tracts of 
vile boom. Naturally, being Brian's parents, the Callahans owned one of the 
best old bungalows. Behind it was a pool for early -summer weekends when 
the ocean was cold. Here Denise, arriving late on a Saturday afternoon, found 
Brian and his daughters lounging while a mouse -haired woman, covered with 
sweat and rust, attacked a wrought -iron table with a wire brush.  
Denise had expected Brian's wife to be ironic and stylish and some thing of a 
knockout. Robin Passafaro was wearing yellow sweat pants, an MAB paint 
cap, a Phillies jersey of unflattering redness, and terrible glasses. She wiped 
her hand on her sweats and gave it to Denise. Her greeting was squeaky and 
oddly formal: "It's very nice to meet you." She went immediately back to 
work.  
I don't like you either, Denise thought.  
Sinead, a skinny pretty girl of ten, was sitting on the diving board with a book 
in her lap. She waved carefully at Denise. Erin, a younger and chunkier girl 
wearing hea dphones, was hunched over a picnic table with a scowl of 
concentration. She gave a low whistle.  
"Erin's learning birdcalls," Brian said.  
"Why?"  
"Basically, we have no idea."  
"Magpie," Erin announced. "Queg -queg -queg -queg?"  
"This might be a good time to put  that away," Brian said.  
Erin peeled off her headphones, ran to the diving board, and tried to bounce 
her sister off it. Sinead's book nearly went into the soup. She snagged it with 
an elegant hand. "Dad —!" 
"Honey, it's a diving board, not a reading board. " 
There was a coked -up fast -forwardness to Robin's brushing. Her work 
seemed pointed and resentful and it set Denise's nerves on edge. Brian, too, 
sighed and considered his wife. "Are you almost done with that?"  
"Do you want me to stop?"  
"That wo uld be nice, yes."  
"OK." Robin dropped the brush and moved toward the house. "Denise, can I 
get you something to drink?"  
"Glass of water, thanks."  
"Erin, listen," Sinead said. "I'll be a black hole and you be a red dwarf."  
"I want to be a black hole," Erin  said.  
"No, I'm the black hole. The red dwarf runs around in circles and gradually 
gets sucked in by powerful gravitational forces. The black hole sits here and 
reads."  
"Do we collide?" Erin said.  
"Yes," Brian interposed, "but no information about the even t ever reaches the 
outside world. It's a perfectly silent collision."  
Robin reappeared in a black one -piece swimsuit. With a gesture just short of 
rude, she gave Denise her water.  
"Thank you," Denise said.  
"You're welcome!" Robin said. She took off her glasses and dove into the deep 
end. She swam underwater while Erin circled the pool and emitted shrieks 
appropriate to a dying M - or S -class star. When Robin surfaced at the shallow 
end she looked naked in her  semi -blindness. She looked more like the wife 
Denise had imagined —hair pouring in rivers down her head and shoulders, 
her cheekbones and dark eyebrows gleaming. As she left the pool, water 
beaded on the hem ming of her suit and streamed through the untend ed hairs 
of her bikini line.  
An old unresolved confusion gathered like asthma in Denise. She felt a need 
to get away and cook.  
"I stopped at the necessary markets," she told Brian.  
"It doesn't seem fair to put our guest to work," he said.  
"On the other han d, I offered, and you're paying me."  
388                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
"There is that, yes."  
"Erin, now you be a pathogen," Sinead said, slipping int o the water, "and I'll 
be a leukocyte."  
Denise made a simple salad of red and yellow cherry tomatoes. She made 
quinoa with butter and saffron, and halibut steaks with a color guard of 
mussels and roasted peppers. She was nearly done before she thought to p eer 
under the foil coverings of several containers in the refrigerator. Here she 
found a tossed salad, a fruit salad, a platter of cleaned ears of corn, and a pan 
of (could it be?) pigs in blankets?  
Brian was drinking a beer by himself on the deck.  
"There's a dinner in the fridge," Denise told him. "There's already a dinner."  
"Yikes," Brian said. "Robin must have —I guess when the girls and I were out 
fishing."  
"Well, there's a whole dinner there. I just made a second whole din ner." 
Denise laughed, r eally angry. "Do you guys not communicate?"  
"No, in fact, this was not our most communicative day. Robin had some work 
at the Garden Project that she wanted to stay and do. I had to kind of drag 
her over here."  
"Well, fuck."  
"Look," Brian said, "we'll have  your dinner now, and we can have hers 
tomorrow. This is totally my fault."  
"I guess!"  
She found Robin on the other porch, cutting Erin's toenails. "I just realized," 
she said, "that I've been making dinner and you already made it. Brian didn't 
tell me."  
Robin shrugged. "Whatever."  
"No, I'm really sorry about this, though."  
"Whatever," Robin said. "The girls are excited that you're cook -ing."  
"I'm sorry."  
"Whatever."  
At dinner Brian prodded his shy progeny to answer Denise's ques tions. Each 
time she caught  the girls staring at her, they lowered their eyes and reddened. 
Sinead in particular seemed to know the right way  
 
to want her. Robin ate quickly with her head down and declared the food 
"tasty." It wasn't clear how much her unpleasantness was aimed at Brian and 
how much at Denise. She went to bed soon after the girls, and in the morning 
she had already left for mass w hen Denise got up.  
"Quick question," Brian said, pouring coffee. "How would you feel about 
driving me and the girls back to Philly tonight? Robin wants to get back to the 
Garden Project early."  
Denise hesitated. She felt positively shoved by Robin into Bri an's arms.  
"Not a problem if you don't want to," he said. "She's willing to take a bus and 
leave us the car."  
A bus* A bus!  
Denise laughed. "Sure, no, I'll drive you." She added, echoing Robin: 
"Whatever!"  
At the beach, as the sun burned off the metallic m orning coastal clouds, she 
and Brian watched Erin veer through the surf while Sinead dug a shallow 
grave.  
"I'll be Jimmy Hoffa," Sinead said, "and you guys be the Mob."  
They worked to inter the girl in sand, smoothing the cool curves or her burial 
mound, t humping the hollows of the living body underneath. The mound was 
geologically active and was experiencing little quakes, webs of fissure 
spreading where Sinead's belly rose and fell.  
"I'm just now putting it together," Brian said, "that you were mar ried t o 
Emile Berger."  
"Do you know him?"  
"Not personally, but I knew Cafe Louche. Ate there often."  
"That was us."  
"Two awfully big egos in a little kitchen."  
"Yuh."  
"Do you miss him?"  
"My divorce is the great unhappiness of my life."  
"That's an answer," Brian said, "but not to my question."  
Sinead was destroying her sarcophagus slowly from within, toes wriggling 
into daylight, a knee erupting, pink fingers sprouting from  
390                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIOHS  
moist sand. Erin flung herself into a slurry of sand and water, picked herself 
up, and flung herself back down.  
I could get to like these girls, Denise thought.  
At home that night she called her mother and listened, as she did every 
Sunday, to Enid's litany of Alfred's sins against a healthy attitude, against a 
healthful lifestyle, against doctors' orders, against circadian or thodoxies, 
against established principles of daytime verticality, against commonse nse 
rules regarding ladders and staircases, against all that was fun -loving and 
optimistic in Enid's nature. After fifteen grueling min utes Enid concluded, 
"Now, and how are you?"  
Since her divorce, Denise had resolved to tell her mother fewer lies, and s o 
she made herself come clean about her enviable travel plans. She omitted 
only the fact that she would travel in France with someone else's husband; 
this fact already radiated trouble.  
"Oh, I wish I could go with you!" Enid said. "I so love Austria."  
Denise manfully offered: "Why don't you take a month and come over?"  
"Denise, there's no way could I leave Dad by himself."  
"He can come, too."  
"You know what he says. He's given up on land tours. He has too much 
trouble with his legs. So, you just go and have a wonderful time for me. Say 
hello to my favorite city! And be sure and visit Cindy Meis -ner. She and Klaus 
have a chalet in St. Moritz and  a huge, elegant apart ment in Vienna."  
To Enid, Austria meant "The Blue Danube" and "Edelweiss." The music boxes 
in her living room, with their floral and Alpine marquetry, all came from 
Vienna. Enid was fond of saying that her mother's mother had been 
"Viennese," because this was a synonym, in her mind, for "Austrian," by 
which she meant "of or relating to the Austro -Hungarian Empire" —an 
empire that at the time of her grandmother's birth had encompassed lands 
from north of Prague to south of Sarajevo. Den ise, who as a girl had had a 
massive crush on Barbra Streisand in Yentl and who as a teenager had 
steeped herself in I. B. Singer and Sholem Alei -chem, once badgered from 
Enid an admission that the grandmother in  
391 
question might in fact have b een Jewish. Which, as she pointed out in 
triumph, would make both her and Enid Jewish by direct matrilineal descent. 
But Enid, quickly backpedaling, said that no, no, her grand mother had been 
Catholic.  
Denise had a professional interest in certain flavors  from her grand mother's 
cooking —country ribs and fresh sauerkraut, gooseberries and whortleberries, 
dumplings, trouts, and sausages. The culinary problem was to make central 
European heartiness palatable -to Size 4 Petites. The Titanium Card crowd 
didn't w ant Wagnerian slabs of Sauerbraten, or softballs of Semmelknodel, or 
alps of Schlag. This crowd might, however, eat sauerkraut. If ever there was a 
food for chicks with tooth pick legs: low -fat and high -flavor and versatile, 
ready to fall in bed with pork,  with goose, with chicken, with chestnuts, ready 
to take a raw plunge with mackerel sashimi or smoked bluefish . . .  
Severing her last ties with Mare Scuro, she flew to Frankfurt as a salaried 
employee of Brian Callahan with a no -limit American Express car d. In 
Germany she drove a hundred miles an hour and was tailgated by cars 
flashing their high beams. In Vienna she looked for a Vienna that didn't exist. 
She ate nothing that she couldn't have done better herself; one night she had 
Wiener schnitzel and tho ught, yes, this is Wiener schnitzel, uh huh. Her idea 
of Austria was way more vivid than Austria itself. She went to the 
Kunsthistorisches Museum and the Phil harmonic; she reproached herself for 
being a bad tourist. She got so bored and lonely that she fi nally called Cindy 
von Kippel (nee Meisner) and accepted an invitation to dinner at her 
seventeen -room apartment on the Ringstrafie.  
Cindy had gone thick around the middle and looked, Denise thought, far 
worse than she had to. Her features were lost in fou ndation, rouge, and 
lipstick. Her black silk pants were roomy in the hips and tight at the ankles. 
Brushing cheeks and weathering the tear -gas attack of Cindy's perfume, 
Denise was surprised to detect bacterial breath.  
Cindy's husband, Klaus, had yard -wide shoulders, narrow hips, and a butt of 
fascinating tininess. The von Kippel living room was half a block long and 
furnished with gilt chairs in sociability -killing forma - 
392                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
tions. Ancestral Watteauery hung on the walls, as did Klaus's Olympic bronze 
medal, mounted and framed, beneath the largest chandelier.  
"What you see here is merely a replica," Klaus told Denise. "T he original 
medal is in safe storage."  
On a Louis XlV -ish sideboard was a plate of bread disks, a mangled smoked 
fish with the consistency of chunk canned tuna, and a not -large piece of 
Emmentaler.  
Klaus took a bottle from a silver bucket and poured Sekt w ith a nourish. "To 
our culinary pilgrim," he said, raising a glass. "Welcome to the holy city of 
Wien."  
The Sekt was sweet and overcarbonated and remarkably much like Sprite.  
"It's so neat you're here!" Cindy cried. She snapped her fingers frantically, 
and a maid hurried in through a side door. "Annerl, hun," Cindy said in a 
more babyish voice, "remember I said use the rye bread, not the white 
bread?"  
"Yis, madam," the middle -aged Annerl said.  
"So it's sort of too late now, because I meant this white bread for later, but I 
really wish you'd take this back and bring us the rye bread instead! And then 
maybe send someone out for more white bread for later!" Cindy explained to 
Denise: "She's so so sweet, but so so silly. Aren't you, Annerl? Aren't you a 
silly th ing?"  
"Yis, madam."  
"Well, you know what it's like, you're a chef," Cindy told Denise as Annerl 
exited. "It's probably even worse for you, the stupidity of people."  
"The arrogance and stupidity," Klaus said.  
"Tell somebody what to do," Cindy said, "and the y just go do some thing else, 
it's so frustrating! So frustrating!"  
"My mother sends her greetings," Denise said.  
"Your mom is so neat. She was always so nice to me. Klaus, you know the 
tiny, tiny little house my family used to live in (a long time ago, wh en I was a 
tiny, tiny little girl), well, Denise's parents were our neighbors. My mom and 
her mom are still good friends. I guess your folks are still in their little old 
house, right?"  
393 
Klaus gave a harsh laugh and turned to Denise. "Do you k now what I rilly 
hate about St. Jude?"  
"No," Denise said. "What do you really hate about St. Jude?"  
"I rilly hate the phony democracy. The people in St. Jude pretend they're all 
alike. It's all very nice. Nice, nice, nice. But the people are not all alike. Not at 
all. There are class differences, there are race differ ences, there are enormous 
and decisive economic differences, and yet nobody's honest in this case. 
Everybody pretends! Have you noticed this? " 
"Do you mean," Denise said, "like the differences between my mom and 
Cindy's mom?"  
"No, I don't know your mother."  
"Klaus, actually!" Cindy said. "Actually you did meet her. Three 
Thanksgivings ago, at the open house. Remember?"  
"Well, you see, everybody's the same," Klaus explained. "That's what I'm 
telling you. How can you distinguish the people when every body pretends to 
be the same?"  
Annerl came back with the dismal plate and different bread.  
"Here, try some of this fish," Ci ndy urged Denise. "Isn't this cham pagne 
wonderful? Really different! Klaus and I used to drink it drier, but then we 
found this, and we love it."  
"There's a snob appeal to the dry," Klaus said. "But those who rilly know 
their Sekt know this emperor, this Extra -Trocken, is quite naked."  
Denise crossed her legs and said, "My mother tells me you're a doctor."  
"Yah, sports medicine," Klaus said.  
"All the best skiers come to Klaus!" Cindy said.  
"This is how I repay my debt to society," Klaus said.  
Though Cindy begged her to stay, Denise escaped from the Ringstrafie before 
nine and escaped from Vienna the next morning, heading east across the 
haze -white valley of the middle Danube. Con scious of spending Brian's 
money, she worked long days, walking Budapest secto r by sector, taking 
notes at every meal, checking out bak eries and tiny stalls and cavernous 
restaurants rescued from the brink of terminal neglect. She traveled as far 
east as Ruthenia, the birthplace of  
394                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
Enid's father's parents, now a trans -Carpathian smidgen of the Ukraine. In 
the landscapes she traversed there was no trace of shtetl. No Jews to speak of 
in any but  the largest cities. Everything as durably, drably Gen tile as she'd 
reconciled herself to being. The food, by and large, was coarse. The 
Carpathian highlands, everywhere scarred with the stab wounds of coal and 
pitchblende mining, looked suitable for bury ing lime -sprinkled bodies in 
mass graves. Denise saw faces that resembled her own, but they were closed 
and prematurely weathered, not a word of English in their eyes. She had no 
roots. This was not her country.  
She flew to Paris and met Brian in the lobby  of the Hotel des Deux lies. In 
June he'd spoken of bringing his whole family, but he'd come alone. He was 
wearing American khakis and a very wrinkled white shirt. Denise was so 
lonely she almost jumped into his arms.  
What kind of idiot, she wondered, lets her husband go to Paris with a person like me?  
They ate dinner at La Cuillere Curieuse, a Michelin two -star estab lishment 
that in Denise's opinion was trying too hard. She didn't want raw yellowtail 
or papaya confit when she came to France. On the other hand, she was plenty 
sick of goulash.  
Brian, deferring to her judgment absolutely, made her choose the wine and 
order both dinners. Over coffee she asked him why Robin hadn't come along 
to Paris.  
"It's the first zucchini harvest at the Garden Project," he said with 
uncharacteristic bitterness.  
"Travel is a chore for some people," Denise said.  
"It didn't use to be for Robin," Brian said. "We used to take great trips, all 
over the West. And now that we can really afford it, she doesn't want to go. 
It's like s he's on strike against money."  
"It must be a shock, suddenly having so much."  
"Look, I just want to have fun with it," Brian said. "I don't want to be a 
different person. But I'm not going to wear sackcloth, either."  
"Is that what Robin is doing?"  
"She has n't been happy since the day I sold the company."  
Let's get an egg timer, Denise thought, and see how long this marriage lasts.  
She waited in vain, as they walked the length of the quai after din ner, for 
Brian to brush her hand with his. He kept looking at her hope fully, as if to be 
sure she had no objection to his stopping at this store window or veering 
down that side street. He had a happy canine way of seeking approval 
without seeming insecur e. He described his plans for the Generator as if it 
were a party that he was almost certain she would enjoy. Clearly convinced, 
in the same way, that he was doing a Good Thing that she wanted, he backed 
away from her hygienically when they parted for the night in the lobby of the 
Deux lies.  
She endured ten days of his affability. Toward the end she couldn't stand to 
see herself in mirrors, her face seemed to her so ravaged, her tits so droopy, 
her hair such a frizzball, her clothes so traveled -out. She was , basically, 
shocked that this unhappy husband was resisting her. Even though he had 
good reason to resist her! He being the father of two lovely girls! And she 
being, after all, his paid employee! She respected his resistance, she believed 
that this was h ow adults should behave; and she was extremely unhappy 
about it.  
She bent her will to the task of not feeling overweight and starving herself. It 
didn't help that she was sick of lunch and dinner and wanted only picnics. 
Wanted baguettes, white peaches, dr y chevre, and coffee. She was sick of 
watching Brian enjoy a meal. She hated Robin for hav ing a husband she 
could trust. She hated Robin for her rudeness at Cape May. She cursed Robin 
in her head, called Robin a cunt and threatened to fuck her husband. Se veral 
nights, after dinner, she consid ered violating her own twisted ethics and 
putting the moves on Brian (because surely he would defer to her judgment; 
surely, given permis sion, he would jump up on her bed and pant and grin and 
lick her hand), but she  was finally too demoralized by her hair and clothes. 
She was ready to go home.  
Two nights before they left, she knocked on Brian's door before dinner and he 
pulled her into his room and kissed her.  
He'd given no warning of his change of heart. She visited  the con fessor in her 
head and was able to say, "Nothing! I did nothing! I knocked on the door, and 
next thing I know, he's on his knees."  
On his knees, he pressed her hands to his face. She looked at him as  
 
398 
THE CORRECTIONS  
she'd looked at Don Armour long ago. His desire brought cool topical relief to 
the dryness and crackedness, the bodywide distress, of her per son. She 
followed him to bed.  
Naturally, being good at everything, Brian knew how to kiss. He had the 
oblique styl e she liked. She murmured ambiguously: "I love your taste." He 
put his hands everywhere she'd expected him to put them. She unbuttoned 
his shirt as the woman does at a certain point. She licked his nipple in the 
nodding, firm way of a grooming cat. She put  a practiced, curled hand on the 
lump in his pants. She was beauti fully, avidly adulterous and she knew it. She 
embarked on buckle work, on hook and button projects, on elastic -band 
labors, until there began to swell inside her, hardly noticeable and then  
suddenly distinct, and then not merely distinct but increasingly painful in its 
pressure on her peritoneum and eyeballs and arteries and meninges, a body -
sized, Robin -faced balloon of wrongness.  
Brian's voice was in her ear. He was asking the protection q uestion. He'd 
mistaken her discomfort for transports, her squirming for an invi tation. She 
clarified by rolling out of bed and crouching in a corner of the hotel room. 
She said she couldn't.  
Brian sat up on the bed and made no reply. She stole a glance an d confirmed 
that his endowment was per expectation for the man who had everything. 
She suspected that she wouldn't soon forget the sight of this dick. Would be 
seeing it when she closed her eyes, at inconvenient times, in far -fetched 
contexts.  
She apologiz ed to him.  
"No, you're right," Brian said, deferring to her judgment. "I feel terrible. I've 
never done anything like this."  
"See, I have," she said, lest he think her merely timid. "More than once. And I 
don't want to anymore."  
"No, of course, you're righ t." 
"If you weren't married — If I weren't your employee —" 
"Listen, I'm dealing with it. I'm going in the bathroom now. I'm dealing with 
it." 
"Thank you."  
Part of her thought: What is my problem?  
397 
Another part of her thought: For once in my lif e, I'm doing the right thing.  
She spent four nights by herself in Alsace and flew home from Frankfurt. She 
was shocked when she went to see the progress that Brian's team had made 
at the Generator in her absence. The building -within -a-building was already 
framed out, the concrete subfloors poured. She could see what the effect 
would be: a bright bubble of modernity in a twilight of monumental industry. 
Although she had faith in her cooking, the grandness of the space made her 
nervous. She wished that she'd insisted on an ordinary plain space in which 
her food could shine alone. She felt seduced and suckered somehow —as if, 
unbeknownst to her, Brian had been competing with her for the world's 
attention. As if, all along, in his affable way, he'd been angling to make the 
restaurant his, not hers.  
She was haunted, just as she'd feared, by the afterimage of his dick. She felt 
gladder and gladder that she hadn't let him put it in her. Brian had every 
advantage that she had, plus many of his own. He was male, he wa s rich, he 
was a born insider; he wasn't hampered by Lambert weirdnesses or strong 
opinions; he was an amateur with nothing to lose but throwaway money, and 
to succeed all he needed was a good idea and somebody else (namely her) to 
do the hard work. How lu cky she'd been, in that hotel room, to recognize him 
as her adversary! Two more minutes and she would have disappeared. She 
would have become an other facet of his really fun life, her beauty reflecting 
on his irresistibil ity, her talents redounding to hi s restaurant's glory. How 
lucky she'd been, how lucky.  
She believed that if, when the Generator opened, reviewers paid more 
attention to the space than to the food, she would lose and Brian would win. 
And so she worked her ass off. She convection -roasted country ribs to 
brownness and cut them thin, along the grain, for pres entation, reduced and 
darkened the kraut gravy to bring out its nutty, earthy, cabbagy, porky flavor, 
and arted up the plate with t win testicular new potatoes, a cluster of Brussels 
sprouts, and a spoon of stewed white beans that she lightly spiked with 
roasted garlic. She invented luxurious new white sausages. She matched a 
fennel relish, roasted potatoes, and  
398  
THE CORRECTIONS  
good bitter wholesome rapini with fabulous pork chops that she bought 
direct from a sixties holdover organic farmer who did his own butcher ing and 
made his own deliveries. She took the guy to lunch and visited his farm in 
Lancaster County and me t the hogs in question, examined their eclectic diet 
(boiled yams and chicken wings, acorns and chest nuts) and toured the 
soundproofed room where they were slaughtered. She extracted 
commitments from her old crew at Mare Scuro. She took former colleagues 
out on Brian's AmEx and sized up the local competi tion (most of it 
reassuringly undistinguished) and sampled desserts to see if anybody's pastry 
chef was worth stealing. She staged one -woman late -night forcemeat 
festivals. She made sauerkraut in five -gallon buck ets in her basement. She 
made it with red cabbage and with shredded kale in cabbage juice, with 
juniper berries and black peppercorns. She hurried along the fermentation 
with hundred -watt bulbs.  
Brian still called her every day, but he didn't take her driving in his Volvo 
anymore, he didn't play her music. Behind his polite questions she sensed a 
waning interest. She recommended an old friend of hers, Rob Zito, to manage 
the Generator, and when Brian took the two of them to lunch, he stayed for 
half an hour. He had an appointment in New York.  
One night Denise called him at home and instead got Robin Passa -faro. 
Robin's clipped phrases —"OK," "Whatever," "Yes," "I'll tell him," "OK" —so 
irritated Denise that she deliberately kept her on the line. She as ked how the 
Garden Project was going.  
"Fine," Robin said. "I'll tell Brian you called."  
"Could I come over sometime and see it?"  
Robin replied with naked rudeness: "Why?"  
"Well," Denise said, "it's something Brian talks about" (this was a lie; he 
rarely me ntioned it), "it's an interesting project" (in fact, it sounded Utopian 
and crackpot), "and, you know, I love vegetables."  
"Uh huh."  
"So maybe some Saturday afternoon or something."  
"Whenever."  
A moment later Denise slammed the phone down in its cradle. Sh e was 
angry, among other things, at how fake she'd sounded to herself. "I  
could have fucked your husband!" she said. "And I chose not to! So how 
about a little friendliness?"  
Maybe, if she'd been a better person, she would have left Robin alone. Maybe 
she wanted to make Robin like her simply to deny her the satisfaction of 
disliking her —to win that contest of esteem. Maybe she was just picking up 
the gauntlet. But the desire to be liked was real. She was haunted by the 
feeling that Robin had been in the hotel room with her and Brian; by that 
bursting sensation of Robin's presence inside her body.  
On the last Saturday of baseball season she cooked at home for eight hours, 
shrink -wrapping trout, juggling half a dozen kraut salads, and pairing the 
pan juices of sauteed kidneys with interesting spirits. Late in the day she 
went for a walk and, finding herself going west, crossed Broad Street into the 
ghetto of Point Breeze, where Robin had her Project.  
The weather was fine. Early autumn in Philadelphia brought smells of fresh 
seawater and tidewater, gradual abatements in temperature, a quiet 
abdication of control by the humid air masses that had held the onshore 
breeze at bay all summer. Denise passed an old woman in a housecoat 
standing watch while two dusty men unloaded Acme gro ceries from a 
corroded Pinto's hatchback. Cinderblock was the material of choice over here 
for blinding windows. There were fire -gutted LUNG ONETTEs and P ZER As. 
Friable houses with bedsheet curtains. Expanses of fresh asphalt that seemed 
to seal the neighborhood's fate more than promise renewal.  
Denise didn't care if she saw Robin. Almost better, in a way, to score the 
point subtly —to let Robin find out from Brian that she'd taken the trouble to 
walk by the Project.  
She came to  a block within whose chain -link confines were small hills of 
mulch and large piles of wilted vegetation. At the far corner of the block, 
behind the only house left standing on it, somebody was working rocky soil 
with a shovel.  
The front door of the solita ry house was open. A black girl of col lege age was 
sitting at a desk that also contained a vastly ghastly plaid sofa and a wheeled 
blackboard on which a column of names (Lateesha,  
400 
THE CORRECTIONS  
Latoya, Tyrell) was followed by columns of HOURS TO DATE and DOL LARS 
TO DATE.  
"Looking for Robin," Denise said.  
The girl nodded at the open rear door of the house. "She's in back."  
The garden was raw but peaceful. Not much seemed to have been grown here 
besides squashes and their cousins, but the patches of vine were extensive, 
and the smells of mulch and dirt, and the onshore au tumn breeze, were full of 
childhood memory.  
Robin was shoveling rubble into a makeshift sieve. She had thin arms and a 
hummingbird metabolism and took many fast small bites of rubble instead of 
fewer big ones. She was wearing a black bandanna and a very dirty T -shirt 
with the text QUALITY DAYCARE: PAY NOW OR PAY LATER. She seemed 
neither surprised nor pleased to see Denise.  
"This is a big project," Denise said.  
Robin shrugged, holding the shovel with both hands as if to stress that she 
felt interrupted.  
"Do you want some help?" Denise said.  
"No. The kids were supposed to do this, but there's a game over at the river. 
I'm just cleaning up."  
She whacked the rubble in the sieve to urge some dirt through. Caught in the 
mesh were fragments of brick and mortar, gobs of roof ing tar, ailanthus 
limbs, petrified cat shi t, Baccardi and Yuengling labels with backings of 
broken glass.  
"So what did you grow?" Denise said.  
Robin shrugged again. "Nothing that would impress you."  
"Well, like what?"  
"Like zucchini and pumpkins."  
"I cook with both of those."  
"Yeah."  
"Who's the gi rl?" 
"I have a couple of half -time assistants that I pay. Sara's a junior at Temple."  
"And who are the kids who were supposed to be here?"  
"Neighborhood kids between twelve and sixteen." Robin took off her glasses 
and rubbed sweat from her face with a dirt y sleeve. Denise  
401  
had forgotten, or had never noticed to begin with, what a pretty mouth she 
had. "They get minimum wage plus vegetables, plus a share of any money we 
make."  
"Do you subtract expenses?"  
"That would discourage them."  
"Right."  
Robin looked away, across the street, at a row of dead buildings with rusting 
sheet -metal cornices. "Brian says you're very competitive."  
"Oh really?"  
"He said he wouldn't want to arm -wrestle you."  
Denise winced.  
"He said he wouldn't want to be the other che f in the kitchen with you."  
"No danger of that," Denise said.  
"He said he wouldn't want to play Scrabble with you."  
"Uh huh."  
"He said he wouldn't want to play Trivial Pursuit with you."  
OK, OK, Denise thought.  
Robin was breathing hard. "Anyway."  
"Yeah, anyway."  
"Here's why I didn't go to Paris," Robin said. "I thought Erin was too young. 
Sinead was having fun at art camp, and I had tons of work here."  
"I understood that."  
"And you guys were going to be talking about food all day. And Brian said it  
was business. So."  
Denise raised her eyes from the dirt but couldn't quite look Robin in the eye. 
"It was business."  
Robin, her lip trembling, said, "Whatever!"  
Above the ghetto a fleet of copper -bottomed clouds, Revere Ware clouds, had 
withdrawn to the northwest. It was the moment when the blue backdrop of 
the sky grayed to the same value as the stratus forma tions in front of it, when 
night light and day light w ere in equilibrium.  
"You know, I'm not really into guys," Denise said.  
"Pardon me?"  
402                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
"I said I don't sleep with men  anymore. Since I got divorced."  
Robin frowned as if this made no sense to her at all. "Does Brian know that?"  
"I don't know. Not from my telling him."  
Robin thought this over for a moment and then began to laugh. She said, 
"Hee hee hee!" She said, "Ha ha ha!" Her laugh was full -throated and 
embarrassing and, at the same time, Denise thought, lovely. It echoed off the 
rusty -corniced houses. "Poor Brian!" she said. "Poor Brian!"  
Robin immediately became more cordial. She put down her shovel and gave 
Denise a  tour of the garden —"my little enchanted kingdom" she called it. 
Finding that she had Denise's interest, she risked enthusi asm. Here was a 
new asparagus patch, here two rows of young pear and apple trees that she 
hoped to espalier, here the late crops of sunflowers, acorn squash, and kale. 
She'd planted only sure winners this summer, hoping to hook a core group of 
local teenagers and reward them for the thankless infrastructural work of 
preparing beds, running pipes, adjust ing drainages, and connecting ra in 
barrels to the roof of the house.  
"This is basically a selfish project," Robin said. "I always wanted a big garden, 
and now the whole inner city's going back to farmland. But the kids who 
really need to be out working with their hands and learn ing what  fresh food 
tastes like are the ones who aren't doing it. They're latchkey kids. They're 
getting high, they're having sex, or they're stuck in some classroom until six 
with a computer. But they're also at an age when it's still fun to play in the 
dirt."  
"Though possibly not as much fun as sex or drugs."  
"Maybe not for ninety percent of kids," Robin said. "I just want there to be 
something for the other ten percent. Some alternative that doesn't involve 
computers. I want Sinead and Erin to be around kids who  aren't like them. I 
want them to learn how to work. I want them to know that work isn't just 
pointing and clicking."  
"This is very admirable," Denise said.  
Robin, mistaking her tone, said, "Whatever."  
Denise sat on the plastic skin of a bale of peat moss while Robin washed up 
and changed her clothes. Maybe it was because she could  
403 
count on one hand the autumn Saturday evenings that she'd spent out side a 
kitchen since she was twenty, or maybe because some sentimental part of her 
was taken in by the egalitarian ideal that Klaus von Kippel found so phony in 
St. Jude, but the word she wanted to apply to Robin Passafaro, who had lived 
in urban Philly al l her life, was "midwestern." By which she meant hopeful or 
enthusiastic or community -spirited.  
She didn't care so much, after all, about being liked. She found her self liking. 
When Robin came out and locked the house, Denise asked if she had time for 
dinner.  
"Brian and his dad took the girls to see the Phillies," Robin said. "They'll 
come home full of stadium food. So, sure. We can have din ner."  
"I have stuff in my kitchen," Denise said. "Do you mind?"  
"Anything. Whatever."  
Typically, if a chef invited y ou to dinner, you considered yourself lucky and 
you hastened to show it. But Robin seemed determined not to be impressed.  
Night had fallen. The air on Catharine Street smelled like the last weekend of 
baseball. Walking east, Robin told Denise the story of her brother, Billy. 
Denise had already heard the story from Brian, but parts of Robin's version 
were new to her.  
"So wait," she said. "Brian sold his company to W ------ , and then  
Billy attacked one of W ------ 's vice presidents, and you think there's a  
conn ection?"  
"God, yes," Robin said. "That's what's so horrible."  
"Brian didn't mention that part."  
Shrillness came pouring out of Robin. "I can't believe it! That's the whole 
point. God! It is so, so, so like him not to mention that part. Be cause that part 
might actually make things hard for him, you know, the way things are hard 
for me. It might get in the way of his fun time in Paris, or his lunch date with 
Harvey Keitel, or whatever. I can't believe he didn't mention it."  
"Explain to me what the problem is ?" 
"Rick Hamburg's disabled for life," Robin said. "My brother is in jail for the 
next ten or fifteen years, this horrible company is corrupting  
404 
THE CORRECTIONS  
the city schools, my father is on anti -psychotics, and Brian is like, hey, look 
what W ------ just did for us, let's move to Mendocino!"  
"But you didn't do anything wrong," Denise said. "You're not re sponsible for 
any of those other things."  
Robin turned and looked straight into her. "What's life for?"  
"I don't know."  
"I don't either. But I don't think it's about winning."  
They marched along in silence. Denise, to whom winning did mat ter, grimly 
noted that, on top of all his other luck, Brian had married a woman of 
principle and spirit.  
She further noted, however, that  Robin didn't seem particularly loyal.  
Denise's living room contained little more than it had after Emile had 
emptied it three years earlier. In their contest of self -denials, on the Weekend 
of Tears, Denise had had the double advantage of feeling guiltier  than Emile 
and of having already agreed to take the house. In the end she'd succeeded in 
making Emile take practically every joint possession that she liked or valued 
and many others that she didn't like but could have used.  
The emptiness of the house had  disgusted Becky Hemerling. It was cold, it 
was self-hating, it was a monastery.  
"Nice and spare," Robin commented.  
Denise sat her down at the half Ping -Pong table that served as her kitchen 
table, opened a fifty -dollar wine, and proceeded to feed her. Denise had 
seldom had to struggle with her weight, but she would have blimped out in a 
month if she'd eaten like Robin.  She watched in awe as her guest, elbows 
flying, devoured two kidneys and a homemade sausage, tried each of the 
kraut salads, and spread butter on her third healthy wedge of artisanal rye 
bread.  
She herself had the butterflies and ate hardly anything.  
"St. Jude is one of my favorite saints," Robin said. "Did Brian tell you I've 
been going to church?"  
"He mentioned it, yes."  
"I'm sure he did. I'm sure he was very understanding and patient!" Robin's 
voice was loud and her face red with wine. Denise felt a con - 
405 
striction in her chest. "Anyway, one of the great things about being Catholic is 
you get to have saints, like St. Jude."  
"Patron saint of hopeless causes?"  
"Exactly. What's a church for if not lost causes?"  
"I feel this way about sports tea ms," Denise said. "That the winners don't 
need your help."  
Robin nodded. "You know what I mean. But if you live with Brian you start 
feeling like there's something wrong with losers. Not that he'll actually 
criticize you. He'll always be very understanding  and patient and loving. 
Brian's great! Nothing wrong with Brian! It's just that he'd rather root for a 
winner. And I'm not really a winner like that. And I don't really want to be."  
Denise would never have talked about Emile like this. She wouldn't do it even 
now.  
"See, but you are that kind of winner," Robin said. "That's why I frankly sort 
of saw you as my potential replacement. I saw you as next in line."  
"Nope."  
Robin made her self -consciously delighted sounds. She said, "Hee hee hee!"  
"In Brian's defe nse," Denise said, "I don't think he needs you to be Brooke 
Astor. I think he'd settle for bourgeois."  
"I can live with being bourgeois," Robin said. "A house like this is what I 
want. I love that your kitchen table is half a Pirig -Pong table."  
"It's yours  for twenty bucks."  
"Brian's wonderful. He's the person I wanted to spend my life with, he's the 
father of my kids. Pm the problem. I'm the one who's not get ting with the 
program. I'm the one who's going to confirmation class. Listen, do you have a 
jacket ? I'm freezing."  
The low candles were spilling wax in the October draft. Denise fetched her 
favorite jean jacket, a discontinued Levi's product with a woolen lining, and 
noticed how large it looked on Robin's smaller arms, how it engulfed her 
thinner shoul ders, like a letter jacket on a ball player's girlfriend.  
The next day, wearing the jacket herself, she found it softer and  
406                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
lighter than she remembered. She pulled on the collar and hugged her self 
with it.  
No matter how hard she worked that fall, she had more free time and a more 
flexible schedule than she'd had in many years. She began to drop by the 
Project with f ood from her kitchen. She went over to Brian and Robin's house 
on Panama Street, found Brian away, and stayed for an evening. A few nights 
later, when Brian came home and found her baking madeleines with the girls, 
he acted as if he'd seen her in his kitch en a hundred times.  
She had a lifetime of practice at arriving late in a family of four and being 
loved by all. Her ne xt conquest on Panama Street was Sinead, the serious 
reader, the little fashion plate. Denise took her shopping on Saturdays. She 
bought her costume jewelry, an antique Tuscan jewelry case, mid -seventies 
disco and proto -disco albums, old illustrated books about costumes, 
Antarctica, Jackie Kennedy, and shipbuilding. She helped Sinead select 
larger, brighter, lesser gifts for Erin. Sinead, like her father, had impeccable 
taste. She wore black jeans and corduroy miniskirts and jumpers, silver 
bangles, and str ings of plastic beads even longer than her very long hair. In 
Denise's kitchen, after shopping, she peeled potatoes immaculately or rolled 
out simple doughs while the cook contrived kgniappes for a child's palate: 
wedges of pear, strips of homemade mortade lla, elderberry sorbet in a doll -
size bowl of elder berry soup, lambsmeat ravioli Xed with mint -charged olive 
oil, cubes of fried polenta.  
On the rare occasions, like weddings, when Robin and Brian still went out 
together, Denise baby -sat the girls at Pana ma Street. She taught them how to 
make spinach pasta and how to tango. She listened to Erin recite the U.S. 
presidents in order. She joined Sinead in raiding drawers for costumes.  
"Denise and I will be ethnologists," Sinead said, "and, Erin, you can be a 
Hmong person."  
As she watched Sinead work out with Erin how a Hmong woman might 
comport herself, as she watched her dance to Donna Summer with her lazy 
half-bored minimalism, barely  lifting her heels from the floor, faintly rolling 
her shoulders and letting her hair slide and sift  
407 
across her back (Erin all the while throwing epileptic fits), Denise loved not 
only the girl but the girl's parents for whatever childrearing  magic they'd 
brought to bear on her.  
Robin was less impressed. "Of course they love you," she said. "You're not 
trying to comb the tangles out of Sinead's hair. You're not arguing for twenty 
minutes about what constitutes 'making the bed.' You never see S inead's 
math scores."  
"They're not good?" the smitten baby -sitter said.  
"They're appalling. We may threaten not to let her see you if they don't 
improve."  
"Oh, don't do that."  
"Maybe you'd like to do some long division with her."  
"I'll do anything."  
One Su nday in November, while the family of five was walking in Fairmount 
Park, Brian remarked to Denise, "Robin's really warmed to you. I wasn't sure 
she would."  
"I like Robin a lot," Denise said.  
"I think at first she felt a little intimidated by you."  
"She ha d good reason to. Didn't she."  
"I never told her anything."  
"Well, thank you for that."  
It didn't escape Denise that the qualities that would have enabled Brian to 
cheat on Robin —his sense of entitlement, his retrieverish con viction that 
whatever he was d oing was the Good Thing We All Want —would also make it 
easy to cheat on him. Denise could feel her self becoming an extension of 
"Robin" in Brian's mind, and since "Robin" had permanent status as "great" 
in Brian's estimation, neither she nor "Denise" requ ired further thought or 
worry on his part.  
Brian seemed to put similarly absolute faith in Denise's friend Rob Zito to 
oversee the Generator. Brian kept himself reasonably well in formed, but 
mainly, as the weather got colder, he was absent. Denise briefly  wondered if 
he'd fallen for another female, but the new darling turned out to be an 
independent filmmaker, Jerry Schwartz, who was noted for his exquisite 
taste in sound -track music and his skill at repeat - 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
edly finding funding for red -ink art -house projects.' ("A film best enjoyed," 
Entertainment Weekly said of Schwartz's mopey slasher flick Moody Fruit, 
"with both eyes closed.") A fervent admirer of Schwartz's sound tracks, Brian 
had swooped down like an angel with a crucial fi fty thou just as Schwartz 
began principal photography on a modern -dress Crime and Punishment in 
which Raskolnikov, played by Giovanni Ribisi, was a young anarchist and 
rabid audiophile living underground in North Philadelphia. While Denise and 
Rob Zito wer e making hardware and lighting decisions at the Generator, 
Brian joined Schwartz and Ribisi et al. on location at soulful ruins in 
Nicetown, and swapped CDs with Schwartz from identical zippered CD 
carrying cases, and ate din ner at Fastis in New York with  Schwartz and Greil 
Marcus or Stephen Malkmus.  
Without realizing it, Denise had let herself imagine that Brian and Robin had 
no sex life anymore. So on New Year's Eve, when she and four couples and a 
mob of children gathered at the house on Panama Street a nd she saw Brian 
and Robin necking in the kitchen after mid night, she pulled her coat from the 
bottom of the coat pile and ran from the house. For more than a week she 
was too ripped up to call Robin or see the girls. She had a thing for a straight 
woman who was married to a man whom she herself might have liked to 
marry. It was a reasonably hopeless case. And St. Jude gave and St. Jude took 
away.  
Robin ended Denise's moratorium with a phone call. She was screeching 
mad. "Do you know what Jerry Schwartz's movie is about?"  
"Uh, Dostoevsky in Germantown?"  
"You know it. How come I didn't know it? Because he kept it from me, 
because he knew what I would think!"  
"We're talking about a Giovanni -Ribisi -as-wispily -bearded -Raskol -nikov type 
of thing," Denise said.  
"My husband," Robin said, "has put fifty thousand dollars, which he got from 
the W ----- Corporation, into a movie about a North Philly anar chist who 
splits two women's skulls and goes to jail for it! He's getting off on how cool it 
is to hang out with Giova nni Ribisi, and Jerry Schwartz, and Ian What's His 
Face, and Stephen Whoever, while my  
409 
North Philly anarchist brother, who really did split somebody's skull —" 
"No, I get it," Denise said. "There's a definite want of sensitivity there."  
"I don't even think so," Robin said. "I think he's deeply pissed off with me 
and he doesn't even know it."  
From that day forward, Denise became a stealthy advocate of infi delity. She 
learned that by defending Brian's minor insensitivities she could spur R obin 
to more serious accusations with which she then re luctantly concurred. She 
listened and she listened. She took care to un derstand Robin better than 
anyone else ever had. She plied Robin with the questions Brian wasn't asking: 
about Billy, about her dad, about church, about her Garden Project plans, 
about the half -dozen teenagers who'd caught the gardening bug and were 
coming back next summer, about the romantic and academic travails of her 
young assistants. She attended Seed Catalogue Night at the Pr oject and put 
faces to the names of Robin's favorite kids. She did long division with Sinead. 
She nudged conversations in the direction of movie stars or popular music or 
high fashion, the sorest topics in Robin's marriage. To the untrained ear, she 
sounde d as if she were merely advocating closer friendship; but she had seen 
Robin eat, she knew this woman's hunger.  
When a sewer -line problem delayed the opening of the Generator, Brian took 
the opportunity to attend the Kalamazoo Film Festival with Jerry Schw artz, 
and Denise took the opportunity to hang out with Robin and the girls for five 
nights running. The last of these nights found her agonizing in the video 
store. She finally settled on Wait Until Dark (disgusting male menaces 
resourceful Audrey Hepburn,  whose coloration happens to resemble Denise 
Lambert's) and Something Wild (kinky, gorgeous Melanie Griffith liberates 
Jeff Daniels from a dead marriage). The very titles, when she arrived at 
Panama Street, made Robin blush.  
Between movies, after midnight,  they drank whiskey on the living -room sofa, 
and in a voice that even for her was unusually squeaky Robin asked 
permission to ask Denise a personal question. "How often, in, like, a week," 
she said, "did you and Emile fool around?"  
410  
THE CORRECTIONS  
"I'm not the person to ask about what's normal," Denise answered. "I've 
mainly seen normal in the rearview mirror."  
"I know. I know." Robin stared intensely at the blue TV screen. "But, what did 
you think was normal?"  
"I guess, at the time, I had  the sense," Denise said, telling herself large 
number, say a large number, "that maybe three times a week might be 
normal."  
Robin sighed loudly. A square inch or two of her left knee rested against 
Denise's right knee. "Just tell me what you think is norm al," she said.  
"I think for some people, once a day feels right."  
Robin spoke in a voice like an ice cube compressed between molars. "I might 
like that. That doesn't sound bad to me."  
A numbing and prickling and burning broke out on the engaged portion of 
Denise's knee.  
"I take it that's not how things are."  
"Like twice a MONTH," Robin said, through her teeth. "Twice a MONTH."  
"Do you think Brian's seeing somebody?"  
"I don't know what he does. But it doesn't involve me. And I just feel like such 
a freak."  
"You're not a freak. You're the opposite."  
"So what's the other movie?"  
"Something Wild."  
"OK, whatever. Let's watch it."  
For the next two hours Denise mainly paid attention to her hand, which she'd 
laid on the sofa cushion within easy reach of Robin's. The  hand wasn't 
comfortable there, it wanted to be retracted, but she didn't want to give up 
hard -won territory.  
When the movie ended they watched TV, and then they were silent for an 
impossibly long time, five minutes or a year, and still Robin didn't take t he 
warm, five -fingered bait. Denise would have welcomed some pushy male 
sexuality right around now. In hindsight, the week and a half she'd waited 
before Brian grabbed her had passed like a heartbeat.  
411 
At 4 a.m., sick with tiredness and impatience, she stood up to leave. Robin 
put on her shoes and her purple nylon parka and walked her to her car. Here, 
at last, she seized Denise's hand in both of hers. She rubbed Denise's palm 
with her dry, grown -woman t humbs. She said she was glad that Denise was 
her friend.  
Stay the course, Denise enjoined herself. Be sisterly.  
"I'm glad, too," she said.  
Robin produced the spoken cackle that Denise had come to recog nize as pure 
distilled self -consciousness. She said, " Hee hee hee!" She looked at Denise's 
hand, which she was kneading nervously in hers now. "Wouldn't it be ironic if 
I was the one who cheated on Brian?"  
"Oh God," Denise said involuntarily.  
"Don't worry." Robin made a fist around Denise's index finger and s queezed 
it hard, in spasms. "I'm totally joking."  
Denise stared at her. Are you even listening to what you're saying? Are you 
aware of what you're doing to my finger?  
Robin pressed the hand to her mouth now and bit down on it with lip -
cushioned teeth, sort  of softly gnawed on it, and then dropped it and 
skittered away. She bounced from one foot to the other. "So I'll see you."  
The next day, Brian came back from Michigan and put an end to the house 
party.  
Denise flew to St. Jude for a long Easter weekend, and Enid, like a toy piano 
with one working note, spoke every day of her old friend Norma Greene and 
Norma Greene's tragic involvement with a married man. Denise, to change 
the subject, observed that Alfre d was livelier and sharper than Enid 
portrayed him in her letters and Sunday calls.  
"He pulls himself together when you're in town," Enid countered. "When 
we're alone, he's impossible."  
"When you're alone, maybe you're too focused on him."  
"Denise, if you lived with a man who slept in his chair all day —" 
"Mother, the more you nag, the more he resists."  
"You don't see it, because you're only here for a few days. But I know what 
I'm talking about. And I don't know what I'm going to do."  
If I lived with a pers on who was hysterically critical of me, Denise thought, I 
would sleep in a chair.  
412 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
Back in Philly, the kitchen at the Generator was finally available. Denise's life 
returned to near -normal levels of madness as she assembled an d trained her 
crew, invited her pastry -chef finalists to compete head to head, and solved a 
thousand problems of delivery, scheduling, pro duction, and pricing. As a 
piece of architecture, the restaurant was every bit as stunning as she'd feared, 
but for o nce in her career she'd prepared a menu properly and had twenty 
winners on it. The food was a three -way conversation between Paris and 
Bologna and Vienna, a Continental conference call with her own trademark 
emphasis on flavor over flash. Seeing Brian agai n in person, rather than 
imagining him through Robin's eyes, she remembered how much she liked 
him. She awoke, to an extent, from her dreams of conquest. As she fired up 
the Garland and drilled her line and sharpened her knives, she thought: An 
idle brain is the Devil's workshop. If she had been working as hard as God 
intended her to work, she would never have had time to chase someone's 
wife.  
She went into full avoidance mode, working 6 a.m. to midnight. The more 
days she spent free of the spell that Robin 's body and body heat and hunger 
cast on her, the more willing she was to admit how little she liked Robin's 
nervousness, and Robin's bad haircut and worse clothes, and Robin's rusty -
hinge voice, and Robin's forced laughter, her whole profound uncoolness. 
Brian's benign neglect of his wife, his hands -off attitude of "Yeah, Robin's 
great," made more sense now to Denise. Robin was great; and yet, if you 
were married to her, you might need some time away from her incandescent 
energy, you might enjoy a few days  by yourself in New York, and Paris, and 
Sundance . . .  
But the damage had been done. Denise's case for infidelity had ap parently 
been compelling. With a persistence the more irritating for the shyness and 
apologies that accompanied it, Robin began to see k her out. She came to the 
Generator. She took Denise to lunch. She called Denise at midnight and 
chattered about the mildly interesting things that Denise had long pretended 
to be extremely interested in. She caught Denise at home on a Sunday 
afternoon an d drank tea at the half Ping -Pong table, blushing and hee -
heeing.  
And part of Denise was thinking, as the tea went cold: Shit, she's really into 
me now. This part of her considered, as if it were an actual  
413 
threat of harm, the exhausting circu mstance: She wants sex every day. This 
same part of her was thinking also: My God, the way she eats. And: I am not 
a "lesbian. " 
At the same time, another part of her was literally awash in desire. She'd 
never seen so objectively what an illness sex was, wh at a collection of bodily 
symptoms, because she'd never been remotely as sick as Robin made her.  
During a lull in the chatter, beneath a corne r of the Ping -Pong table, Robin 
gripped Denise's tastefully shod foot between her own knobby, white, purple -
and-orange -accented sneakers. A moment later she leaned forward and 
seized Denise's hand. Her blush looked life -threatening.  
"So," she said. "I've b een thinking."  
The Generator opened on May 23, exactly a year after Brian began paying 
Denise her inflated salary. The opening was delayed a final week so that 
Brian and Jerry Schwartz could attend the festival at Cannes. Every night, 
while he was away, De nise repaid his generosity and his faith in her by going 
to Panama Street and sleeping with his wife. Her brain might feel like the 
brain of a questionable calf's head at a Ninth Street "discount" butcher, but 
she was never as tired as she initially be lieved. One kiss, one hand on the 
knee, awakened her body to itself. She felt haunted, animated, revved, by the 
ghost of every coital encounter she'd ever nixed in her marriage. She shut her 
eyes against Robin's back and pillowed her cheek between her shoulde r 
blades, her hands sup porting Robin's breasts, which were round and flat and 
strangely light; she felt like a kitten with two powder puffs. She dozed for a 
couple of hours and then scraped herself out of the sheets, opened the door 
that Robin had locked against surprise visits from Erin or Sinead, and crept 
down and out into the damp Philly dawn and shivered violently.  
Brian had placed strong cryptic ads for the Generator in the local weeklies 
and monthlies and had put the buzz out through his network, bu t 26 covers 
on the first day of lunch and 45 that night did not exactly tax Denise's 
kitchen. The glassed -in dining room, suspended in a blue Cherenkov glow, 
sat 140; she was ready for 300 -cover evenings. Brian and Robin and the girls 
came to dinner on a S aturday and stopped  
414 
THE CORRECTIOHS  
briefly in the kitchen. Denise did a good impression of being at ease with the 
girls, and Robin, looking great in red lipstick and a little black dress, did a 
good impression of being Brian's wife.  
Denise f ixed things as well as she could with the authorities in her head. She 
reminded herself that Brian had dropped to his knees in Paris; that she was 
doing nothing worse than playing by his rules; that she'd waited for Robin to 
make the first move. But moral hair -splitting could not explain her complete, 
dead absence of remorse. In conversa tion with Brian she was distracted and 
thick -headed. She caught the meaning of his words at the last moment, as if 
he were speaking French. She had reason to seem strung ou t, of course —she 
routinely slept four hours a night, and before long the kitchen was running at 
full throttle — and Brian, distracted by his film projects, was every bit as easy 
to deceive as she'd anticipated. But "deceive" wasn't even the word. 
"Dissociat e" was more like it. Her affair was like a dream life unfolding in 
that locked and soundproofed chamber of her brain where, growing up in St. 
Jude, she'd learned to hide desires.  
Reviewers descended on the Generator in late June and came away happy. 
The Inquirer invoked matrimony: the "wedding" of a "com pletely unique" 
setting with "serious and seriously delicious food" from the "perfectionist" 
Denise Lambert for a "must -have" experience that "single -handedly" put 
Philadelphia on the "map of cool." Brian w as ec static but Denise was not. She 
thought the language made the place sound crappy and middlebrow. She 
counted four paragraphs about architecture and decor, three paragraphs 
about nothing, two about service, one about wine, two about desserts, and 
only seven about her food.  
"They didn't mention my sauerkraut," she said, angry nearly to the point of 
tears.  
The reservation line rang day and night. She needed to work, to work. But 
Robin called her at midmorning or midafternoon on the executive chef's line, 
her voice pinched with shyness, her cadences syn copated with 
embarrassment: "So —I was wondering —do you think — could I see you for a 
minute?" And instead of saying no, Denise kept saying yes. Kept delegating or 
delaying sensitive inventory work, tricky  
415 
 
preroastings, and necessary phone calls to purveyors to slip away and meet 
Robin in the nearest strip of park along the Schuylkill. Sometimes they just 
sat on a bench, discreetly held hands, and, although non -work conversations 
during work hour s made Denise extremely impatient, discussed Robin's guilt 
and her own dissociated lack of it, and what it meant to be doing what they 
were doing, how exactly it had come to pass. But soon the talking tapered off. 
Robin's voice on the executive chef's line  came to signify tongue. She didn't 
say more than a word or two before Denise tuned out. Robin's tongue and 
lips continued to form the instructions demanded by the day's exigencies, but 
in Denise's ear they were already speaking that other language of up a nd 
down and round and round that her body intuitively understood and auton -
omously obeyed; sometimes she melted so hard at the sound of this voice 
that her abdomen caved in and she doubled over; for the next hour -plus there 
was nothing in the world but ton gue, no inventory or buttered pheasants or 
unpaid purveyors; she left the Generator in a buzzing hypnotized state of 
poor reflexes, the volume of the world's noise lowered to near zero, other 
drivers luckily obeying basic traffic laws. Her car was like a t ongue gliding 
down the melty asphalt streets, her feet like twin tongues licking pavement, 
the front door of the house on Panama Street like a mouth that swallowed 
her, the Persian runner in the hall outside the master bedroom like a tongue 
beckoning, the bed in its cloak of comforter and pillows a big soft tongue 
begging to be depressed, and then.  
This was all, safe to say, new territory. Denise had never wanted anything, 
certainly not sex, like this. Simply coming, when she was married, had come 
to seem like a laborious but occasionally necessary kitchen chore. She cooked 
for fourteen hours and rou tinely fell asleep in street clothes. The last thing 
she wanted late at night was to follow a complicated and increasingly time -
consuming recipe for a dish she was too tired to enjoy in any case. Prep time 
a minimum fifteen minutes. Even after that, the co oking was seldom 
straightforward. The pan over heated, the heat was too high, the heat was too 
low, the onions refused to caramelize or burned immediately and stuck; you 
had to set the pan aside to cool off, you had to start over after painful 
discussion w ith the  
41B 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
now angry and anguished sous -chef, and inevitably the meat got tough and 
stringy, the sauce lost its complexity in the repeated dilutions and deglazings, 
and it was so fucking late, and your eyes were burning, and OK,  with enough 
time and effort you could fairly reliably get the sucker plated, but by then it 
was something you might hesitate to serve your floor personnel; you simply 
bolted it ("OK, there," you thought, "I came") and fell asleep with an ache. 
And it was so not worth the effort. But she'd made the effort every week or 
two because her coming mat tered to Emile and she felt guilty. Him she could 
please as adroitly and unfailingly (and, before long, as unthinkingly) as she 
clarified con somme; and what pride,  what pleasure, she took in the exercise 
of her skills! Emile, however, seemed to believe that without a few shudders 
and semi -willed sighs on her part the marriage would be in trouble, and 
although later events proved him one -hundred -percent correct, she couldn't 
help feeling, in the years before she clapped eyes on Becky Hemerling, 
enormous guilt and pressure and resentment on the O front.  
Robin was pret -a-manger. You didn't need a recipe, you didn't need prep, to 
eat a peach. Here was the peach, boom, he re was the payoff. Denise had had 
intimations of ease like this with Hemerling, but only now, at the age of 
thirty -two, did she get what all the fuss was about. Once she got it, there was 
trouble. In August the girls went to camp and Brian went to London, and the 
executive chef of the hottest new restau rant in the region would get out of a 
bed only to find herself down on some carpet, would dress only to find herself 
undressing, would come as close to escape as the entry hall and then find 
herself coming w ith her back to the front door; jelly -kneed and slit -eyed, she 
dragged herself back to a kitchen to which she'd promised to return in forty -
five min utes. And this was not good. The restaurant was suffering. There was 
gridlock on the line, delays on the fl oor. Twice she had to strike entrees from 
the menu because the kitchen, doing without her, had run out of prep time. 
And still she went AWOL in the middle of the second evening rush. She drove 
through Crack Haven and down Junk Row and past Blunt Alley to t he Garden 
Project, where Robin had a blanket. Most of the garden was mulched and 
limed and planted now. Tomatoes  
417 
had grown up inside bald tires outfitted with cylinders of gutter screen. And 
the searchlights and wing lights of landing jets, a nd the smog -stunted 
constellations, and the radium glow from the watch glass of Veterans 
Stadium, and the heat lightning over Tinicum, and the moon to which filthy 
Camden had given hepatitis as it rose, all these compro mised urban lights 
were reflected in  the skins of adolescent eggplants, young peppers and cukes 
and sweet corn, pubescent cantaloupes. Denise, naked in the middle of the 
city, rolled off the blanket into night -cool dirt, a sandy loam, freshly turned. 
She rested a cheek in it, pushed her Robi ny fingers down into it.  
"God, stop, stop," Robin squeaked, "that's our new lettuce."  
Then Brian was home and they started taking stupid chances. Robin 
explained to Erin that Denise hadn't felt well and had needed to lie down in 
the bedroom. There was a fe verish episode in the pantry at Panama Street 
while Brian read E. B. White aloud not twenty feet away. Finally, a week 
before Labor Day, there came a morning in the di rector's office at the Garden 
Project when the weight of two bodies on Robin's antique w ooden desk chair 
snapped its back off. They were laughing when they heard Brian's voice.  
Robin jumped up and unlocked the door and opened it in one motion, to 
conceal that it had been locked. Brian was holding a basket of speckled green 
erections. He was s urprised — but delighted, as always — to see Denise. 
"What's going on in there?"  
Denise knelt by Robin's desk, her shirt untucked. "Robin's chair broke," she 
said. "I'm licking a take at Robin's chair."  
"I asked Denise if she could fix it!" Robin squeaked.  
"What are you doing here?" Brian asked Denise, very curious.  
"I had the same thought you had," she said. "Zucchini."  
"Sara said nobody was here."  
Robin was edging away. "I'll go talk to her. She should know when I'm here."  
"How did Robin break that?" Bria n asked Denise.  
"I don't know," she said. She had the bad child's impulse to cry when caught 
red-handed.  
Brian picked up the top half of the chair. He had never specifically  
418 
THE CORRECTIONS  
reminded Denise of her father, but she was pierced n ow fey the resem blance 
to Alfred in his intelligent sympathy for the broken object. "This is good oak," 
he said. "Weird it should just suddenly break."  
She rose from her knees and wandered into the hall, stuffing shirt into pants 
as she went. She kept wan dering until she was outside and got into her car. 
She drove up Bainbridge Street to the river. Pulled up to a galvanized 
guardrail and killed the engine by letting out the clutch, let the car lurch into 
the guardrail and bounce back dead, and now, finally , she broke down and 
cried about the broken chair.  
Her head was clearer when she returned to the Generator. She saw that she 
was in the weeds on every front. There were unanswered phone messages 
from a food writer at the Times, from an editor at Gourmet, and from the 
latest restaurateur hoping to steal Brian's chef. A thousand dollars' worth of 
unrotated duck breasts and veal chops had gone bad in the walk -in. 
Everybody in the kitchen knew and nobody had told her that a needle had 
turned up in the employee bathroom. The pastry chef claimed to have left 
Denise a pair of handwritten notes, presumably salary -related, that Denise 
had no memory of seeing.  
"Why is nobody ordering country ribs?" Denise asked Rob Zito. "Why are the 
waiters not pushing my phenomenall y delicious and un usual country ribs?"  
"Americans don't like sauerkraut," Zito said.  
"The hell they don't. I've seen my reflection in the plates coming back when 
people order it. I've counted my eyelashes."  
"It's possible we get some German nationals in h ere," Zito said. "German 
passport -holders may be responsible for those clean plates."  
"Is it possible you don't like sauerkraut yourself?"  
"It's an interesting food," Zito said.  
She didn't hear from Robin and she didn't call her. She gave the Times an 
interview and let herself be photographed, she stroked the pastry chef's ego, 
she stayed late and bagged up the spoiled meats in privacy, she fired the 
dishwasher who'd tied off in the John, and every lunch and every dinner she 
dogged the line and troub leshot.  
On Labor Day: deadness. She made herself leave her office and went walking 
in the empty hot city, bending her steps, in her loneliness,  
419 
toward Panama Street. She had a liquid Pavlovian response when she saw the 
house. The brownstone f acade was still a face, the door still a tongue. Robin's 
car was in the street but Brian's wasn't; they'd gone to Cape May. Denise rang 
the bell, although she could already tell, from a dustiness around the door, 
that nobody was home. She let herself in wi th the dead -bolt key on which 
she'd written "R/B." She walked up two flights to the parental bedroom. The 
house's expensive retrofitted central air conditioner was doing its job, the 
cool canned -smelling air contending with Labor Day sunbeams. As she lay 
down on the unmade parental bed, she remembered the smell and the quiet 
of the St. Judean summer afternoons when she would be left alone in the 
house and could be, for a couple of hours, as weird as she wanted. She 
brought herself off. She lay on the snarle d sheets, a slice of sunlight falling on 
her chest. She took a second helping of herself and stretched her arms 
luxuriantly. Beneath a parental pillow, she scratched her hand on the foil 
corner of something like a condom wrapper.  
It was a condom wrapper. T orn and empty. She actually whimpered as she 
pictured the penetrative act it attested to. She actually clutched her head.  
She scrambled out of the bed and smoothed her dress across her hips. She 
scanned the sheets for other sickening surprises. Well, of co urse a married 
couple had sex. Of course. But Robin had told her that she wasn't on the Pill, 
she'd said that she and Brian no longer fooled around enough to bother; and 
all summer long Denise had seen and tasted and smelled no trace of a 
husband on her lo ver's body, and so she'd let herself forget the obvious.  
She knelt at the wastebasket by Brian's dresser. She stirred Kleenexes, ticket 
stubs, and segments of floss and found another con dom wrapper. Hatred of 
Robin, hatred and jealousy, were coming on lik e a migraine. She went into 
the master -bedroom bathroom and found two more wrappers and a knotted 
rubber in the can beneath the sink.  
She actually hit her temples with her fists. She hea rd the breath in her teeth 
as she ran down the stairs and let herself out into the late af ternoon. The 
temperature was ninety and she was shivering. Weirdness,  
420 
THE CORRECTIONS  
weirdness. She hiked back to the Generator and let herself in at the loading 
dock. She inventoried oils and cheeses and flours and spices, drew up 
meticulous order sheets, left twenty voice -mail messages in a wry and 
articulate and civilized voice, did her e -mail chores, fried her self a kidney on 
the Garland, chased it  with a single shot of grappa, and called a cab at 
midnight.  
Robin showed up in the kitchen unannounced the next morning. She was 
wearing a big white shirt that appeared to have been Brian's. Denise's 
stomach flipped at the sight of her. She led her back t o the executive chef's 
office and shut the door.  
"I can't do this anymore," Robin said.  
"Good, neither can I, so."  
Robin's face was all blotch. She scratched her head and scrunched up her 
nose with tic -like incessancy and pushed on the bridge of her glasse s. "I 
haven't been to church since June," she said. "Sinead's caught me in about 
ten different lies. She wants to know why you're never around. I don't even 
know half the kids turning up at the Project lately. Everything's a mess, and I 
just can't do it an ymore."  
Denise choked out a question: "How's Brian?"  
Robin blushed. "He doesn't know anything. He's the same as always. You 
know —he likes you, he likes me."  
"I bet."  
"Things have gotten weird."  
"Well, and I've got a lot of work here, so."  
"Brian never did anything bad to me. He didn't deserve this."  
Denise's phone rang and she let it ring. Her head felt close to crack ing open. 
She couldn't stand to hear Robin say Brian's name.  
Robin raised her face to the ceiling, pearls of tear beading in her lashes. "I 
don't know what I came for. I don't know what I'm saying. I'm just feeling 
really, really bad and incredibly alone."  
"Get over it," Denise said. "That's what I'm going to do."  
"Why are you being so cold?"  
"Because I'm a cold person."  
"If you'd call me, or s ay you loved me —" 
"Get over it! For God's sake! Get over it! Get over it!"  
421 
Robin gave her a beseeching look; but really, even if the matter of the 
condoms were somehow cleared up, what was Denise supposed to do? Quit 
working at the restaurant  that was making her a star? Go live in the ghetto 
and be one of Sinead and Erin's two mommies? Start wearing big sneakers 
and cooking vegetarian?  
She knew she was telling herself lies, but she didn't know which of the things 
in her head were the lies and which were the truth. She stared at her desk 
until Robin yanked open the door and fled.  
The next morning the Generator made the front page of the New York Times 
food section, below the fold. Beneath the headline ("Gener ating Buzz by the 
Megawatt") was a photograph of Denise, the interior and exterior 
architectural shots having been relegated to page 6, where her country ribs 
and sauerkraut could also be seen. This was better. This was more like it. By 
noon she'd been offered a guest appearance on the Food Channel and a 
permanent monthly column in Philadelphia. She bypassed Rob Zito and 
instructed the reservation girl to start overbook ing by forty seats an evening. 
Gary and Caroline called separately with congratulations. She dressed down 
Zito for refusing a weekend reserva tion to the local NBC -affiliate 
anchorwoman, she let herself abuse him a little bit, it felt good.  
Expensive people of a sort formerly scarce in Philadelphia were three -deep at 
the bar when Brian came by with a dozen roses. He hugged Deni se and she 
lingered in his arms. She gave him a little bit of what men liked.  
"We need more tables," she said. "Three fours and a six at a mini mum. We 
need a full -time reservationist who knows how to screen. We need better 
parking -lot security. We need a pastry chef with more imag ination and less 
attitude. Also think about replacing Rob with somebody from New York who 
can handle the kind of customer profile we're go ing to get."  
Brian was surprised. "You want to do that to Rob?"  
"He wouldn't push my ribs and sauerkraut," Denise said. "The Times liked 
my ribs and sauerkraut. I say fuck him if he can't do the job."  
The hardness in her voice brought a glow to Brian's eyes. He seemed to like 
her like this.  
 
422 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"Whatever you think," he said.  
Late Saturday night she joined Brian and Jerry Schwartz and two cheekboned 
blondes and the lead singer and the lead guitarist from one of her favorite 
bands for drinks on the little railed -in aerie that Brian had ri gged on the roof 
of the Generator. The night was warm and the bugs along the river were 
nearly as loud as the Schuylkill Expressway. Both blondes were talking on 
their phones. Denise accepted a cigarette from the guitarist, who was hoarse 
from a gig, and l et him examine her scars.  
"Holy shit, your hands are worse than mine."  
"The job," she said, "consists of tolerating pain."  
"Cooks do notoriously abuse their substances."  
"I like a drink at midnight," she said. "Two Tylenols when I get up at six."  
"Nobody's  tougher than Denise," Brian bragged unattractively over the 
antennae of the blondes.  
The guitarist responded by sticking his tongue out, holding his cig arette like 
an eyedropper, and lowering the coal into the glistening cleft. The sizzle was 
loud enough  to distract the blondes from their phoning. The taller one 
squealed and spoke the guitarist's name and said he was insane.  
"Well, but I'm wondering what substances you've ingested," Denise said.  
The guitarist applied cold vodka directly to the burn. The t aller blonde, 
unhappy with his performance, answered, "Klonopin and Jame son's and 
whatever that is now."  
"Well, and a tongue is wet," Denise said, extinguishing her own cigarette on 
the tender skin behind her ear. She felt like she'd taken a bullet in the  head, 
but she nicked the dead cigarette toward the river casually.  
The aerie got very quiet. Her weirdness was showing as she didn't use to let it 
show. Because she didn't have to —because she could have trimmed a rack of 
lamb now or had a conversation wit h her mother —she produced a strangled 
scream, a comical sound, to reassure her audience.  
"Are you OK?" Brian asked her later in the parking lot.  
423  
"I've burned myself worse by accident."  
"No, I mean are you OK? That was a little scary to watch. " 
"You're the one who bragged about my toughness, thanks."  
"I'm trying to say I feel bad about that."  
She was awake in pain all night.  
A week later she and Brian hired the former manager of the Union Square 
Cafe and fired Rob Zito.  
A week after that the ma yor of Philadelphia, the junior senator  
from New Jersey, the CEO of the W ------  Corporation, and Jodie  
Foster were in the restaurant.  
A week after that, Brian took Denise home after work and she invited him 
inside. Over the same fifty -dollar wine she'd once served his wife, he asked if 
she and Robin had had a falling -out.  
Denise pursed her lips and shook her head. "I've just gotten very busy."  
"That's what I thought. I figured it didn't have anything to do with you. 
Robin's pissed off with everything lately. Especially with anything that has to 
do with me."  
"I miss hanging out with the girls," Denise said.  
"Believe me, they miss you," Bri an said. He added, with a slight stammer, 
"I'm —thinking of moving out."  
Denise said she was sorry to hear it.  
"The sackcloth business is out of control," he said, pouring. "She's been going 
to nightly mass for the last three weeks. I didn't even know there  was such a 
thing. And I literally can't say a word about the Gener ator without setting off 
an explosion. She, meanwhile, is talking about home -schooling the girls. 
She's decided our house is too big. She wants to move into the Project house 
and home -scho ol the girls and maybe a couple of the Project kids. 'Rasheed'? 
'Marilou'? Which, what a great place for Sinead and Erin to grow up, a 
brownfield in Point Breeze. We're verging over into the loony, a little bit. I 
mean, Robin is great. She believes in bett er things than I believe in. I'm just 
not sure I love her anymore. I feel like I'm arguing with Nicky Passafaro. It's 
Class Hatred II, the Sequel."  
424 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"Robin is full of guilt," Denise said.  
"She's verging on being an irresponsible parent."  
Denise found breath to ask: "Would you want to take the girls, if it came to 
that?"  
Brian shook his head. "I'm not sure, if it came to that, that Robin would 
actually want custody. I could see her giving up  everything."  
"Don't bet on it."  
Denise thought of Robin brushing Sinead's hair and suddenly — keenly, 
terribly —missed her crazy yearnings, her excesses and accesses, her 
innocence. A switch was flipped and Denise's brain became a passive screen 
on which wa s projected a highlight reel of all that was excellent in the person 
she'd driven away. She reappreciated the least of Robin's habits and gestures 
and distinguishing marks, her preference for scalded milk in her coffee, and 
the off -color cap on the front t ooth that her brother had broken with a rock, 
and the way she put her head down like a goat and butted Denise with love.  
Denise, pleading exhaustion, made Brian leave. Early the next morning a 
tropical depression slid up the seaboard, a humid hurricane -like disturbance 
that set trees thrashing moodily and water spilling over curbs. Denise left the 
Generator in the hands of her sous and took the train to New York to bail out 
her feckless brother and entertain her par ents. In the stress of lunch, as Enid 
repeated verbatim her narrative of Norma Greene, Denise didn't notice any 
change in herself. She had a still -working old self, a Version 3.2 or a Version 
4.0, that deplored the deplorable in Enid and loved the lovable in Alfred. Not 
until she was at the pier and her mother kissed her and a quite different 
Denise, a Ver sion 5.0, nearly put her tongue in the pretty old woman's 
mouth, nearly ran her hands down Enid's hips and thighs, nearly caved in 
and prom ised to come at Christmas for as long as Enid wanted, did the extent 
of the correction she was undergoing reveal itself.  
She sat on a southbound train while rain -glazed local platforms flashed by at 
intercity speed. Her father at the lunch table had looked insane. And if he was 
losing his mind, it was possibl e that Enid had not been exaggerating her 
difficulties with him, possible that Alfred really  
425 
 
was a mess who pulled himself together for his children, possible that Enid 
wasn't entirely the embarrassing nag and pestilence that Denise for twen ty 
years had made her out to be, possible that Alfred's problems went deeper 
than having the wrong wife, possible that Enid's problems did not go much 
deeper than having the wrong husband, possible that Denise was more like 
Enid than she had ever dreamed. She listened to the pa -thum -pa-thum -pa-
thump of wheels on track and watched the October sky darken. There might 
have been hope for her if she could have stayed on the train, but it was a 
short ride to Philly, and then she was back at work and had no time t o think 
about anything until she went to the Axon road show with Gary and surprised 
herself by defend ing not only Alfred but Enid as well in the arguments that 
followed.  
She could not remember a time when she had loved her mother.  
She was soaking in her b athtub around nine o'clock that night when Brian 
called and invited her to dinner with him and Jerry Schwartz, Mira Sorvino, 
Stanley Tucci, a Famous American Director, a Famous British Author, and 
other luminaries. The Famous Director had just finished sho oting a film in 
Camden, and Brian and Schwartz had roped him into a private screening of 
Crime and Punishment and Rock and Roll.  
"It's my night off," Denise said.  
"Martin says he'll send his driver," Brian said. "I'd be grateful if you came. My 
marriage is  over."  
She put on a black cashmere dress, ate a banana to avoid seeming hungry at 
dinner, and rode with the director's driver up to Tacconelli's, the storefront 
pizzeria in Kensington. A dozen famous and semifamous people, plus Brian 
and the simian, round -shouldered Jerry Schwartz, had taken over three 
tables at the rear. Denise kissed Brian on the mouth and sat down between 
him and the Famous British Author, who appeared to have an evening's 
worth of cricket - and darts -related wit with which he wished to regale Mira 
Sorvino. The Famous Director told Denise he'd had her country ribs and 
sauerkraut and loved them, but she changed the subject as fast as she could. 
She was clearly there as Brian's date; the movie people weren't interested in 
either of them. Sh e put her hand on Brian's knee, as if consolingly.  
426 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
Id 
Kie 
"Raskolnikov in headphones, listening to Trent Reznor while he whacks the 
old lady, is so perfect," the very least famous person at the table, a college -age 
intern of the director, gushed to Jerry Schwartz.  
"Actually, it's the Nomatics," Schwartz corrected  with devastating lack of 
condescension.  
"Not Nine Inch Nails?"  
Schwartz lowered his eyelids and shook his head minimally. "No matics, 
1980, 'Held in Trust.' Later covered with insufficient attribution by that 
person whose name you just mentioned."  
"Everyb ody steals from the Nomatics," Brian said.  
"They suffered on the cross of obscurity so that others might enjoy eternal 
fame," Schwartz said.  
"What's their best record?"  
"Give me your address, I'll make you a CD," Brian said.  
"It's all brilliant," Schwartz said, "until 'Thorazine Sunrise.' That was when 
Tom Paquette quit, but the band didn't realize it was dead un til two albums 
later. Somebody had to break that news to them."  
"I suppose that a country that teaches creationism in its schools," the Famous 
British Author remarked to Mira Sorvino, "may be forgiven for believing that 
baseball does not derive from cricket."  
It occurred to Denise that Stanley Tucci had directed and starred in her 
favorite restaurant movie. She happily talked shop with him, resent ing the 
beautiful Sorvino a little less and enjoying, if not the company itself, then at 
least her own lack of intimidation by it.  
Brian drove her home from Tacconelli's in his Volvo. She felt enti tled and 
attractive and well aerated and alive. Brian, howe ver, was angry.  
"Robin was supposed to be there," he said. "I guess you could call it an 
ultimatum. But she'd agreed to go to dinner with us. She was going to take 
some tiny, minimal interest in what I'm doing with my life, even if I knew 
she'd deliberatel y dress like a grad student to make me uncomfort able and 
prove her point. And then I was going to spend next Saturday at the Project. 
That was the agreement. And then this morning she decides she's going to 
march against the death penalty instead. I'm no fan of the death penalty. But 
Khellye Withers is not my idea of a poster boy for  
427 
leniency. And a promise is a promise. I didn't see that one fewer candle in the 
candlelight vigil was going to make much difference. I said she could miss 
one ma rch for my sake. I said, why don't I write a check to the ACLU, 
whatever size you want. Which didn't go over so well."  
"Writing checks, no, not good," Denise said.  
"I realized that. But things got said that are going to be hard to un say. I 
frankly don't h ave a lot of interest in unsaying them."  
"You never know," Denise said.  
Washington Avenue between the river and Broad was lonely at eleven on a 
Monday evening. Brian appeared to be experiencing his first real 
disappointment in life, and he couldn't stop ta lking. "Remember when you 
said if I weren't married and you weren't my employee?"  
"I remember."  
"Does that still hold?"  
"Let's go in and have a drink," Denise said.  
Which was how Brian came to be sleeping in her bed at nine -thirty the next 
morning when her doorbell rang.  
She was still full of the alcohol that had fueled completion of the picture of 
weirdness and mor al chaos that her life seemed bent on being. Beneath her 
soddenness, though, an agreeable fizz of celebrity lingered from the night 
before. It was stronger than anything she felt for Brian.  
The doorbell rang again. She got up and put on a maroon silk robe and 
looked out the window. Robin Passafaro was standing on the stoop. Brian's 
Volvo was parked across the street.  
Denise considered not answering the door, but Robin wouldn't be looking for 
her here if she hadn't already tried the Generator.  
"It's Robin," she said. "Stay here and be quiet."  
Brian in the morning light still wore his pissed -off expression of the night 
before. "I don't care if she knows I'm here."  
"Yeah, but I do."  
"Well, my car's right across the street."  
"I'm aware of that."  
She, too, felt s trangely pissed off with Robin. All summer, betraying Brian, 
she'd never felt anything like the contempt she felt for his wife  
428  
THE CORRECTIONS  
as she descended the stairs now. Annoying Robin, stubborn Robin, 
screeching Robin, hooting Robin, s tyleless Robin, clueless Robin.  
And yet, the moment she opened the door, her body recognized what it 
wanted. It wanted Brian on the street and Robin in her bed.  
Robin's teeth were chattering, though the morning wasn't cold. "Can I come 
in?" 
"I'm about to g o to work," Denise said.  
"Five minutes," Robin said.  
It seemed impossible that she hadn't seen the pistachio -colored wagon across 
the street. Denise let her into the front hall and closed the door.  
"My marriage is over," Robin said. "He didn't even come ho me last night."  
"I'm sorry."  
"I've been praying for my marriage, but I get distracted by the thought of you. 
I'm kneeling in church and I start thinking about your body."  
Dread settled on Denise. She didn't exactly feel guilty —the egg timer on an 
ailing ma rriage had run out; at worst she'd hurried the clock along —but she 
was sorry that she'd wronged this person, sorry she'd competed. She took 
Robin's hands and said, "I want to see you and I want to talk to you. I don't 
like what's happened. But I have to go  to work now."  
The telephone rang in the living room. Robin bit her lip and nodded. "OK."  
"Can we meet at two?" Denise said.  
"OK."  
"I'll call you from work."  
Robin nodded again. Denise let her out and shut the door and released five 
breaths' worth of air.  
"Denise, it's Gary, I don't know where you are, but call me when you get this, there's 
been an accident, Dad fell off the cruise ship, he fell about eight stories, I just talked 
to Mom —" 
She ran to the phone and picked up. "Gary."  
"I tried you at work."  
429 
"Is he alive?"  
"Well, he shouldn't be," Gary said. "But he is."  
Gary was at his best in emergencies. The qualities that had infuri ated her the 
day before were a comfort now. She wanted him to know it all. She wanted 
him to sound pleased with  his own calm.  
"They apparently towed him for a mile in forty -five-degree water before the 
ship could stop," Gary said. "They've got a helicopter com ing to take him to 
New Brunswick. But his back is not broken. His heart is still working. He's 
able to spe ak. He's a tough old guy. He could be fine."  
"How's Mom?"  
"She's concerned that the cruise is being delayed while the helicop ter comes. 
Other people are being inconvenienced."  
Denise laughed with relief. "Poor Mom. She wanted this cruise so badly."  
"Well, I'm afraid her cruising days with Dad are over."  
The doorbell rang again. Immediately there was a pounding on the door as 
well, a pounding and a kicking.  
"Gary, hang on one second."  
"What's going on?"  
"Let me call you right back."  
The doorbell rang so long and hard it changed its tone, went flat and a little 
hoarse. She opened the door to a trembling mouth and eyes bright with 
hatred.  
"Get out of my way," Robin said, "because I don't want to touch any part of 
you."  
"I made a really bad mistake last n ight."  
"Get out of my way!"  
Denise stood aside, and Robin headed up the stairs. Denise sat in the only 
chair in her penitential living room and listened to the shout ing. She was 
struck by how seldom in her childhood her parents, that other married 
couple in her life, that other incompatible pair, had shouted at each other. 
They'd held their peace and let the proxy war unfold inside their daughter's 
head.  
430 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
Whenever she was with Brian she would pine for Robin's body and sinceri ty 
and good works and be repelled by Brian's smug coolness, and whenever she 
was with Robin she would pine for Brian's good taste and like -mindedness 
and wish that Robin would notice how sensational she looked in black 
cashmere.  
Easy for you guys, she thou ght. You can split in two.  
The shouting stopped. Robin came running down the stairs and went on out 
the front door without slowing.  
Brian followed a few minutes later. Denise had expected Robin's disapproval 
and could handle it, but from Brian she was hoping for a word of 
understanding.  
"You're fired," he said.  
FROM: Denise3@cheapnet.com  
TO: exprof@gaddisfly.com  
SUBJECT: Let's maybe tr y a little harder next time  
Lovely to see you on Saturday. I really appreciated your effort to hurry back 
and help me out.  
Since then, Dad's fallen off the cruise ship and been pulled out of icy water 
with a broken arm, a dislocated shoulder, a detached re tina, short -term 
memory loss, and possibly a mild stroke, he and Mom have been 
helicoptered to New Brunswick, I've been fired from the best job I may ever 
have, and Gary and I have learned about a new medical technology that I 
feel certain you would agree is horrifying and dystopic and malignant except 
that it's good for Parkinson's and can maybe help Dad.  
Other than that, not much to report.  
Hope all's well wherever the fuck you are. Julia says Lithuania and expects 
me to believe it.  
431 
FROM: exprof@gaddisfly.com TO: Denise3@cheapnet.com SUBJECT: Re: 
"Let's maybe try a little harder next time"  
Business opportunity in Lithuania. Julia's husband, Gitanas, is paying me to 
produce a profit -making website. It's actually a lot of fun and not unlucrative.  
All your favorite high -school groups are on the radio here. Smiths, New Order, 
Billy Idol. A blast  from the past. I saw an old man kill a horse with a shotgun on a 
street near the airport. I'd been on Baltic soil for maybe fifteen minutes. Welcome 
to Lithuania!  
Talked to Mom this morning, got the whole story, made my apologies, so don't 
worry about tha t. 
I'm sorry about your job. To be honest, I'm stunned. I can't believe anyone would 
fire you.  
Where are you working now?  
FROM: Denise3@cheapnet.com TO: exprof@gaddisfly.com SUBJECT: Holiday 
responsibilities  
Mom says you won't commit to coming home for Chr istmas, and she expects me 
to believe it. But I'm thinking no way could you talk to a woman who's just had the 
highlight of her year truncated by an accident, and who otherwise has a shitty life 
with a semi -disabled man, and who hasn't gotten to be at home  for Christmas 
since like Dan Quayle's vice presidency, and who *survives* by looking forward 
to things, and who loves Christmas the way other people love sex, and who's 
seen you for all of forty -five minutes in the last three years: I'm thinking no way 
could you have told this woman, nope, sorry, staying in Vilnius.  
432                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
(Vilnius!)  
Mom must have misunderstood you. Please c larify.  
Since you ask, I'm not working anywhere. Subbing a little at Mare Scuro but 
otherwise sleeping until two in the afternoon. If this continues, I may have to 
do some therapeutic thing of the sort that will horrify you. Got to regain my 
appetite for s hopping and other non -free consumer pleasures.  
The last thing I heard about Gitanas Misevicious was that he'd given Julia 
two black eyes. But whatever.  
FROM: exprof@gaddisfly.com TO: Denise3@cheapnet.com SUBJECT: Re: 
"Holiday responsibilities"  
I intend to get to St. Jude as soon as I make some money. Maybe even by 
Dad's birthday. But Christmas is hell, you know that. There's no worse time. 
You can tell Mom I'll come early in the new year.  
Mom says that Caroline and the boys will be in St. Jude for Christmas . Can 
this be true?  
Don't not take a psychotropic on my account.  
FROM: Denise3@cheapnet.com  
TO: exprof@gaddisfly.com  
SUBJECT: "The only thing I hurt was my dignity"  
Nice try, but no, sorry, I insist that you come for Christmas.  
I've been talking to Axon, and the plan is to give Dad six months of Corecktall 
beginning right after New Year's, and to let him and Mom  
433 
stay with me while that's going on. (Helpfully, my life is in ruins, so it's easy to 
make myself availabl e.) The only way this scenario won't happen is if Axon's 
medical staff decides that Dad has non -drug-related dementia. He admittedly 
seemed pretty shaky when he was in New York, but he's been sounding good on 
the phone. "All I hurt when I fell was my digni ty," etc. They took the cast off his 
arm a week early.  
Anyway, he's probably going to be with me in Philly for his birthday, and for the 
rest of the winter and spring too, and so Christmas is the time for you to come to 
St. Jude, and so please don't argue with me anymore, just do it.  
I eagerly (but with confidence) await confirmation that you will be there.  
P.S. Caroline, Aaron, and Caleb are not coming. Gary's coming with Jonah and 
flying back to Philly at noon on the 25th.  
P.P.S. Don't worry, I say NO to drugs.  
FROM: exprof@gaddisfly.com TO: Denise3@cheapnet.com SUBJECT: Re : "The 
only thing  
hurt was my dignity1 
I saw a man shot six times in the stomach last night. A paid hit in a club called 
Musmiryte. It had nothing to do with us, but I wasn't happy to see it.  
It's not clear to me why I'm required to come to St. Jude on some specific date. If 
Mom and Dad were my childre n, whom I'd created out of nothing without asking 
their permission, I could understand being responsible for them. Parents have an 
overwhelming Darwinian hard -wired genetic stake in their children's welfare. But 
children, it seems to me, have no correspond ing debt to their parents.  
434 
THE CORRECTIONS  . 
Basically, I have very little to say to these people.'And I don't think they want 
to hear what I do have to say.  
Why don't I plan to see them when they're in Philadelphia? That sounds 
more fun anyw ay. That way all nine of us can get together, instead of just six 
of us.  
FROM: Denise3@cheapnet.com  
TO: exprof@gaddisfly.com  
SUBJECT: A serious flaming from your pissed -off sister  
My god you sound self -pitying.  
I'm saying come for MY sake. For MY sake. And  also for YOUR OWN sake, 
because I'm sure it's very cool and interesting and adult -feeling to watch 
somebody get shot in the stomach, but you only have two parents, and if you 
miss your time with them now you won't get another chance.  
I'll admit it: I'm a mess.  
I will tell you —because I want to tell someone —even though you never told 
me why YOU got fired —that I was fired for sleeping with my boss's wife.  
So, what do you think *l* have to say to "these people"? What do you think 
my little Sunday chats with Mom are like these days?  
You owe me $20,500. How's THAT for a debt? Buy the fucking ticket. I'll 
reimburse you. I love you and I miss you. Don't ask me w hy. 
435 
 
FROM: Denise3@cheapnet.com TO: exprof@gaddisfly.com SUBJECT: 
Remorse  
I'm sorry I flamed you. The last line is the only one I meant. I don't have the 
right temperament for e -mail. Please write back. Please come for Christmas.  
FROM: Denise3@cheapnet.com TO: exprof@gaddisfly.com SUBJECT: 
Worry  
Please, please, please don't talk about people getting shot and then do the 
silence thing to me.  
FROM: Denise3@cheapnet.com  
TO: exprof@gaddisfly.com  
SUBJECT: Only six more shopping days before Ch ristmas!  
Chip? Are you there? Please write or call.  
Global Wanning Enhances Value of Lithuania Incorporated  
VILNIUS, OCTOBER 30. With world ocean levels rising by more than an 
inch per year and millions of cubic meters of ocean beach eroded daily, the 
Euro pean Council on Natural Re sources this week warned that Europe could 
face "catastrophic" shortages of sand and gravel by the end of the decade.  
"Throughout history, mankind has regarded sand and gravel as inexhaustible 
resources," said ECNR chairman Jacqu es Dor -mand. "Sadly, our overreliance 
on greenhouse -gas-producing  436                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
fossil fuels will leave many central European cou ntries, includ ing Germany, 
at the mercy of sand -and-gravel cartel states, particularly sand -rich 
Lithuania, if they wish to continue with basic road -building and 
construction."  
Gitanas R. Misevicius, founder and CEO of Lithuania's Free Market Party 
Compan y, compared the impending Euro pean sand -and-gravel crisis to the 
oil crisis of 1973. "Back then," Misevicius said, "tiny oil -rich countries like 
Bahrain and Brunei were the mice that roared. Tomorrow, Lithuania."  
Chairman Dormand described the pro -Western , pro -business Free Market 
Party Company as "currently the only political movement in Lithuania willing 
to deal fairly and re sponsibly with Western capital markets.  
"Our misfortune," Dormand said, "is that most of Europe's reserve sand -and-
gravel capacity  is in the hands of Baltic na tionalists beside whom Muammar 
Gadhafi looks like Charles de Gaulle. I scarcely exaggerate in saying that the 
future economic stability of the EC is in the hands of a few brave Eastern 
capi talists like Mr. Misevicius ..."  
The beauty of the Internet was that Chip could post whole -cloth fabrications 
without troubling to check even his spelling. Reliability on the Web was 
ninety -eight percent a function of how slick and cool your site looked. 
Although Chip personally wasn't fluen t in Web, he was an American under 
forty, and Americans under forty were exquisite judges of what was slick and 
cool and what was not. He and Gitanas went to a pub called Prie Universiteto 
and hired five young Lithuanians in Phish and R.E.M. T -shirts for t hirty 
dollars a day plus millions of worthless stock options, and for a month Chip 
rode these slang -slinging Webheads mercilessly. He made them study 
American sites like nbci.com and Oracle. He told them to do it like this, to 
make it look like this.  
Lithu ania.com was officially launched on November 5. A high -res banner —
DEMOCRACY PAYS HANDS OME DIVIDENDS —unfurled to the ac companiment of 
sixteen joyful bars of the "Dance of the Coachmen and  
437 
Grooms" in Petrushka. Side by side, in a ridiblue grap hical spate bekw the 
banner, were a black -and-white Before picture ("Socialist Vilnius") of shell -
scarred facades and shattered lindens on the Gedimino Prospektas and a 
luscious color After photograph ("Free -Market Vil nius") of a honey -lit 
harborside deve lopment of boutiques and bistros. (The development was 
actually in Denmark.) For a week Chip and Gitanas had stayed up late 
drinking beer and composing the other pages, which promised investors the 
various eponyms and inseminatory privileges from Gitanas's  original bitter 
posting and also, according to the level of financial commitment,  
•     time -shares in ministerial beachside villas at Palanga!  
•     pro rata mineral rights and logging rights to all national parklands!  
•     appointment of selected local magistrates and judges!  
•     blanket 24 -hour -a-day parking privileges in perpetuity in the Old City of 
Vilnius!  
•    fifty -percent discount on selected rentals of Lithuanian national troops 
and armaments on a sign -up basis, except during wartime!  
•    no -hassle adoptions of Lithuanian girl babies!  
•     discretionary immunity from left -turn -on-red prohibitions!  
•    inclusion of the investor's likeness on commemorative stamps, collector's -
item coins, microbrewery beer labels, bas -relief chocolate -covered 
Lithuanian cookies, Heroic Leader trading cards, printed wrapping tissue for 
holiday Clementines, etc.!  
•    honora ry Doctorate of Humane Letters from Vilnius University, founded 
in 1578!  
•    "no -questions -asked" access to wiretaps and other state -security 
apparatus!  
•    the legally enforceable right, whilst on Lithuanian soil, to such titles and 
honorifics as "Your Lordship" and "Your Ladyship" and "Your Grace," with 
non -use by service  
438 
THE CORRECTIOHS  
personnel punishable by public flogging and up to sixty days in jail!  
•    last -minute "bumping" privileges for train and plane seats, reserved -
seating cu ltural events, and table reservations at participating five -star 
restaurants and nightclubs!  
•     "top -of-the-list" priority for liver, heart, and cornea transplants at 
Vilnius's famed Antakalnis Hospital!  
•    no -limit hunting and fishing licenses, plus off-season privileges in 
national game reserves!  
•    your name in block letters on the side of large boats!  
•     etc., etc.!  
The lesson that Gitanas had learned and that Chip was now learn ing was that 
the more patently satirical the promises, the lustie r the in flux of American 
capital. Day after day Chip churned out press releases, make -believe financial 
statements, earnest tracts arguing the Hegelian inevitability of a nakedly 
commercial politics, gushing eyewitness accounts of Lithuania's boom -
economy -in-the-making, slow -pitch questions in online investment chat 
rooms, and line -drive -home -run answers. If he got flamed for his lies or his 
ignorance, he simply moved to another chat room. He wrote text for the stock 
certificates and for the accompanying b rochure ("Congratulations —You Are 
Now a Free -Market Patriot of Lithuania") and had them sumptuously printed 
on cotton -rich stock. He felt as if, finally, here in the realm of pure fabrica -
tion, he'd found his metier. Exactly as Melissa Paquette had promise d him 
long ago, it was a gas to start a company, a gas to see the money flowing in.  
A reporter for USA Today e-mailed to ask: "Is this for real?"  
Chip e -mailed back: "It's for real. The for -profit nation -state, with a globally 
dispersed citizenry of shareh olders, is the next stage in the evolution of 
political economy. 'Enlightened neotechnofeudalism' is blossoming in 
Lithuania. Come see for yourself. I can guarantee you a minimum ninety 
minutes' face time with G. Misevicius."  
There was no reply from USA To day. Chip worried that he'd over - 
433 
played his hand; but weekly gross receipts were topping' forty thousand 
dollars. The money came in the form of bank drafts, credit -card numbers, e -
cash encryption keys, wire transfers to Credit Suisse, and hu ndred -dollar bills 
in airmail envelopes. Gitanas plowed much of the money into his ancillary 
enterprises, but, per agreement, he did double Chip's salary as profits rose.  
Chip was living rent -free in the stucco villa where the commander of the 
Soviet garri son had once eaten pheasants and drunk Gewiirz -traminers and 
chatted with Moscow on secure phone links. The villa had been stoned and 
looted and tagged with triumphant graffiti in the fall of 1990, and had then 
stood derelict until the VIPPPAKJRIINPB17 was  voted out of power and 
Gitanas was recalled from the UN. Gitanas had been attracted to the 
shattered villa by its unbeatable price (it was free), by its outstanding security 
arrangements (including an armored tower and a U.S. -embassy -quality 
fence), and b y the opportunity to sleep in the bedroom of the very 
commander who'd had him tortured for six months in the old Soviet barracks 
next door. Gitanas and other Party members had worked weekends with 
trowels and scrapers to re store the villa, but the Party h ad disbanded 
altogether before the job was finished. Now half the rooms stood vacant, the 
floors splashed with broken glass. As throughout the Old City, heat and hot 
water originated at a mammoth Central Boiler Facility and dissipated much 
vigor in the lon g trip, via buried pipes and leaky risers, to the showers and 
radiators of the villa. Gitanas had set up offices for the Free Market Party 
Com pany in the former grand ballroom, claimed the master bedroom for 
himself, installed Chip in the former aide -de-camp's suite on the third floor, 
and let the young Webheads crash where they pleased.  
Although Chip was still paying the rent on his New York apartment and the 
monthly minimum on his Visa bills, he felt agreeably affluent in Vilnius. He 
ordered from the top  of menus, shared his booze and ciga rettes with those 
less fortunate, and never looked at the prices in the natural food store near 
the university where he bought his groceries.  
True to Gitanas's word, there were plenty of underage girls in heavy makeup 
available at the bars and pizzerias, but by leaving New York and escaping 
from "The Academy Purple," Chip seemed to have lost his  
440                                                                                                                THE CORRECTI ONS  
need to fall in love with adolescent strangers. Twice a week he and Gi -tanas 
visited the Club Metropol and, after a massage and before a sauna, had their 
needs efficiently gratified on the Metropol's indifferently clean foam 
cushions. Most of the Metropol' s female clinicians were in their thirties and 
led daytime lives that revolved around child care, or parent care, or the 
university's International Journalism program, or the making of art in 
political hues that nobody would buy. Chip was sur prised by how  willing 
these women were, while they dressed and fixed their hair, to speak to him 
like a human being. He was struck by how much pleasure they seemed to take 
in their daytime lives, how blah their night work was by contrast, how 
altogether meaningless; an d since he himself had begun to take active 
pleasure in his daytime work, he be came, with each therapeutic 
(trans)act(ion) on the massage mat, a little more adept at putting his body in 
its place, at putting sex in its place, at understanding what love wa s and 
wasn't. With each prepaid ejaculation he rid himself of another ounce of the 
hereditary shame that had re sisted fifteen years of sustained theoretical 
attack. What remained was a gratitude that he expressed in the form of two 
hundred percent tips. A t two or three in the morning, when the city lay 
oppressed by a darkness that seemed to have fallen weeks earlier, he and 
Gitanas returned to the villa through high -sulfur smoke and snow or fog or 
drizzle.  
Gitanas was Chip's real love in Vilnius. Chip part icularly liked how much 
Gitanas liked him. Everywhere the two men went, people asked if they were 
brothers, but the truth was that Chip felt less like a sibling of Gitanas than 
like his girlfriend. He felt much like Julia: perpetually feted, lavishly treat ed, 
and almost wholly dependent on Gitanas for favors and guidance and basic 
necessities. He sang for his supper, like Julia. He was a valued employee, a 
vulnerable and delightful American, an object of amusement and indulgence 
and even mystery; and what a  great pleasure it was, for a change, to be the 
pursued one —to have qualities and attributes that somebody else so wanted.  
All in all, he found Vilnius a lovely world of braised beef and cab bage and 
potato pancakes, of beer and vodka and tobacco, of comra deship, subversive 
enterprise, and pussy. He liked a climate and a latitude that substantially 
dispensed with daylight. He could sleep extremely late  
441 
 
and still rise with the sun, and very soon after breakfast the time came for an 
evening pi ck-me-up of coffee and a cigarette. His was partly a student life 
(he'd always loved a student life) and partly a life in the fast lane of dot -corn 
start -ups. From a distance of four thousand miles, everything he'd left behind 
in the U.S. looked manageably  small —his parents, his debts, his failures, his 
loss of Julia. He felt so much better on the work front and sex front and 
friendship front that for a while he forgot what misery tasted like. He 
resolved to stay in Vilnius until he'd earned enough money to  pay down his 
debts to Denise and to his credit -card issuers. He believed that as few as six 
months would suffice for this.  
How wholly typical it was of his luck, then, that before he could enjoy even 
two good months in Vilnius, both his father and Lithuan ia fell apart.  
Denise in her e -mails had been hectoring Chip about Alfred's health and 
insisting that Chip come to St. Jude for Christmas, but a trip home in 
December held little attraction. He suspected that if he aban doned the villa, 
even for a week, so mething stupid would prevent him from returning. A spell 
would be broken, a magic lost. But Denise, who was the steadiest person he 
knew, finally sent him an e -mail in which she sounded downright desperate. 
Chip skimmed the message before he realized that he shouldn't have looked 
at it at all, because it named the sum he owed her. The misery whose taste he 
thought he'd forgotten, the troubles that had seemed small from a distance, 
filled his head again.  
He delete d the e -mail and immediately regretted it. He had a dreamlike semi -
memory of the phrase fired for sleeping with my boss's wife. But this was 
such an unlikely phrase, coming from Denise, and his eye had brushed over it 
so quickly, that he couldn't fully cre dit the memory. If his sister was on her 
way out as a lesbian (which, come to think of it, would make sense of several 
aspects of Denise that had al ways puzzled him), then she could certainly now 
use the support of her Foucaultian older brother, but Chip wasn't ready to go 
home yet, and so he assumed that his memory had deceived him and that her 
phrase had referred to something else.  
442 
THE CORRECTIONS  
He smoked three cigarettes, dissolving his anxiety in rationaliza tions and 
counteraccusations  and a fresh resolve to stay in Lithuania un til he could pay 
his sister the $20,500 that he owed her. If Alfred lived with Denise until 
June, this meant that Chip could stay in Lithuania for another six months 
and still keep his promise of an all -family r eunion in Philadelphia.  
Lithuania, unfortunately, was rattling down the road toward anar chy.  
Through October and November, despite the global financial crisis, a veneer 
of normalcy had adhered to Vilnius. Farmers still brought to market poultry 
and livest ock for which they were paid in litai that they then spent on Russian 
gasoline, on domestic beer and vodka, on stone -washed jeans and Spice Girls 
sweatshirts, on pirated X Files videos im ported from economies even sicker 
than Lithuania's. The truckers who  distributed the gasoline and the workers 
who distilled the vodka and the kerchiefed old women who sold the Spice 
Girls sweatshirts out of wooden carts all bought the farmers' beef and 
chicken. The land pro duced, the litai circulated, and in Vilnius, at l east, the 
pubs and clubs stayed open late.  
But the economy wasn't simply local. You could give litai to the Russian 
petroleum exporter who supplied your country with gasoline, but this 
exporter was within his rights to ask which Lithuanian goods or service s, 
exactly, he might care to spend his litai on. It was easy to buy litai at the 
official rate of four per dollar. Hard, however, to buy a dollar for four litai! In 
a familiar paradox of depression, goods became scarce because there were no 
buyers. The har der it was to find aluminum foil or ground beef or motor oil, 
the more tempting it became to hijack truck -loads of these commodities or to 
muscle in on their distribution. Mean while public servants (notably the 
police) continued to draw fixed salaries of irrelevant litai. The underground 
economy soon learned to price a precinct captain as unerringly as it priced a 
box of lightbulbs.  
Chip was struck by the broad similarities between black -market Lithuania 
and free -market America. In both countries, wealth w as con centrated in the 
hands of a few; any meaningful distinction between private and public 
sectors had disappeared; captains of commerce lived  
 
in a ceaseless anxiety that drove them to expand t'heir empires ruth lessly; 
ordinary citizens live d in ceaseless fear of being fired and cease less confusion 
about which powerful private interest owned which formerly public 
institution on any given day; and the economy was fu eled largely by the elite's 
insatiable demand for luxury. (In Vilnius, by Nov ember of that dismal 
autumn, five criminal oligarchs were responsi ble for employing thousands of 
carpenters, bricklayers, craftsmen, cooks, prostitutes, barkeeps, auto 
mechanics, and bodyguards.) The main difference between America and 
Lithuania, as far a s Chip could see, was that in America the wealthy few 
subdued the unwealthy many by means of mind -numbing and soul -killing 
entertainments and gadgetry and Pharmaceuticals, whereas in Lithuania the 
powerful few subdued the unpowerful many by threatening vio lence.  
It warmed his Foucaultian heart, in a way, to live in a land where property 
ownership and the control of public discourse were so obvi ously a matter of 
who had the guns.  
The Lithuanian with the most guns was an ethnic Russian named Victor 
Lichenkev , who had parlayed the cash liquidity of his heroin and Ecstasy 
near -monopoly into absolute control of the Bank of Lithuania after the bank's 
previous owner, FrendLeeTrust of Atlanta, had cata -strophically misjudged 
consumer appetite for its Dilbert Master Cards. Victor Lichenkev's cash 
reserves enabled him to arm a five -hundred -man private "constabulary" 
which in October boldly surrounded the Chernobyl -type nuclear reactor at 
Ignalina, 120 kilometers northeast of Vilnius, that supplied three -quarters of 
the nation's electricity. The siege gave Lichenkev excellent leverage in 
negotiating his purchase of the country's largest utility from the rival oligarch 
who himself had bought it on the cheap during the great privatization. 
Overnight, Lichenkev gained contr ol of every litas flowing from every electric 
meter in the country; but, fearing that his Russian heritage might provoke 
nationalist animosity, he took care not to abuse his new power. As a gesture 
of goodwill, he slashed electricity prices by the fifteen  percent that the 
previous oligarch had been overcharging. On the resulting wave of 
popularity, he chartered a new political party (the Cheap Power  
THE CORRECTIONS  
dl- 
;e- 
•roich  
for the People Party) and fielded a slate of parliamentary candidates for the 
mid -December national elections.  
And still the land produced and the litai circulated. A slasher flick called 
Moody Fruit opened at the Lietuva and the Vingis. Lithuanian droller ies 
issued from Jennifer Aniston's mouth on Friends. City work ers emptied 
concrete -clad garbage receptacles on the square outside St. Catherine's. But 
every day was darker and shorter than the day before.  
As a global player, Lithuania had been fading sinc e the death of Vy -tautas the 
Great in 1430. For six hundred years the country was passed around among 
Poland, Prussia, and Russia like a much -recycled wed ding present (the 
leatherette ice bucket; the salad tongs). The country's language and a 
memory of be tter times survived, but the main fact about Lithuania was that 
it wasn't very large. In the twentieth century, the Gestapo and SS could 
liquidate 200,000 Lithuanian Jews and the Soviets could deport another 
quarter -million citizens to Siberia without attr acting undue international 
attention.  
Gitanas Misevicius came from a family of priests and soldiers and 
bureaucrats near the Belorussian border. His paternal grandfather, a lo cal 
judge, had failed a Q&A session with the new Communist adminis trators in 
1940 and had been sent to the gulag, along with his wife, and never heard 
from again. Gitanas's father owned a pub in Vidiskes and gave aid and 
comfort to the partisan resistance movement (the so -called Forest Brothers) 
until hostilities ceased in '53.  
A yea r after Gitanas was born, Vidiskes and eight surrounding mu nicipalities 
were emptied by the puppet government to clear the way for the first of two 
nuclear power plants. The fifteen thousand people thus displaced ("for 
reasons of safety") were offered hou sing in a brand -new, fully modern small 
city, Khrushchevai, that had been erected hastily in the lake country west of 
Ignalina.  
"Kind of bleak -looking, all cinderblock, no trees," Gitanas told Chip. "My 
dad's new pub had a cinderblock bar, cinderblock boot hs, cinderblock 
shelves. The socialist planned economy in Belorussia had made too many 
cinderblocks and was giving them away for nothing. Or so we were told. 
Anyway, we all move in. We got our cinderblock beds  
445  
 
 
and our cinderblock playground  equipment and our cinderblock park 
benches. The years go by, I'm ten years old, and suddenly everybody's mom 
or dad's got lung cancer. I mean everybody's. Well, and then my dad's got a 
lung tumor, and finally the authorities come and take a look at Khrush chevai, 
and lo and behold, we got a radon problem. Serious radon problem. Really 
fucking disastrous radon problem, actually. Be cause it turns out those 
cinderblocks are mildly radioactive! And radon is pooling in every closed 
room in Khrushchevai. Especia lly rooms like a pub, with not a lot of air, 
where the owner sits all day and smokes cig arettes. Like for instance my dad 
does. Well, Belorussia, which is our sister socialist republic (and which, by 
the way, we Lithuanians used to own), Belorussia says i t's really sorry. There 
must have somehow been some pitchblende in those cinderblocks, says 
Belorussia. Big mistake. Sorry, sorry, sorry. So we all move out of 
Khrushchevai, and my dad dies, horribly, at ten minutes after midnight on 
the day after his wedd ing anniversary, because he doesn't want my mom 
remembering his death on their wedding date, and then thirty years go by, 
and Gorbachev steps down, and finally we get to take a look in those old 
archives, and what do you know? There was no weird glut of ci nderblock due 
to poor planning. There was no snafu in the five -year plan. There was a 
deliberate strategy of recycling very -low-grade nuclear waste in building 
materials. On the theory that the cement in cinderblock renders the 
radioisotopes harmless! But the Belorussians had Geiger counters, and that 
was the end of that happy dream of harmlessness, and so a thousand 
trainloads of cinderblock got sent to us, who had no reason to suspect that 
anything was wrong."  
"Ouch," Chip said.  
"It's beyond ouch," Gitana s said. "It killed my dad when I was eleven. And my 
best friend's dad. And hundreds of other people, over the years. And 
everything made sense. There was always an enemy with a big red target on 
his back. There was a big evil daddy U.S.S.R. that we all cou ld hate, until the 
nineties."  
The platform of the VIPPPAKJRIINPB17, which Gitanas helped found after 
Independence, consisted of one very broad and heavy plank: the Soviets must 
pay for raping Lithuania. For a while, in the nineties,  
446  
THE CORRECTIONS  
it was possible to run the country on pure hatred. But soon other parties 
emerged with platforms which, while giving revanchism its due, also sought 
to move beyond it. By the end of the nineties, after the VTPP -PAKJRIINPB17 
lost its last seat in the Seimas, all that remained of the party was its half -
renovated villa.  
Gitanas tried to make political sense of the world around him and could not. 
The world had made sense when the Red Army was illegally detaining him, 
asking him questions that he refus ed to answer, and slowly covering the left 
side of his body with third -degree burns. After Independence, though, 
politics had lost its coherence. Even as simple and vital an issue as Soviet 
reparations to Lithuania wa,s bedeviled by the fact that during Wo rld War II 
the Lithuanians themselves had helped persecute the Jews and by the fact 
that many of the people now running the Kremlin were themselves former 
anti -Soviet patriots who deserved reparations nearly as much as the 
Lithuanians did.  
"What do I do no w," Gitanas asked Chip, "when the invader is a system and a 
culture, not an army? The best future I can hope now for my country is that 
someday it looks more like a second -rate country in the West. More like 
everybody else, in other words."  
"More like Denm ark, with its attractive harborside bistros and boutiques," 
Chip said.  
"How Lithuanian we all felt," Gitanas said, "when we could point to the 
Soviets and say: No, we're not like that. But to say, No, we are not. free -
market, no, we are not globalized —this doesn't make me feel Lithu anian. 
This makes me feel stupid and Stone Age. So how do I be a patriot now? 
What positive thing do I stand for? What is the positive definition of my 
country?"  
Gitanas continued to reside in the semiderelict villa. He offered the aide -de-
camp's suite to his mother, but she preferred to stay in her apartment outside 
Ignalina. As was de rigueur for all Lithuanian offi cials of that era, especially 
for revanchists like himself, he acquired a piece of formerly Communist 
property —a twenty percent stake in Sucrosas, the beet -sugar refinery that 
was Lithuania's second -largest single -site employer —and lived fairly 
comfortably as a retired patriot on the dividends.  
447 
For a time, like Chip, Gitanas glimpsed salvatiofi in the p erson of Julia Vrais: 
in her beauty, in her American path -of-least -resistance quest for pleasure. 
Then Julia ditched him on a Berlin -bound jet. Hers was the latest betrayal in 
a life that had come to seem a numbing parade of betrayals. He was screwed 
by th e Soviets, screwed by the Lithuanian electorate, and screwed by Julia. 
Finally he was screwed by the IMF and World Bank, and he brought a forty -
year load of bitterness to the joke of Lithuania Incorporated.  
Hiring Chip to run the Free Market Party Company was the first good 
decision he'd made in a long time. Gitanas had gone to New York to find a 
divorce lawyer and possibly to hire a cheap American actor, somebody 
middle -aged and failing, whom he could install in Vilnius to reassure such 
callers and visitor s as Lithuania Incorporated might attract. He could hardly 
believe that a man as young and talented as Chip was willing to work for him. 
He was only briefly dismayed that Chip had been sleeping with his wife. In 
Gitanas's experience, everyone eventually be trayed him. He appreciated that 
Chip had accomplished his betrayal before they even met.  
As for Chip, the inferiority he felt in Vilnius as a "pathetic Ameri can" who 
spoke neither Lithuanian nor Russian, and whose father hadn't died of lung 
cancer at an e arly age, and whose grandparents hadn't disappeared into 
Siberia, and who'd never been tortured for his ideals in an unheated military -
prison cell, was offset by his competence as an employee and by the memory 
of certain extremely flattering con trasts tha t Julia used to draw between him 
and Gitanas. In pubs and clubs, where the two men often didn't bother to 
deny that they were brothers, Chip had the sensation of being the more 
successful of the two.  
"I was a pretty good deputy prime minister," Gitanas sai d gloomily. "I'm not a 
very good criminal warlord."  
Warlord, indeed, was a somewhat glorified term for Gitanas's line of work. 
He was exhibiting signs of failure with which Chip was all too familiar. He 
spent an hour worrying for every minute he spent doing. Investors around 
the globe were sending him gaudy  sums that he de posited in his Credit Suisse 
account every Friday afternoon, but he  
448 
THE CORRECTIONS  
couldn't decide whether to use the money "honestly" (i.e., to buy seats in 
Parliament for the Free Market Party Company) or to commit fraud 
unabashedly and pour his ill -gotten hard currency into even less legiti mate 
businesses. For a while he sort of did both and sort of did neither. Finally his 
market research (which he conducted by quizzing drunken strangers in bars) 
persuaded him that, in t he current economic climate, even a Bolshevik had a 
better chance of attracting votes than a party with "Free Market" in its name.  
Abandoning any notion of staying legit, Gitanas hired bodyguards. Soon 
Victor Lichenkev asked his spies: Why is this has -been  patriot Misevicius 
bothering with protection? Gitanas had been far safer as an undefended has -
been patriot than he was as the commander of ten strapping Kalashnikov -
toting youths. He was obliged to retain more bodyguards, and Chip, for fear 
of getting sho t, stopped leaving the compound without an escort.  
"You're not in danger," Gitanas assured him. "Lichenkev might want to kill 
me and take over the company for himself. But you're the goose with the 
golden ovaries."  
The back of Chip's neck nonetheless prick led with vulnerability when he went 
out in public. On the night of Thanksgiving in America he watched two of 
Lichenkev's men elbow through the crowd at a sticky -floored club called 
Musmiryte and put six holes in the abdomen of a red -haired "wine and spirit s 
importer." That Lichenkev's men had walked past Chip without harming him 
did go to prove Gitanas's point. But the body of the "wine and spirits 
importer" looked every bit as soft, in comparison to bullets, as Chip had 
always feared a body was. Bad overlo ads of current flooded the dying man's 
nerves. Violent convul sions, hidden stores of galvanic energy, immensely 
distressing electro chemical outcomes, had clearly lain latent in his wiring all 
his life.  
Gitanas showed up at Musmiryte half an hour later. " My problem," he mused, 
looking at the bloodstains, "is it's easier for me to be shot than to shoot."  
"There you go again, running yourself down," Chip said.  
"I'm good at enduring pain, bad at inflicting it."  
"Seriously. Don't be so hard on yourself."  
449 
 
"Kill or be killed. It's not an easy concept."  
Gitanas had tried to be aggressive. As a criminal warlord, he did have one 
fine asset: the cash generated by the Free Market Party Com pany. After 
Lichenkev's forces had surrounded the Ignalina react or and coerced the sale 
of Lithuanian Electric, Gitanas sold his lucrative stake in Sucrosas, emptied 
the coffers of the Free Market Party Company, and bought a controlling 
interest in the principal cellular phone -service provider in Lithuania. The 
company , Transbaltic Wireless, was the only utility in his price range. He 
gave his bodyguards 1,000 domestic min utes per month, plus free voice mail 
and caller ID, and put them to work monitoring calls on Lichenkev's many 
Transbaltic cell phones. When he learne d that Lichenkev was about to dump 
his entire position in the National Tannery and Livestock Products and 
Byproducts Cor poration, Gitanas was able to short his own shares. The move 
netted him a bundle but proved fatal in the long run. Lichenkev, tipped of f to 
the monitoring of his phones, switched service to a more secure regional 
system operated out of Riga. Then he turned around and attacked Gitanas.  
On the eve of the December 20 elections, an electrical substation "accident" 
selectively blacked out the switching center of Transbaltic Wireless and six of 
its transceiver towers. A mob of angry young Vil -niusian cell phone users 
with shaved heads and goatees attempted to storm Transbaltic's offices. 
Transbaltic's management called for help on ordinary coppe r-wire lines; the 
"police" responding to the call joined the mob in looting the office and laying 
siege to its treasury until the ar rival of three vanloads of "police" from the 
only precinct that Gitanas could afford to pay off. After a pitched battle, th e 
first group of "police" retreated, and the remaining "police" dispersed the 
mob.  
Through Friday night and into Saturday morning the company's technical 
staff scrambled to repair the Brezhnev -era emergency genera tor that 
provided backup power to the swit ching center. The generator's main 
transfer bus was badly corroded, and when the senior supervisor jiggled it to 
test its integrity he snapped if off at the base. Working to reattach it in the 
light of candles and flashlights, the supervisor then  
 
450 
THE CORRECTIONS  
burned a hole in the primary induction coil with his welding torch, and given 
the political instabilities surrounding the election there were no other gas -
powered AC generators to be had at any price in Vilnius (and certainly no 
three -phase generators of the kind for which the switch ing center had been 
retrofitted for no better reason than that an old Brezhnev -era three -phase 
generator was available for cheap), and meanwhile electrical -parts suppliers 
in Poland and Finland were reluc tant, given the political instabilities, to ship 
anything into Lithuania without first receiving payment in hard Western 
currency, and so a country whose citizens, like so many of their Western 
counterparts, had simply disconnected their copper -wire teleph ones when 
cell phones be came cheap and universal was plunged into a communications 
silence of nineteenth -century proportions.  
On a very gloomy Sunday morning, Lichenkev and his slate of smugglers and 
hit men on the Cheap Power for the People Party ticket claimed 38 of the 141 
seats in the Seimas. But the Lithuanian President, Audrius Vitkunas, a 
charismatic and paranoid arch -nationalist who hated Russia and the West 
with equal passion, refused to certify the election results.  
"Hydrophobic Lichenkev and his  mouth -frothing hellhounds will not 
intimidate me!" Vitkunas shouted in a televised address on Sunday evening. 
"Localized power failures, a near -total breakdown in the com munications 
network of the capital and its environs, and the presence of roving heav ily 
armed 'constabularies' of Lichenkev's hired mouth -frothing lickspittle 
hellhounds do not inspire confidence that yesterday's voting reflects the 
stubborn will and immense good sense of the great and glorious immortal 
Lithuanian People! I will not, I ca nnot, I must not, I durst not, I shall not 
certify these scum -flecked, maggot -riddled, tertiary -syphilitic national 
parliamentary election results!"  
Gitanas and Chip watched the address on the television in the former 
ballroom at the villa. Two bodyguards quietly played Dungeon -master in a 
corner of the room while Gitanas translated for Chip the richer nuggets of 
Vitkunasian rhetoric. The peaty light of the year's shortest day had faded in 
the casement windows.  
451 
"I got a real bad feeling about this," Gitanas said. "I got a feeling Lichenkev 
wants to gun down Vitkunas and take his chances with who ever replaces 
him."  
Chip, who was doing his best to forget that Christmas was four days away, 
had no wish to hang on in  Vilnius only to be driven out a week af ter the 
holiday. He asked Gitanas if he'd thought about emptying the Credit Suisse 
account and leaving the country.  
"Oh, sure." Gitanas was wearing his red motocross jacket and hug ging 
himself. "I think about shopp ing at Bloomingdale's every day. I think about 
the big tree at Rockefeller Center."  
"Then what's keeping you?"  
Gitanas scratched his scalp and smelled his fingernails, blending the aroma 
of scalp with the skin -oil smells from around his nose, taking ob vious comfort 
in sebum. "If I leave," he said, "and the trouble blows over, then where am I? 
I'm fucked three ways. I'm not employable in America. As of next month, I'm 
not married to an American. And my mom's in Ignalina. What do I got in 
New York?"  
"We coul d run this thing in New York."  
"They got laws there. They'd shut us down in a week. I'm fucked three ways."  
Toward midnight Chip went upstairs and inserted himself between his thin, 
cold East Bloc sheets. His room smelled of damp plaster, ciga rettes, and 
strong synthetic shampoo fragrances such as pleased the Baltic nose. His 
mind was aware of its own racing. He didn't fall into sleep but skipped off it, 
again and again, like a stone on water. He kept mistaking the streetlight in 
his window for the light o f day. He went downstairs and realized that it was 
already late afternoon on Christmas Eve; he had the oversleeper's panicked 
sense of having fallen behind, of lacking information. His mother was making 
Christmas Eve dinner in the kitchen. His father, yout hful in a leather jacket, 
was sitting in the ballroom in the dim late light and watching the CBS 
Evening News with Dan Rather. Chip, to be friendly, asked him what the 
news was.  
"Tell Chip," Alfred told Chip, whom he didn't recognize, "there's trouble in 
the East."  
Real daylight came at eight. A shouting in the street woke him up.  
452 
THE CORRECTIONS  
His room was cold but not freezing; a smell of warm dust came off the 
radiator —the city's  Central Boiler Facility still functioning, the social order 
still intact.  
Through the branches of the spruce trees outside his window he saw a crowd 
of several dozen men and women in bulky overcoats milling outside the 
fence. A dusting of snow had fallen in the night. Two of Gitanas's security 
men, the brothers Jonas and Aidaris —big blond fellows with semiautomatics 
on straps —were parleying through the bars of the front gate with a pair of 
middle -aged women whose brassy hair and red faces, like the heat in  Chip's 
radiator, gave evidence of ordinary life's persistence.  
Downstairs the ballroom echoed with emphatic televised Lithua nian 
declarations. Gitanas was sitting exactly where Chip had left him the night 
before, but his clothes were different and he app eared to have slept.  
The gray morning light and the snow on the trees and the periph eral sense of 
disarray and breakup recalled the end of an academic fall term, the last day of 
exams before the Christmas break. Chip went to the kitchen and poured 
Vitasoy  Delite Vanilla soy milk on a bowl of Barbara's All -Natural Shredded 
Oats Bite Size cereal. He drank some of the viscous German organic black -
cherry juice that he'd lately been en joying. He made two mugs of instant 
coffee and took them to the ballroom, wh ere Gitanas had turned off the TV 
and was sniffing his fingernails again.  
Chip asked him what the news was.  
"All my bodyguards ran away except Jonas and Aidaris," Gitanas said. "They 
took the VW and the Lada. I doubt they're coming back."  
"With protectors like this, who needs attackers?" Chip said.  
"They left us the Stomper, which is a crime magnet."  
"When did this happen?"  
"Must have been right after President Vitkunas put the Army on alert."  
Chip laughed. "When did that happen?"  
"Early this morning. Everything in the city is apparently still func tioning —
except, of course, Transbaltic Wireless," Gitanas said.  
453 
The mob in the street had swelled. There were perhaps a hundred people 
now, holding aloft cell phones that co llectively produced an eerie, angelic 
sound. They were playing the sequence of tones that sig nified SERVICE 
INTERRUPTION.  
"I want you to go back to New York," Gitanas said. "We'll see what happens 
here. Maybe I'll come, maybe I won't. I gotta see my mothe r for Christmas. 
Meantime, here's your severance."  
He tossed Chip a thick brown envelope just as multiple thuds were sounding 
on the villa's outer walls. Chip dropped the envelope. A rock crashed through 
a window and bounced to a stop by the television set . The rock was four -
sided, a broken corner of granite cobblestone. It was coated with fresh 
hostility and seemed faintly embarrassed.  
Gitanas dialed the "police" on the copper -wire line and spoke wearily. The 
brothers Jonas and Aidaris, fingers on triggers , came in through the front 
door, followed by cold air with a sprucey Yule flavor. The brothers were 
cousins of Gitanas; this was presumably why they hadn't deserted with the 
others. Gitanas put down the phone and con ferred with them in Lithuanian.  
The br own envelope contained a meaty stack of fifty - and hundred -dollar 
bills.  
Chip's feeling from his dream, his belated realization that the holiday had 
come, was persisting in the daylight. None of the young Webheads had 
reported to work today, and now Gitana s had given him a present, and snow 
was clinging to the boughs of spruces, and carolers in bulky coats were at the 
gate . . .  
"Pack your bags," Gitanas said. "Jonas will take you to the airport."  
Chip went upstairs with an empty head and heart. He heard gu ns banging on 
the front porch, the ting -a-ling of ejected casings, Jonas and Aidaris firing (he 
hoped) at the sky. Jingle bells, jingle bells.  
He put on his leather pants and leather coat. Repacking his bag connected 
him to the moment of unpacking it in ea rly October, com pleted a loop of time 
and pulled a drawstring that made the twelve intervening weeks disappear. 
Here he was again, packing.  
Gitanas was smelling his fingers, his eyes on the news, when Chip  
454 
THE CORRECTIONS  
returned to the ballroom. Victor Lichenkev's mustaches went up and down 
on the TV screen. "What's he saying?"  
Gitanas shrugged. "That Vitkunas is mentally unfit, et cetera. That Vitkunas 
is mounting a putsch to reverse the legitimate will of the Lithuanian people, 
et cetera. " 
"You should come with me," Chip said.  
"I'm gonna go see my mother," Gitanas said. "I'll call you next week."  
Chip put his arms around his friend and squeezed him. He could smell the 
scalp oils that Gitanas in his agitation had been sniffing. He felt as i f he were 
hugging himself, feeling his own primate shoulder blades, the scratch of his 
own woolen sweater. He also felt his friend's gloom —how not -there he was, 
how distracted or shut down —and it made him, too, feel lost.  
Jonas beeped the horn on the grave l drive outside the front door. "Let's meet 
up in New York," Chip said.  
"OK, maybe." Gitanas pulled away and wandered back to the tele vision.  
Only a few stragglers remained to throw rocks at the Stomper as Jonas and 
Chip roared through the open gate. They drove south out of the city center on 
a street lined with forbidding gas stations and brown -walled, traffic -scarred 
buildings that seemed happ iest and most them selves on days, like this one, 
when the weather was raw and the light was poor. Jonas spoke very little 
English but managed to exude toler ance toward Chip, if not friendliness, 
while keeping his eyes on the rearview mirror. Traffic was extremely sparse 
this morning, and sport -utility vehicles, those workhorses of the warlord 
class, attracted unhealthy attention in times of instability.  
The little airport was mobbed with young people speaking the languages of 
the West. Since the Quad Citi es Fund had liquidated Lietuvos Avialinijos, 
other airlines had taken over some of the routes, but the curtailed flight 
schedule (fourteen departures a day for a capital of Europe) wasn't equipped 
to handle loads like today's. Hundreds of  
455  
British, German, and American students and entrepreneurs, many of their 
faces familiar to Chip from his pub -crawling with Gitanas, had converged on 
the reservation counters of Finnair and Lufthansa, Aeroflot and LOT Polish 
Airlines.  
Doughty city buses were ar riving with fresh loads of foreign nation als. As far 
as Chip could see, none of the counter lines were moving at all. He tallied the 
flights on the Outbound board and chose the airline, Finnair, with the most 
departures.  
At the end of the very long Finnai r line were two American college girls in 
bell-bottom jeans and other Sixties Revival wear. The names on their luggage 
were Tiffany and Cheryl.  
"Do you have tickets?" Chip asked.  
"For tomorrow," Tiffany said. "But things looked kinda nasty, so."  
"Is this l ine moving?"  
"I don't know. We've only been here ten minutes."  
"It hasn't moved in ten minutes?"  
"There's only one person at the counter," Tiffany said. "But it's not like there's 
some other, better Finnair counter someplace else, so."  
Chip was feeling dis oriented and had to steel himself not to hail a cab and 
return to Gitanas.  
Cheryl said to Tiffany: "So my dad's like, you've got to sublet if you're going to 
Europe, and I'm like, I promised Anna she could stay there weekends when 
there's home games so she  can sleep with Jason, right? I can't take a promise 
back —right? But my dad's getting like all bottom -line, and I'm like, hello, it's 
my condominium, right? You bought it for me, right? I didn't know I was 
going to have some stranger, you know, who, like, fries things on the stove, 
and sleeps in my bed?"  
Tiffany said: "That is so -gross."  
Cheryl said: "And uses my pillows?"  
Two more non -Lithuanians, a pair of Belgians, joined the line be hind Chip. 
Simply not to be the last in line brought some relief. Chip, in French, asked 
the Belgians to watch his bag and hold his place. He went to the men's room, 
locked himself in a stall, and counted the money Gitanas had given him.  
It was $29,250.  
456                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
It upset him somehow. It made him afraid.  
A voice on a bathroom speaker announced, in Lithuanian and then Russian 
and then English, that LOT Polish Airlines Flight #331 from Warsaw had 
been canceled.  
Chip put twenty hundreds in his T -shirt pocket, twenty hundreds in his left 
boot, and returned the rest of the money to the envelope, which he hid inside 
his T -shirt, agains t his belly. He wished that Gitanas hadn't given him the 
money. Without money, he'd had a good reason to stay in Vilnius. Now that 
he had no good reason, a simple fact which the previous twelve weeks had 
kept hidden was stripped naked in the fecal, uric ba throom stall. The simple 
fact was that he was afraid to go home.  
No man likes to see his cowardice as clearly as Chip could see his now. He 
was angry at the money and angry at Gitanas for giving it to him and angry at 
Lithuania for falling apart, but the f act remained that he was afraid to go 
home, and this was nobody's fault but his.  
He reclaimed his place in the Finnair line, which hadn't moved at all. Airport 
speakers were announcing the cancellation of Flight #1048 from Helsinki. A 
collective groan went  up, and bodies surged forward, the head of the line 
blunting itself against the counter like a delta.  
Cheryl and Tiffany kicked their bags forward. Chip kicked his bag forward. 
He felt returned to the world and he didn't like it. A kind of hospital light,  a 
light of seriousness and inescapability, fell on the girls and the baggage and 
the Finnair personnel in their uniforms. Chip had nowhere to hide. Everyone 
around him was reading a novel. He hadn't read a novel in at least a year. The 
prospect frightened  him nearly as much as the prospect of Christmas in St. 
Jude. He wanted to go out and hail a cab, but he suspected that Gitanas had 
already fled the city.  
He stood in the hard light until the hour was 2:00 and then 2:30 — early 
morning in St. Jude. While th e Belgians watched his bag again, he waited in a 
different line and made a credit -card phone call.  
Enid's voice was slurred and tiny. "Wello?"  
"Hi, Mom, it's me."  
Her voice trebled instantly in pitch and volume. "Chip? Oh, Chip! Al, it's 
Chip! It's Chip! Chip, where are you?"  
"I'm at the airport in Vilnius. I'm on my way home."  
"Oh, wonderful! Wonderful! Wonderful! Now, tell me, when do you get 
here?"  
"I don't have a ticket yet," he said. "Things are sort of falling apart here. But 
tomorrow afternoon sometime. Wednesday at the latest."  
"Wonderful!"  
He hadn't been prepared for the joy in his mother's voice. If he'd ever known 
that he could bring joy to anoth er person, he'd long since forgotten it. He 
took care to steady his own voice and keep his word count low. He said that 
he would call again as soon as he was at a better airport.  
"This is wonderful news," Enid said. "I'm so happy!"  
"OK, then, I'll see you soon."  
Already the great Baltic winter night was shouldering in from the north. 
Veterans from the front of the Finnair line reported that the rest of the day's 
flights were sold out and that at least one of these flights was likely to be 
canceled, but Chip  hoped that by flashing a couple of hun dreds he could 
secure those "bumping privileges" that he'd lampooned on lithuania.com. 
Failing that, he would buy somebody's ticket for lots of cash.  
Cheryl said: "Oh my God, Tiffany, the StairMaster is so -totally butt-building."  
Tiffany said: "Only if you, like, stick it out."  
Cheryl said: "Everybody sticks it out. You can't help it. Your legs get tired."  
Tiffany said: "Duh! It's a StairMaster! Your legs are supposed to get tired."  
Cheryl looked out a window and aske d, with withering under graduate 
disdain: "Excuse me, why is there a tank in the middle of the runway?"  
A minute later the lights went out and the phones went dead.  
 
458 
THE CORRECTIONS  
DOWN IN THE BASEMENT, at the eastern end of the Ping -Pong table, 
Alfred was unpacking a Maker's Mark whiskey carton filled with Christmas -
tree lights. He already had prescription drugs and an enema kit on the table. 
He had a sugar cookie freshly baked by Enid in a shape suggest ive of a terrier 
but meant to be a reindeer. He had a Log Cabin syrup carton containing the 
large colored lights that he'd formerly hung on the outdoor yews. He had a 
pump -action shotgun in a zippered can vas case, and a box of twenty -gauge 
shells. He had rare clarity and the will to use it while it lasted.  
A shadowy light of late afternoon was captive in the window wells. The 
furnace was cycling on often, the house leaking heat. Alfred's red sweater 
hung on him in skewed folds and bulges, as if he were a l og or a chair. His 
gray wool slacks were afflicted with stains that he had no choice but to 
tolerate, because the only other option was to take leave of his senses, and he 
wasn't quite ready to do that.  
Uppermost in the Maker's Mark carton was a very long string of white 
Christmas lights coiled bulkily around a wand of cardboard. The string stank 
of mildew from the storeroom beneath the porch, and when he put the plug 
into an outlet he could see right away that all was not well. Most of the lights 
were burn ing brightly, but near the center of the spool was a patch of unlit 
bulbs —a substantia nigra deep inside the tangle. He unwound the spool with 
veering hands, paying the string out on the Ping -Pong table. At the very end 
of it was an unsightly stretch of de ad bulbs.  
He understood what modernity expected of him now. Modernity expected 
him to drive to a big discount store and replace the damaged string. But the 
discount stores were mobbed at this time of year; he'd be in line for twenty 
minutes. He didn't mind waiting, but Enid wouldn't let him drive the car 
now, and Enid did mind waiting. She was upstairs flogging herself through 
the home stretch of Christmas prep.  
4B1 
Much better, Alfred thought, to stay out of sight in the basement, to work 
with what he had.  It offended his sense of proportion and econ omy to throw 
away a ninety -percent serviceable string of lights. It of fended his sense of 
himself, because he was an individual from an age of individuals, and a string 
of lights was, like him, an individual t hing. No matter how little the thing had 
cost, to throw it away was to deny its value and, by extension, the value of 
individuals generally: to willfully designate as trash an object that you knew 
wasn't trash.  
Modernity expected this designation and Alfre d resisted it.  
Unfortunately, he didn't know how to fix the lights. He didn't un derstand 
how a stretch of fifteen bulbs could go dead. He examined the transition from 
light to darkness and saw no change in the wiring pat tern between the last 
burning bulb  and the first dead one. He couldn't follow the three constituent 
wires through all their twists and braidings. The circuit was semiparallel in 
some complex way he didn't see the point of.  
In the old days, Christmas lights had come in short strings that we re wired 
serially. If a single bulb burned out or even just loosened in its socket, the 
circuit was broken and the entire string went dark. One of the season's rituals 
for Gary and Chip had been to tighten each little brass -footed bulb in a 
darkened string  and then, if this didn't work, to replace each bulb in turn 
until the dead culprit was found. (What joy the boys had taken in the 
resurrection of a string!) By the time Denise was old enough to help with the 
lights, the technology had advanced. The wiring  was parallel, and the bulbs 
had snap -in plastic bases. A sin gle faulty light didn't affect the rest of the 
community but identified itself instantly for instant replacement . . .  
Alfred's hands were rotating on his wrists like the twin heads of an eggbea ter. 
As well as he could, he advanced his fingers along the string, squeezing and 
twisting the wires as he went — and the dark stretch reignited! The string was 
complete!  
What had he done?  
He smoothed out the string on the Ping -Pong table. Almost imme diately, the 
faulty segment went dark again. He tried to revive it by squeezing it and 
patting it, but this time he had no luck.  462 
THE CORRECTIONS  
(You fitted the barrel of the shotgun into your mouth and you reached for the 
switch.)  
He reexamined the braid of olive -drab wires. Even now, even at this 
extremity of his affliction, he believed he could sit down with pen cil and 
paper and reinvent the principles of basic circuitry. He was certain, for the 
moment, of his ability to do this; but the task of puzzling out a parallel circuit 
was far more daunting than the task, say, of driving to a discount store and 
waiting in line. The mental task required an inductive rediscovery of basic 
precepts; it required a rewiring of his own cerebral circuitry. It w as truly 
marvelous that such a thing was even thinkable —that a forgetful old man 
alone in his base ment with his shotgun and his sugar cookie and his big blue 
chair could spontaneously regenerate organic circuitry complex enough to 
under stand electricity —but the energy that this reversal of entropy would 
cost him vastly exceeded the energy available to him in the form of his sugar 
cookie. Maybe if he ate a whole box of sugar cookies all at once, he could 
relearn parallel circuitry and make sense of the pec uliar three -wire braiding 
of these infernal lights. But oh, my God, a person got so tired.  
He shook the string and the dead lights came on again. He shook it and shook 
it and they didn't go out. By the time he'd coiled the string back onto the 
makeshift sp ool, however, the deep interior was dark again. Two hundred 
bulbs were burning bright, and modernity insisted that he junk the whole 
thing.  
He suspected that somewhere, somehow, this new technology was stupid or 
lazy. Some young engineer had taken a shortc ut and failed to anticipate the 
consequences that he was suffering now. But because he didn't understand 
the technology, he had no way to know the nature of the failure or to take 
steps to correct it.  
And so the goddamned lights made a victim of him, and t here wasn't a 
goddamned thing he could do except go out and spend.  
You were outfitted as a boy with a will to fix things by yourself and with a 
respect for individual physical objects, but eventually some of your internal 
hardware (including such mental ha rdware as this will and this respect) 
became obsolete, and so, even though many other parts of  
463 
 
 
you still functioned well, an argument could be made for junking the whole 
human machine.  
Which was another way of saying he was tired.  
He fitted  the cookie into his mouth. Chewed carefully and swal lowed. It was 
hell to get old.  
Fortunately, there were thousands of other lights in the Maker's Mark box. 
Alfred methodically plugged in each bunch. He found three shorter strings in 
good working order,  but all the rest were either in explicably dead or were so 
old that the light was faint and yellow; and three shorter strings wouldn't 
cover the whole tree.  
At the bottom of the box he found packages of replacement bulbs, carefully 
labeled. He found strin gs that he'd spliced back together after excising faulty 
segments. He found old serial strings whose broken sockets he'd hot -wired 
with drops of solder. He was amazed, in retro spect, that he'd had time to do 
all this repair work amid so many other respons ibilities.  
Oh, the myths, the childish optimism, of the fix! The hope that an object 
might never have to wear out. The dumb faith that there would always be a 
future in which he, Alfred, would not only be alive but have enough energy to 
make repairs. The q uiet conviction that all his thrift and all his conservator's 
passion would have a point, later on: that some day he would wake up 
transformed into a wholly different person with infinite energy and infinite 
time to attend to all the objects that he'd save d, to keep it all working, to keep 
it all together.  
"I ought to pitch the whole damn lot of it," he said aloud.  
His hands wagged. They always wagged.  
He took the shotgun into his workshop and leaned it against the laboratory 
bench.  
The problem was insoluble. There he'd been, in extremely cold salty water, 
his lungs half -full and his heavy legs cramping and his shoulder useless in its 
socket, and all he would have had to do was noth ing. Let go and drown. But 
he kicked, it was a refle x. He didn't like the depths and so he kicked, and then 
down from above had rained orange flotation devices. He'd stuck his working 
arm through a hole in one of them just as a really serious combination of 
wave and undertow —the 
464  
THE CORRECTIONS  
Gunnar Myrdal's wake —sent him into a gargantuan wash -and-spin. All he 
would have had to do then was let go. And yet it was clear, even as he was 
nearly drowning there in the North Atlantic, that in the other place there 
would be no objects whatso ever: that this miserable orange nota tion device 
through which he'd stuck his arm, this fundamentally in scrutable and 
ungiving fabric -clad hunk of foam, would be a GOD in the objectless world of 
death toward which he was headed, would be the SUPREME I -AM-WHAT -I-
AM in that universe of unbeing. For a few minutes, the orange flotation 
device was the only object he had. It was his last object and so, instinctively, 
he loved it and pulled it close.  
Then they hauled him out of the water and dried him off and wr apped him 
up. They treated him like a child, and he reconsidered the wisdom of 
surviving. There was nothing wrong with him except his one -eyed blindness 
and his non -working shoulder and a few other small things, but they spoke to 
him as if he were an idiot , a lad, a demented person. In their phony 
solicitude, their thinly veiled contempt, he saw the future that he'd chosen in 
the water. It was a nursing -home future and it made him weep. He should 
have just drowned.  
He shut and locked the door of the laborat ory, because it all came down to 
privacy, didn't it? Without privacy there was no point in being an individual. 
And they would give him no privacy in a nursing home. They would be like 
the people on the helicopter and not leave him be.  
He undid his pants, took out the rag that he kept folded in his underwear, 
and peed into a Yuban can.  
He'd bought the gun a year before his retirement. He'd imagined that 
retirement would bring that radical transformation. He'd imagined himself 
hunting and fishing, imagined h imself back in Kansas and Ne braska on a 
little boat at dawn, imagined a ridiculous and improbable life of recreation 
for himself.  
The gun had a velvety, inviting action, but soon after he bought it, a starling 
had broken its neck on the kitchen window whi le he was eat ing lunch. He 
hadn't been able to finish eating, and he'd never fired the gun.  
The human species was given dominion over the earth and took the 
opportunity to exterminate other species and warm the atmosphere and  
generally ruin thin gs in its own image, but it paid this' price for its priv ileges: 
that the finite and specific animal body of this species contained a brain 
capable of conceiving the infinite and wishing to be infinite itself.  
There came a time, however, when death ceased  to be the enforcer of finitude 
and began to look, instead, like the last opportunity for rad ical 
transformation, the only plausible portal to the infinite.  
But to be seen as the finite carcass in a sea of blood and bone chips and gray 
matter —to inflict t hat version of himself on other people — was a violation of 
privacy so profound it seemed it would outlive him.  
He was also afraid that it might hurt.  
And there was a very important question that he still wanted an swered. His 
children were coming, Gary and  Denise and maybe even Chip, his intellectual 
son. It was possible that Chip, if he came, could answer the very important 
question.  
And the question was:  
The question was:  
Enid hadn't felt ashamed at all, not the tiniest bit, when the warning horns 
were so unding and the Gunnar Myrdal was shuddering with the reversal of 
its thrusters and Sylvia Roth was pulling her through the crowded Pippi 
Longstocking Ballroom, crying, "Here's his wife, let us through!" It hadn't 
embarrassed Enid to see Dr. Hibbard again a s he knelt on the shuffleboard 
deck and cut the wet clothes off her husband with dainty surgical clippers. 
Not even when the assistant cruise direc tor who was helping her pack 
Alfred's bags found a yellowed diaper in an ice bucket, not even when Alfred 
cursed the nurses and orderlies on the mainland, not even when the face of 
Khellye Withers on the TV in Alfred's hospital room reminded her that she 
hadn't said a comforting word to Sylvia on the eve of Withers's execution, did 
she feel shame.  
She returned t o St. Jude in such good spirits that she was able to call Gary 
and confess that, rather than sending Alfred's notarized patent -licensing 
agreement to the Axon Corporation, she'd hidden it in the laundry room. 
After Gary had given her the disappointing news  that five thousand dollars 
was probably a reasonable licensing fee after all,  
466 
THE CORRECTIONS  
she went to the basement to retrieve the notarized agreement and couldn't 
find it in its hiding place. Strangely unembarrassed, she called Schwenks ville 
and asked Axon to send her a duplicate set of contracts. Alfred was puzzled 
when she presented him with these duplicates, but she waved her hands and 
said, well, things get lost in the mail. Dave Schumpert again served as notary, 
and she was feeling quite all right until she ran out of Asian and nearly died 
of shame.  
Her shame was crippling and atrocious. It mattered to her now, as it hadn't a 
week earlier, that a thousand happy travelers on the Gunnar Myrdal had 
witnessed how peculiar she and Alfred were. Everyone on the ship had 
understood that the landing at historic Gaspe was being delayed and the side 
trip to scenic Bonaventure Island was being can celed because the palsied 
man in the awful raincoat had gone where no body was supposed to go, 
becau se his wife had selfishly enjoyed herself at an investment lecture, 
because she'd taken a drug so bad that no doc tor in America could legally 
prescribe it, because she didn't believe in God and she didn't respect the law, 
because she was horribly, unspeak ably different from other people.  
Night after night she lay awake, suffered shame, and pictured the golden 
caplets. She was ashamed of lusting for these caplets, but she was also 
convinced that only they could bring relief.  
In early November she took Alfred to the Corporate Woods Med ical Complex 
for his bimonthly neurological checkup. Denise, who'd signed Alfred up for 
Axon's Phase II testing of Corecktall, had been ask ing Enid if he seemed 
"demented." Enid referred the que stion to Dr. Hedgpeth during his private 
interview with her, and Hedgpeth replied that Alfred's periodic confusion did 
suggest early Alzheimer's or Lewy -body dementia —at which point Enid 
interrupted to ask whether pos sibly Alfred's dopamine -boosters were causing 
his "hallucinations." Hedgpeth couldn't deny that this was possible. He said 
the only sure way to rule out dementia would be to put Alfred in the hospital 
for a ten -day "drug holiday."  
Enid, in her shame, didn't mention to Hedgpeth that she was lee ry of 
hospitals now. She didn't mention that there had been some raging and some 
thrashing and some cursing in the Canadian hospital, some  
4S7 
overturning of Styrofoam water pitchers and of wheeled IV -drip stands, until 
Alfred was sedated. She di dn't mention that Alfred had requested that she 
shoot him before she put him in a place like that again.  
Nor, when Hedgpeth asked how she was holding up, did she men tion her 
little Asian problem. Fearing that Hedgpeth would recognize her as a weak -
willed,  wild -eyed substance -craver, she didn't even ask him for an alternative 
"sleep aid." However, she did mention that she wasn't sleeping well. She 
stressed this, in fact: not sleeping well at all. But Hedgpeth merely suggested 
that she try a different bed. H e suggested Tylenol PM.  
It seemed unfair to Enid, as she lay in the dark beside her snoring husband, 
that a drug legally purchasable in so many other countries should be 
unavailable to her in America. It seemed unfair that many of her friends had 
"sleep ai ds" of the sort that Hedgpeth had failed to of fer her. How cruelly 
scrupulous Hedgpeth was! She could have gone to a different doctor, of 
course, and asked for a "sleep aid," but this other doctor would surely wonder 
why her own doctors weren't giving her  the drugs.  
Such was her situation when Bea and Chuck Meisner departed for six weeks 
of winter family fun in Austria. The day before the Meisners left, Enid had 
lunch with Bea at Deepmire and asked her to do her a favor in Vienna. She 
pressed into Bea's ha nds a slip of paper on which she'd copied information 
from an empty SampLpak —ASLAN 'Cruiser' (rhadamanthine citrate 88%, 3 -
methyl -rhadamanthine chloride 12%) — with the annotation Temporarily 
unavailable in U.S., I need 6 months supply.  
"Now, don't bother i f it's any trouble," she told Bea, "but if Klaus could write 
you a prescription, it would be so much easier than my doc tor trying to get 
something from overseas, so, anyway, I hope you have a wonderful time in 
my favorite country!"  
Enid couldn't have aske d such a shameful favor of anyone but Bea. Even Bea 
she dared to ask only because (a) Bea was a tiny bit dumb, and (b) Bea's 
husband had once upon a time made his own shameful insider purchase of 
Erie Belt stock, and (c) Enid felt that Chuck had never prop erly thanked or 
compensated Alfred for that inside information.  
468 
THE CORRECTIONS  
No so oner had the Meisners flown away, however, than Enid's shame 
mysteriously abated. As if an evil spell had worn off, she began to sleep better 
and think less about the drug. She brought her powers of selective 
forgetfulness to bear on the favor she'd asked of Bea. She be gan to feel like 
herself again, which was to say: optimistic.  
She bought two tickets for a flight to Philadelphia on January 15. She told her 
friends that the Axon Corporation was testing an exciting new brain therapy 
called Corecktall and t hat Alfred, because he'd sold his patent to Axon, was 
eligible for the tests. She said that Denise was being a doll and offering to let 
her and Alfred stay in Philadelphia for as long as the testing lasted. She said 
that, no, Corecktall was not a laxa tive , it was a revolutionary new treatment 
for Parkinson's disease. She said that, yes, the name was confusing, but it was 
not a laxative.  
"Tell the people at Axon," she told Denise, "that Dad has some mild 
symptoms of hallucination which his doctor says are. probably drug -related. 
Then, see, if Corecktall helps him, we can take him off the med ication, and 
the hallucinations will probably stop."  
She told not only her friends but everybody else she knew in St. Jude, 
including her butcher, her broker, and her ma ilman, that her grandson Jonah 
was coming for the holidays. Naturally she was disap pointed that Gary and 
Jonah were staying for just three days and were leaving at noon on 
Christmas, but plenty of fun could be packed into three days. She had tickets 
for t he Christmasland light show and The Nutcracker; tree -trimming, 
sledding, caroling, and a Christmas Eve church service were also on the bill. 
She dug out cookie recipes that she hadn't used in twenty years. She laid in 
eggnog.  
On the Sunday before Christmas  she awoke at 3:05 a.m. and thought: Thirty -
six hours. Four hours later she got up thinking: Thirty -two hours. Late in the 
day she took Alfred to the street -association Christmas party at Dale and 
Honey Driblett's, sat him down safely with Kirby Root, and proceeded to 
remind all her neighbors that her favorite grandson, who'd been looking 
forward all year to a Christmas in St. Jude, was arriving tomorrow 
afternoon. She located Alfred in the Dribletts' downstairs bathroom and 
argued with him unexpectedly abo ut his sup posed constipation. She took him 
home and put him to bed, erased the  
argument from her memory, and sat down in the dining room to knock off 
another dozen Christmas cards.  
Already the wicker basket for incoming greetings contained a fou r-inch stack 
of cards from old friends like Norma Greene and new friends like Sylvia Roth. 
More and more senders Xeroxed or word -processed their Christmas notes, 
but Enid was having none of this. Even if it meant being late with them, she'd 
undertaken to h andwrite a hundred notes and hand -address nearly two 
hundred envelopes. Besides her standard Two -Paragraph Note and her four -
paragraph Full Note, she had a boilerplate Short Note:  
Loved our cruise to see the autumn color in New England and maritime 
Canada.  Al took an unexpected "swim" in the Gulf of St. Lawrence but is 
feeling "ship -shape" again! Denise's super -deluxe new restaurant in Phila. 
was written up in the NY Times. Chip continued work at his NYC law firm 
and pursued investments in Eastern Europe. W e enjoyed a wonderful visit 
from Gary and our "precocious" youngest grandson Jonah. Hoping the whole 
family will be in St. Jude for Christmas —a heavenly treat for me! Love to you 
all— 
It was ten o'clock and she was shaking the cramp from her writing hand w hen 
Gary called from Philadelphia.  
"Looking forward to seeing the two of you in seventeen hours!" Enid sang 
into the telephone.  
"Some bad news here," Gary said. "Jonah's been throwing up and has a fever. 
I don't think I can take him on the plane."  
This cam el of disappointment balked at the needle's eye of Enid's willingness 
to apprehend it.  
"See how he feels in the morning," she said. "Kids get twenty -four -hour bugs, 
I bet he'll be fine. He can rest on the plane if he needs to. He can go to bed 
early and sl eep late on Tuesday!"  
"Mother."  
"If he's really sick, Gary, I understand, he can't come. But if he gets over his 
fever —" 
470 
 
"Believe me, we're all disappointed. Especially Jonah."  
"No need to make any decision right this minute. Tomorrow is a completely 
new day."  
"I'm warning you it will probably just be me."  
"Well, but, Gary, things could look very, very different in the morn ing. Why 
don't you wait and make your decision then, and  surprise me. I bet 
everything's going to work out fine!"  
It was the season of joy and miracles, and Enid went to bed full of hope.  
Early the next morning she was awakened —rewarded —by the ring ing of the 
phone, the sound of Chip's voice, the news that he was com ing home from 
Lithuania within forty -eight hours and the family would be complete on 
Christmas Eve. She was humming when she went downstairs and pinned 
another ornament on the Advent cal endar that hung on the front door.  
For as long as anyone could remember, the Tuesday ladies' group at the 
church had raised money by manufacturing Advent calendars. These 
calendars were not, as Enid would hasten to tell you, the cheap windowed 
cardboard it ems that you bought for five dollars in a cello phane sleeve. They 
were beautifully hand -sewn and reusable. A green felt Christmas tree was 
stitched to a square of bleached canvas with twelve numbered pockets across 
the top and another twelve across the bo ttom. On each morning of Advent 
your children took an ornament from a pocket —a tiny rocking horse of felt 
and sequins, or a yellow felt turtledove, or a sequin -encrusted toy soldier —
and pinned it to the tree. Even now, with her children all grown, Enid 
continued to shuffle and distribute the ornaments in their pockets every 
November 30. Only the ornament in the twenty -fourth pocket was the same 
every year: a tiny plastic Christ child in a walnut shell spray -painted gold. 
Although Enid generally fell far sho rt of fervor in her Christian beliefs, she 
was devout about this ornament. To her it was an icon not merely of the Lord 
but of her own three babies and of all the sweet baby -smelling babies of the 
world. She'd filled the twenty -fourth pocket for thirty yea rs, she knew very 
well what it contained, and still the anticipation of opening it could take her 
breath away.  
477 
"It's wonderful news about Chip, don't you think?" she asked Alfred at 
breakfast.  
Alfred was shoveling up his hamster -pellet All -Bran and drinking his 
morning drink of hot milk and water. His expression was like a per -spectival 
regression toward a vanishing point of misery.  
"Chip will be here tomorrow" Enid repeated. "Isn't that wonderful news? 
Aren't you happy?"  
Alfred consulted with  the soggy mass of All -Bran on his wandering spoon. 
"Well," he said. "If he comes."  
"He said he'd be here tomorrow afternoon," Enid said. "Maybe, if he's not too 
tired, he can go to The Nutcracker with us. I still have six tickets."  
"I am dubious," Alfred said.  
That his comments actually pertained to her questions —that in spite of the 
infinity in his eyes he was participating in a finite conversa tion —made up for 
the sourness in his face.  
Enid had pinned her hopes, like a baby in a walnut shell, on Corecktall. If 
Alfred proved to be too confused to participate in the testing, she didn't know 
what she was going to do. Her life therefore bore a strange resemblance to 
the lives of those friend s of hers, Chuck Meisner and Joe Person in particular, 
who were "addicted" to monitor ing their investments. According to Bea, 
Chuck's anxiety drove him to check quotes on his computer two or three 
times an hour, and the last time Enid and Alfred had gone out with the 
Persons, Joe had made Enid frantic by cell -phoning three different brokers 
from the restaurant. But she was the same way with Alfred: painfully attuned 
to every hope ful upswing, forever fearful of a crash.  
Her freest hour of the day came afte r breakfast. Every morning, as soon as 
Alfred had downed his cup of hot milky water, he went to the basement and 
focused on evacuation. Enid wasn't welcome to speak to him during this peak 
hour of his anxiety, but she could leave him to his own devices. Hi s colonic 
preoccupations were a madness but not the kind of madness that would 
disqualify him for Corecktall.  
Outside the kitchen window, snowflakes from an eerily blue -clouded sky 
drifted through the twigs of an unthriving dogwood that  
472                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
 
 
had been planted (this really dated it) by Chuck Meisner. Enid mixed and 
refrigerated a ham loaf for later baking and assembled a sa lad of bananas, 
green grapes, canned pineapple, marshmallows, and lemon Jell -O. These 
foods, along with twice -baked potatoes, were official St. Jude favorites of 
Jonah's and were on the menu for tonight.  
For months she'd imagined Jonah pinning the Christ c hild to the Advent 
calendar on the morning of the twenty -fourth.  
Elated by her second cup of coffee, she went upstairs and knelt by the old 
cherrywood dresser of Gary's where she kept gifts and party favors. She'd 
finished her Christmas shopping weeks ago,  but all she'd bought for Chip was 
a sale -priced brown -and-red Pendleton wool bathrobe. Chip had forfeited her 
goodwill several Christmases ago by sending her a used -looking cookbook, 
Foods of Morocco, wrapped in aluminum foil and decorated with stick -on 
pictures of coat hangers with red slashes through them. Now that he was 
coming home from Lithuania, however, she wanted to reward him to the full 
extent of her gift budget. Which was:  
Alfred: no set amount  
Chip, Denise: $100 each, plus grapefruit  
Gary, Caro line: $60 each, maximum, plus grapefruit  
Aaron, Caleb: $30 each, maximum  
Jonah (this year only): no set amount  
Having paid $55 for the bathrobe, she needed $45 worth of additional gifts 
for Chip. She rummaged in the dresser drawers. She rejected the vases in 
shopworn boxes from Hong Kong, the many matching bridge decks and score 
pads, the many thematic cocktail napkins, the really neat and really useless 
pen-and-pencil sets, the many travel alarm clocks that folded up or beeped in 
unusual ways, the shoehorn  with a telescop ing handle, the inexplicably dull 
Korean steak knives, the cork -bottomed bronze coasters with locomotives 
engraved on their faces, the ceramic 5x7 picture frame with the word 
"Memories" in glazed laven der script, the onyx turtle figurines  from Mexico, 
and the cleverly boxed kit of ribbon and wrapping paper called The Gift of 
Giving. She  
473 
 
weighed the suitability of the pewter candle snuffer and the Lucite salt -
shaker cum pepper grinder. Recalling the paucity of Chip's home fur nishings, 
she decided that the snuffer and the shaker/grinder would do just fine.  
In the season of joy and miracles, while she wrapped, she forgot about the 
urine -smelling laboratory and its noxious crickets. She was able not to care 
that Alfred had put u p the Christmas tree at a twenty -degree tilt. She could 
believe that Jonah was feeling just as healthy this morning as she was.  
By the time she'd finished her wrapping, the light in the gull -plumage winter 
sky had a midday angle and intensity. She went dow n to the basement, where 
she found the Ping -Pong table buried under green strings of lights, like a 
chassis engulfed by kudzu, and Alfred seated on the floor with electrician's 
tape, pliers, and extension cords.  
"Damn these lights!" he said.  
"Al, what are you doing on the floor?"  
"These goddamned cheap new lights!"  
"Don't worry about them. Just leave them. Let Gary and Jonah do that. 
Come upstairs and have lunch."  
The flight from Philadelphia was due in at one -thirty. Gary was going to rent 
a car and be at the house by three, and Enid intended to let Alfred sleep in the 
meantime, because tonight she would have reinforcements. Tonight, if he got 
up and wandered, she wouldn't be the only one on duty.  
The quiet in the house after lunch was of such density that it nearly stopped 
the clocks. These final hours of waiting ought to have been the perfect time to 
write some Christmas cards, a win -win occasion in which either t he minutes 
would fly by or she would get a lot of work done; but time could not be 
cheated in this way. Beginning a Short Note, she felt as if she were pushing 
her pen through molasses. She lost track of her words, wrote took an 
unexpected "swim" in an une xpected "swim," and had to throw the card 
away. She stood up to check the kitchen clock and found that five minutes 
had passed since she'd last checked. She arranged an assortment of cookies 
on a lacquered wooden holiday plate. She set a knife and a huge p ear on a 
cutting board. She  
474 
THE CORRECTIONS  
 
shook a carton of eggnog . She loaded the coffeemaker in case Gary wanted 
coffee. She sat down to write a Short Note and saw in the blank whiteness of 
the card a reflection of her mind. She went to the window and peered out at 
the bleached zoysia lawn. The mailman, struggling with  holiday volumes, was 
Coming up the walk with a mighty bundle that he pushed through the slot in 
three batches. She pounced on the mail and sorted wheat from chaff, but she 
was too distracted to open the cards. She went down to the blue chair in the 
baseme nt. 
"Al," she shouted, "I think you should get up."  
He sat up haystack -haired and empty -eyed. "Are they here?"  
"Any minute. Maybe you want to freshen up."  
"Who's coming?"  
"Gary and Jonah, unless Jonah's too sick."  
"Gary," Alfred said. "And Jonah."  
"Why don 't you take a shower'?"  
He shook his head. "No showers."  
"If you want to be stuck in that tub when they get here —" 
"I think I'm entitled to a bath, after the work I've done."  
There was a nice shower stall in the downstairs bathroom, but Al fred had 
never l iked to stand while bathing. Since Enid now refused to help him get 
out of the upstairs tub, he sometimes sat there for an hour, the water cold 
and soap -gray at his haunches, before he contrived to extricate himself, 
because he was so stubborn.  
He had bath water running in the upstairs bathroom when the long -awaited 
knock finally came.  
Enid rushed to the front door and opened it to the vision of her handsome 
elder son alone on the front stoop. He was wearing his calf skin jacket and 
holding a carry -on suitca se and a paper shopping bag. Sunlight, low and 
polarized, had found a way around the clouds, as it often did near the end of a 
winter day. Flooding the street was the pre posterous golden indoor light with 
which a minor painter might illumi nate the partin g of the Red Sea. The 
bricks of the Persons' house, the blue and purple winter clouds, and the dark 
green resinous shrubs were all so falsely vivid as to be not even pretty but 
alien, foreboding.  
"Where's Jonah?" Enid cried.  
475 
 
Gary came inside  and set his bags down. "He still has a fever."  
Enid accepted a kiss. Needing a moment to collect herself, she told Gary to 
bring his other suitcase in while he was at it.  
"This is my only suitcase," he informed her in a courtroom kind of voice.  
She stared  at the tiny bag. "That's all you brought?"  
"Look, I know you're disappointed about Jonah —" 
"How high was his fever?"  
"A hundred this morning."  
"A hundred is not a high fever!"  
Gary sighed and looked away, tilting his head to align it with the axis of the 
listing Christmas tree. "Look," he said. "Jonah's disap pointed. I'm 
disappointed. You're disappointed. Can we leave it at that? We're all 
disappointed."  
"It's just that I'm all  ready for him," Enid said. "I made his favorite dinner —" 
"I specifically warned you —" 
"I got tickets for Waindell Park tonight!"  
Gary shook his head and walked toward the kitchen. "So we'll go to the park," 
he said. "And then tomorrow Denise is here."  
"Chip too!"  
Gary laughed. "What, from Lithuania?"  
"He called this morning."  
"I'll believe that when I see it," Gary said.  
The world in the windows looked less real than Enid would have liked. The 
spotlight of sunshine coming in under the ceiling of cloud was the dream 
light of no familiar hour of the day. She had an intima tion that the family 
she'd tried to bring together wa s no longer the fam ily she remembered —that 
this Christmas would be nothing at all like the Christmases of old. But she 
was doing her best to adjust to the new reality. She was suddenly very excited 
that Chip was coming. And since Jonah's wrapped gifts wou ld now be going 
to Philadelphia with Gary, she needed to wrap some travel alarm clocks and 
pen-and-pencil sets for Caleb and Aaron to reduce the contrast in her giving. 
She could do this while she waited for Denise and Chip.  
478 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"I have so many cookies," she told Gary, who was washing his hands 
fastidiously at the kitchen sink. "I have a pear that I can slice, and some of 
that dark coffee that you kids like."  
Gary sniffed her dish towel before he dried his hands with it. Alfred beg an to 
bellow her name from upstairs.  
"Uch, Gary," she said, "he's stuck in the tub again. You go help him. I won't 
do it anymore."  
Gary dried his hands extremely thoroughly. "Why isn't he using the shower 
like we talked about?"  
"He says he likes to sit dow n." 
"Well, tough luck," Gary said. "This is a man whose gospel is tak ing 
responsibility for yourself."  
Alfred bellowed her name again.  
"Go, Gary, help him," she said.  
Gary, with ominous calm, smoothed and straightened the folded dish towel 
on its rack. "H ere are the ground rules, Mother," he said in the courtroom 
voice. "Are you listening? These are the ground rules. For the next three days, 
I will do anything you want me to do, except deal with Dad in situations he 
shouldn't be in. If he wants to climb a ladder and fall off, I'm going to let him 
lie on the ground. If he bleeds to death, he bleeds to death. If he can't get out 
of the bathtub without my help, he'll be spending Christmas in the bathtub. 
Have I made myself clear? Apart from that, I will do any thing you want me to 
do. And then, on Christmas morning, you and he and I are going to sit down 
and have a talk —" 
"ENID." Alfred's voice was amazingly loud. "SOMEBODY'S AT THE DOOR! 9 
Enid sighed heavily and went to the bottom of the stairs. "Al, it's Gary. " 
"Can you help me?" came the cry.  
"Gary, go see what he wants."  
Gary stood in the dining room with folded arms. "Did I not make my ground 
rules clear?"  
Enid was remembering things about her elder son which she liked to forget 
when he wasn't around. She cl imbed the stairs slowly, trying to work a knot 
of pain out of her hip.  
477 
"Al," she said, entering the bathroom, "I can't help you out of the tub, you 
have to figure that out yourself."  
He was sitting in two inches of water with his arm extended and his fingers 
fluttering. "Get that," he said.  
"Get what?"  
"That bottle."  
His bottle of Snowy Mane hair -whitening shampoo had fallen to the floor 
behind him. Enid knelt carefully on the bath mat , favoring her hip, and put 
the bottle in his hands. He massaged it vaguely, as though seeking purchase 
or struggling to remember how to open it. His legs were hairless, his hands 
spotted, but his shoulders were still strong.  
"I'll be damned," he said, gri nning at the bottle.  
Whatever heat the water had begun with had dissipated in the December -
cool room. There was a smell of Dial soap and, more faintly, old age. Enid 
had knelt in this exact spot thousands of times to wash her children's hair 
and rinse thei r heads with hot water from a l!/2 -quart saucepan that she 
brought up from the kitchen for that purpose. She watched her husband turn 
the shampoo bottle over in his hands.  
"Oh, Al," she said, "what are we going to do?"  
"Help me with this."  
"All right. I'll  help you."  
The doorbell rang.  
"There it is again."  
"Gary," Enid called, "see who that is." She squeezed shampoo into her palm. 
"You've got to start taking showers instead."  
"Not steady enough on my feet."  
"Here, wet your hair." She paddled a hand in the t epid water, to give Alfred 
the idea. He splashed some on his head. She could hear Gary talking to one of 
her friends, somebody female and chipper and St. Judean, Esther Root 
maybe.  
"We can get a stool for the shower," she said, lathering Alfred's hair. "We  can 
put a strong bar in there to hold on to, like Dr. Hedgpeth said we should. 
Maybe Gary can do that tomorrow."  
Alfred's voice vibrated in his skull and on up through her fingers: "Gary and 
Jonah got in all right?"  
478 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"No, just Gary," Enid said. "Jonah has a high, high fever and terri ble 
vomiting. Poor kid, he's much too sick to fly."  
Alfred winced in sympathy.  
"Lean over now and I'll rinse."  
If Alfred was trying to lean forward, it was evident only from a trembling in  
his legs, not from any change in his position.  
"You need to do much more stretching," Enid said. "Did you ever look at that 
sheet from Dr. Hedgpeth?"  
Alfred shook his head. "Didn't help."  
"Maybe Denise can teach you how to do those exercises. You might li ke that."  
She reached behind her for the water glass from the sink. She filled it and 
refilled it at the bathtub's tap, pouring the hot water over her hus band's head. 
With his eyes squeezed shut he could have been a child.  
"You'll have to get yourself out now," she said. "I won't help you."  
"I have my own method," he said.  
Down in the living room Gary was kneeling to straighten the crooked tree.  
"Who was at the door?" Enid said.  
"Bea Meisner," he said, not looking up. "There 's a gift on the mantel."  
"Bea Meisner?" A late flame of shame flickered in Enid. "I thought they were 
staying in Austria for the holiday."  
"No, they're here for one day and then going to La Jolla."  
"That's where Katie and Stew live. Did she bring anything ?" 
"On the mantel," Gary said.  
The gift from Bea was a festively wrapped bottle of something pre sumably 
Austrian.  
"Anything else?" Enid said.  
Gary, clapping fir needles from his hands, gave her a funny look. "Were you 
expecting something else?"  
"No, no," she said. "There was a silly little thing I asked her to get in Vienna, 
but I'm sure she forgot."  
Gary's eyes narrowed. "What silly little thing?"  
"Oh, nothing, just, nothing." Enid examined the bottle to see if  
anything was attached to it. She'd  survived her infatuation with Asian, she'd 
done the work necessary to forget him, and she was by no means sure she 
wanted to see the Lion again. But the Lion still had power over her. She had a 
sensation from long ago, a pleasurable apprehension of a love r's return. It 
made her miss how she used to miss Alfred.  
She chided: "Why didn't you invite her in?"  
"Chuck was waiting in their Jaguar," Gary said. "I gather they're making the 
rounds."  
"Well." Enid unwrapped the bottle —it was a Halb -Trocken Aus trian 
champagne —to be sure there was no hidden package.  
"That is an extremely sugary -looking wine," Gary said.  
She asked him to build a fire. She stood and marveled as her com petent gray -
haired son walked steadily to the woodpile, returned with a load of logs on 
one arm, deftly arranged them in the fireplace, and lit a match on the first try. 
The whole job took five minutes. Gary was doing nothing more than function 
the way a man was supposed to function, and yet, in contrast to the man Enid 
lived with, his capabi lities seemed godlike. His least gesture was glorious to 
watch.  
Along with her relief at having him in the house, though, came the awareness 
of how soon he would leave again.  
Alfred, wearing a sport coat, stopped in the living room and visited with Gary 
for a minute before repairing to the den for a high -decibel dose of local news. 
His age and his stoop had taken two or three inches off his height, which not 
long ago had been the same as Gary's.  
While Gary, with exquisite motor control, hung the lights on t he tree, Enid 
sat by the fire and unpacked the liquor cartons in which she kept her 
ornaments. Everywhere she'd traveled she'd spent the bulk of her pocket 
money on ornaments. In her mind, while Gary hung them, she traveled back 
to a Sweden populated by st raw reindeers and little red horses, to a Norway 
whose citizens wore authentic Lapp reindeer -skin boots, to a Venice where all 
the animals were made of glass, to a dollhouse Germany of enameled wood 
Santas and angels, to an Austria of wooden soldiers and t iny Alpine churches. 
In Belgium the doves of peace were made of chocolate and wrapped 
decoratively in foil, and in France the gendarme dolls and artiste dolls were 
impeccably dressed,  
480 
THE CORRECTIOHS  
and in Switzerland the bronze bells tinkle d above overtly religious mini -
creches. Andalusia was atwitter with gaudy birds; Mexico jangled with its 
painted tin cutouts. On the high plateaux of China, the noise less gallop of a 
herd of silk horses. In Japan, the Zen silence of its lac quered abstrac tions.  
Gary hung each ornament as Enid directed. He was seeming differ ent to 
her—calmer, more matoor, more deliberate —until she asked him to do a little 
job for her tomorrow.  
"Installing a bar in the shower is not a 'little job,' " he replied. "It would have 
made sense a year ago, but it doesn't now. Dad can use the bathtub for 
another few days until we deal with this house."  
"It's still four weeks before we fly to Philadelphia ," Enid said. "I want him to 
get in the habit of using the shower. I want you to buy a stool and put a bar in 
there tomorrow, so it's done."  
Gary sighed. "Are you thinking you and Dad can actually stay in this house?"  
"If Corecktall helps him —" 
"Mother, he 's being evaluated for dementia. Do you honestly believe —" 
"For non -drug -related dementia."  
"Look, I don't want to puncture your bubble —" 
"Denise has it all set up. We have to try it."  
"So, and then what?" Gary said. "He's miraculously cured, and the two o f you 
live here happily ever after?"  
The light in the windows had died entirely. Enid didn't understand why her 
sweet, responsible oldest child, with whom she'd felt such a bond from his 
infancy onward, became so angry, now, when she came to him in need. S he 
unwrapped a Styrofoam ball that he'd decorated with fabric and sequins 
when he was nine or ten. "Do you remember this?"  
Gary took the ball. "We made these in Mrs. Ostriker's class."  
"You gave it to me."  
"Did I?"  
"You said you'd do anything I asked tomor row," Enid said. "This is what I'm 
asking."  
481 
 
"All right! All right!" Gary threw his hands in die air. "I'll buy the stool! I'll 
install the bar!"  
After dinner he took the Olds from the garage, and the three of them went to 
Christmasland.  
From  the back seat Enid could see the undersides of clouds catch ing urban 
light; the patches of clear sky were darker and riddled with stars. Gary piloted 
the car down narrow suburban roads to the lime stone gates of Waindell Park, 
where a long queue of cars,  trucks, and minivans was waiting to enter.  
"Look at all the cars," Alfred said with no trace of his old impa tience.  
By charging admission to Christmasland, the county helped defray the cost of 
mounting this annual extravaganza. A county park ranger took the Lamberts' 
ticket and told Gary to extinguish all but his parking lights. The Olds crept 
forward in a line of darkened vehicles that had never looked more like 
animals than they did now, collectively, in their humble procession through 
the park.  
For mos t of the year, Waindell was a tired place of burnt grass, brown ponds, 
and unambitious limestone pavilions. In December, by day, it looked its very 
worst. Garish cables and utilitarian power lines crisscrossed the lawns. 
Armatures and scaffolds were expose d in their flimsiness, their 
provisionality, their metallic knobbiness of joint. Hun dreds of trees and 
shrubs were draped in light strings, limbs sagging as if hammered by a 
freezing rain of glass and plastic.  
By night the park was Christmasland. Enid dre w breath sharply as the Olds 
crept up a hill of light and across a landscape made luminous. Just as the 
beasts were said to speak on Christmas Eve, so the natural order of the 
suburbs seemed overturned here, the ordinarily dark land alive with light, the 
ordinarily lively road dark with crawling traffic.  
The mild gradients of WaindelPs slopes and the intimacy of its ridgelines' 
relations with the sky were midwestern. So, it seemed to Enid, were the hush 
and patience of the drivers; so were the isolated clos e-knit frontier 
communities of oaks and maples. She'd spent the last eight Christmases 
exiled in the alien East, and now, at last, she felt at  
482 
THE CORRECTIONS  
home. She imagined being buried in this landscape. She was happy to think 
of her bones resting on a hillside such as this.  
There came scintillant pavilions, luminous reindeer, pendants and necklaces 
of gathered photons, electro -pointillist Santa Glaus face s, a glade of towering 
glowing candy canes.  
"Lot of work involved here," Alfred commented.  
"Well, I'm sorry Jonah couldn't come after all," Gary said, as if, until now, he 
had not been sorry.  
The spectacle was nothing more than lights in darkness, but Enid  was 
speechless. So often credulity was asked of you, so seldom could you summon 
it absolutely, but here at Waindell Park she could. Some body had set out to 
delight all comers, and Enid was delighted. And tomorrow Denise and Chip 
came, tomorrow was The Nu tcracker, and on Wednesday they would take the 
Christ baby from its pocket and pin the walnut cradle to the tree: she had so 
much to look forward to.  
In the morning, Gary drove over to Hospital City, the close -in suburb where 
St. Jude's big medical centers  were concentrated, and held his breath among 
the eighty -pound men in wheelchairs and the five -hundred -pound women in 
tentlike dresses who clogged the aisles of Central Discount Medical Supply. 
Gary hated his mother for sending him here, but he recognized how lucky he 
was in comparison to her, how free and advantaged, and so he set his jaw and 
kept maximum dis tance from the bodies of these locals who were loading up 
on syringes and rubber gloves, on butterscotch bedside candies, on 
absorptive pads in every  imaginable size and shape, on jumbo 144 -packs of 
get-well cards and CDs of flute music and videos of visualization exercises 
and disposable plastic hoses and bags that connected to harder plastic inter -
faces sewn into living flesh.  
Gary's problem with ill ness in aggregate, aside from the fact that it involved 
large quantities of human bodies and that he didn't like human bodies in 
large quantities, was that it seemed to him low -class. Poor people smoked, 
poor people ate Krispy Kreme doughnuts by the dozen.  Poor people were 
made pregnant by close relatives. Poor people prac - 
ticed poor hygiene and lived in toxic neighborhoods. Poor people with their 
ailments constituted a subspecies of humanity that thankfully re -> mained 
invisible to Gary except i n hospitals and in places like Central Discount 
Medical. They were a dumber, sadder, fatter, more resignedly suffering 
breed. A Diseased underclass that he really, really liked to keep away from.  
However, he'd arrived in St. Jude feeling guilty about sever al cir cumstances 
that he'd concealed from Enid, and he'd vowed to be a good son for three 
days, and so in spite of his embarrassment he pushed through the crowds of 
the lame and halt, entered Central Discount Medical's vast furniture 
showroom, and looked for a stool for his father to sit on while he showered.  
A full -symphonic version of the most tedious Christmas song ever written, 
"Little Drummer Boy," dripped from hidden speakers in the showroom. The 
morning outside the showroom's plate -glass windows was  brilliant, windy, 
cold. A sheet of newsprint wrapped itself around a parking meter with erotic -
looking desperation. Awnings creaked and automotive mud flaps shivered.  
The wide array of medical stools and the variety of afflictions to which they 
attested m ight have upset Gary had he not been able to make aesthetic 
judgments.  
He wondered, for example, why beige. Medical plastic was usually beige; at 
best, a sickly gray. Why not red? Why not black? Why not teal?  
Maybe the beige plastic was intended to ensure that the furniture be used for 
medical purposes only. Maybe the manufacturer was afraid that, if the chairs 
were too handsome, people would be tempted to buy them for nonmedical 
purposes.  
There was a problem to avoid, all right: too many people wanting to buy your 
product!  
Gary shook his head. The idiocy of these manufacturers.  
He picked out a sturdy, low aluminum stool with a wide beige seat. He 
selected a heavy -duty (beige!) gripping bar for th e shower. Mar veling at the 
gouge -level pricing, he took these items to the checkout  
484 
THE CORRECTIONS  
counter, where a friendly midwestern girl, possibly evangelical (she had a 
brocade sweater and feather -cut bangs), showed the bar codes to a laser 
beam and remarked to Gary, in a downstate drawl, that these alu minum 
chairs were really a super product. "So lahtweight, practically indestructible," 
she said. "Is it for your mom or your dad?"  
Gary resented invasions of his privacy and refused the girl the satis faction of 
an answer. He did, however, nod.  
"Our older folks get shaky in the shower at a certain point. Guess it happens 
to us all, eventually." The young philosopher swiped Gary's AmEx through a 
groove. "You home for the holidays, helpin' out a little bit?"  
"You know what these stools would really be good for," Gary said, "would be 
to hang yourself. Don't you think?"  
Life drained from the girl's smile. "I don't know about that."  
"Nice and light —easy to kick away."  
"Sign this, please, sir."  
He had to fight the wind to push the Exit door open. The wind had teeth 
today, it bit right through his calfskin jacket. It was a wind unchecked by any 
serious topography between the Arctic and St. Jude.  
Driving north toward the airport, with the low sun m ercifully be hind him, 
Gary wondered if he'd been cruel to the girl. Possibly he had. But he was 
under stress, and a person under stress, it seemed to him, had a right to be 
strict in the boundaries he established for himself — strict in his moral 
accountin g, strict about what he would and wouldn't do, strict about who he 
was and who he wasn't and whom he would and wouldn't talk to. If a perky, 
homely evangelical girl insisted on talking, he had a right to choose the topic.  
He was aware, nevertheless, that if the girl had been more attrac tive, he 
might have been less cruel.  
Everything in St. Jude strove to put him in the wrong. But in the months 
since he'd surrendered to Caroline (and his hand had healed nicely, thank 
you, w ith hardly a scar), he'd reconciled himself to being the villain in St. 
Jude. When you knew in advance that your mother would consider you the 
villain no matter what you did, you lost your  
 
485 
 
incentive to play by her rules. You asserted your o wn rules. You did whatever 
it took to preserve yourself. You pretended, if need be, that a healthy child of 
yours was sick.  
The truth about Jonah was that he'd freely chosen not to come to St. Jude. 
This was in accordance with the terms of Gary's surrender  to Caroline in 
October. Holding five nonrefundable plane tickets to St. Jude, Gary had told 
his family that he wanted everyone to come along with him for Christmas, 
but that nobody would be forced to go. Caroline and Caleb and Aaron had all 
instantly and loudly said no thank you; Jonah, still under the spell of his 
grandmother's enthusiasm, declared that he would "very much like" to go. 
Gary never actually promised Enid that Jonah was coming, but he also never 
warned her that he might not.  
In November Caro line bought four tickets to see the magician Alain 
Gregarius on December 22 and another four tickets for The Lion King in New 
York City on December 23. "Jonah can come along if he's here," she 
explained, "otherwise Aaron or Caleb can bring a friend." Gary wanted to ask 
why she hadn't bought tickets for the week after Christmas, which would 
have spared Jonah a difficult choice. Ever since the October surrender, 
however, he and Caroline had been enjoying a second honeymoon, and 
although it was understood that  Gary, as a du tiful son, would be going to St. 
Jude for three days, a shadow fell on his domestic bliss whenever he made 
reference to the trip. The more days that elapsed without mention of Enid or 
Christmas, the more Caroline seemed to want him, the more  she included 
him in her private jokes with Aaron and Caleb, and the less depressed he felt. 
Indeed, the topic of his depression hadn't come up once since the morning of 
Alfred's fall. Silence on the topic of Christmas seemed a small price to pay for 
such domestic harmony.  
And for a while the treats and attention that Enid had promised Jonah in St. 
Jude seemed to outweigh the attractions of Alain Gregarius and The Lion 
King. Jonah mused aloud at the dinner table about Christ -masland and the 
Advent calendar that Grandma talked so much about; he ignored, or didn't 
see, the winks and smiles that Caleb and Aaron were exchanging. But 
Caroline more and more openly encouraged the  
48B                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
older boys to laugh at their grandparents and to tell stories about Al fred's 
cluelessness ("He called it Intendo!") and Enid's puritanism ("She asked what 
the show was ratedl") and Enid's parsimony (" There were two green beans 
and she wrapped them up in foil!"), and Gary, since his surrender, had begun 
to join in the laughter himself ("Grandma is funny, isn't she?"), and finally 
Jonah became self -conscious about his plans. At the age of eight, he fell 
under the tyranny of Cool. First he ceased to bring up Christmas at the dinner 
table, and then when Caleb with his trademark semi -irony asked if he was 
looking forward to Christmasland, Jonah replied, in an effortfully wicked 
voice, "It's proba bly really stupid."  
"Lots of fat people in big cars driving around in the dark," Aaron said.  
"Telling each other how wunnerful it is," Caroline said.  
"Wunnerful, wunnerful," Caleb said.  
"You shouldn't make fun of your grandmother," Gary said.  
"They're not making fun of her," Caroline said.  
"Right, we're not," Caleb said. "It's just that people are funny in St. Jude. 
Aren't they, Jonah?"  
"People certainly are very large there," Jonah said.  
On Saturday night, three days ago, Jonah had thrown up after din ner and 
gone to bed with a mild fever. By Sunday evening, his color and appetite were 
back to normal, and Caroline played her final trump. For Aaron's birthday, 
earlier in the month, she'd bought an expensive com puter game, God Project 
II, in which player s designed and operated or ganisms to compete in a 
working ecosystem. She hadn't allowed Aaron and Caleb to start the game 
until classes ended, and now, when they finally did start, she insisted that 
they let Jonah be Microbes, because Microbes, in any eco system, had the 
most fun and never lost.  
By bedtime on Sunday, Jonah was entranced with his team of killer bacteria 
and looked forward to sending them into battle the next day. When Gary 
woke him on Monday morning and asked if he was coming to St. Jude, Jo nah 
said he'd rather stay home.  
"It's your choice," Gary said. "But it would mean a lot to your grandma if you 
came."  
487 
"What if it's not fun, though?"  
"There's never a guarantee that something's going to be fun," Gary said. "But 
you'll make Gr andma happy. That's one thing I can guaran tee."  
Jonah's face clouded. "Can I think about it for an hour?"  
"OK, one hour. But then we have to pack and go."  
The end of the hour found Jonah deeply immersed in God Project II. One 
strain of his bacteria had blinded eighty percent of Aaron's small hoofed 
mammals.  
"It's OK not to go," Caroline assured Jonah. "Your personal choice is what 
matters here. This is your vacation."  
Nobody will be forced to go.  
"I'll say it one more time," Gary  said. "Your grandma is really look ing forward 
to seeing you."  
To Caroline's face there came a desolation, a deep tearful stare, reminiscent 
of the troubles in September. She rose without a word and left the 
entertainment room.  
Jonah's answer came in a vo ice not much louder than a whisper: "I think I'm 
going to stay here."  
If it had still been September, Gary might have seen in Jonah's de cision a 
parable of the crisis of moral duty in a culture of consumer choice. He might 
have become depressed. But he'd been down that road now and he knew 
there was nothing for him at the end of it.  
He packed his bag and kissed Caroline. "I'll be happy when you're back," she 
said.  
In a strict moral sense Gary knew he hadn't done anything wrong. He'd never 
promised Enid tha t Jonah was coming. It was simply to spare himself an 
argument that he'd lied about Jonah's fever.  
Similarly, to spare Enid's feelings, he hadn't mentioned that in the six 
business days since the IPO, his five thousand shares of Axon Cor poration 
stock, fo r which he'd paid $60,000, had risen in value to $118,000. Here 
again, he'd done nothing wrong, but given the pitiful size of Alfred's patent -
licensing fee from Axon, concealment seemed the wisest policy.  
The same also went for the little packag e Gary had zipped into the inside 
pocket of his jacket.  
Jets were dropping from the bright sky, happy in their metal skins, while he 
jockeyed through the crush of senior traffic converging at the airport. The 
days before Christmas were the St. Jude airport 's finest hour —its raison 
d'etre, almost. Every garage was full and every walk way thronged.  
Denise was right on time, however. Even the airlines conspired to protect her 
from the embarrassment of a late arrival or an inconve nienced brother. She 
was stand ing, per family custom, at a little -used gate on the departure level. 
Her overcoat was a crazy garnet woolen thing with pink velvet trim, and 
something about her head seemed dif ferent to Gary —more makeup than 
usual, maybe. More lipstick. Each time he'd se en Denise in the last year 
(most recently at Thanksgiving), she'd looked more emphatically unlike the 
person he'd always imagined that she would grow up to be.  
When he kissed her, he smelled cigarettes.  
"You've become a smoker," he said, making room in the  trunk for her suitcase 
and shopping bag.  
Denise smiled. "Unlock the door, I'm freezing."  
Gary flipped open his sunglasses. Driving south into glare, he was nearly 
sideswiped while merging. Road aggression was encroaching in St. Jude; 
traffic no longer mov ed so sluggishly that an eastern driver could pleasurably 
slalom through it.  
"I bet Mom's happy Jonah's here," Denise said.  
"As a matter of fact, Jonah is not here."  
Her head turned sharply. "You didn't bring him?"  
"He got sick."  
"I can't believe it. You d idn't bring him!"  
She seemed not to have considered, even for a moment, that he might be 
telling the truth.  
"There are five people in my house," Gary said. "As far as I know, there's only 
one in yours. Things are more complicated when you have multiple 
responsibilities."  
489 
 
 
 
"I'm just sorry you had to get Mom's hopes'up."  
"It's not my fault if she chooses to live in the future."  
"You're right," Denise said. "It's not your fault. I just wish it hadn't 
happened."  
"Speaking of Mom," Gary said, "I want to tell you a very weird thing. But you 
have to promise not to tell her."  
"What weird thing?"  
"Promise you won't tell her."  
Denise so promised, and Gary unzipped the inner pocket of his jacket and 
showed her the packag e that Bea Meisner had given him the day before. The 
moment had been fully bizarre: Chuck Meisner's Jaguar in the street, idling 
amid cetacean puffs of winter exhaust, Bea Meisner standing on the Welcome 
mat in her embroidered green loden coat while she du g from her purse a 
seedy and much -handled little packet, Gary setting down the wrapped bottle 
of champagne and taking delivery of the contraband. "This is for your 
mother," Bea had said. "But you must tell her that Klaus says to be very 
careful with this. He didn't want to give it to me at all. He says it can be very, 
very addictive, which is why I only got a little bit. She wanted six months, but 
Klaus would only give me one. So you tell her to be sure and talk to her 
doctor. Maybe, Gary, you should even h old on to it until she does that. 
Anyway, have a wonderful Christmas" —here the Jaguar's horn beeped —"and 
give our best love to everyone."  
Gary recounted this to Denise while she opened the packet. Bea had folded 
up a page torn from a German magazine and ta ped it shut. On one side of the 
page was a bespectacled German cow promoting ultrapasteurized milk. 
Inside were thirty golden pills.  
"My God." Denise laughed. "Mexican A."  
"Never heard of it," Gary said.  
"Club drug. Very young -person."  
"And Bea Meisner is delivering it to Mom at our front door."  
"Does Mom know you took it?"  
"Not yet. I don't even know what this stuff does."  
Denise reached over with her smoky ringers and put a pill near his mouth. 
"Try one."  
490                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
Gary jerked his head away. His sister seemed to be on some drug herself, 
something stronger than nicotine. She was greatly happy or greatly unhappy 
or a dangerous co mbination of the two. She was wear ing silver rings on three 
fingers and a thumb.  
"Is this a drug you've tried?" he said.  
"No, I stick with alcohol."  
She folded up the packet and Gary took control of it again. "I want to make 
sure you're with me on this," he said. "Do you agree that Mom should not be 
receiving illegal addictive substances from Bea Meisner?"  
"No," Denise said. "I don't agree. She's an adult and she can do what she 
wants. And I don't think it's fair to take her pills without telling her. If y ou 
don't tell her, I will."  
"Excuse me, I believe you promised not to," Gary said.  
Denise considered this. Salt -splashed embankments were flying past.  
"OK, maybe I promised," she said. "But why are you trying to run her life?"  
"I think you'll see," he said , "that the situation is out of hand. I think you'll 
see that it's about time somebody stepped in and ran her life."  
Denise didn't argue with him. She put on shades and looked at the towers of 
Hospital City on the brutal south horizon. Gary had hoped to fi nd her more 
cooperative. He already had one "alternative" sibling and he didn't need 
another. It frustrated him that people could so happily drop out of the world 
of conventional expectations; it undercut the pleasure he took in his home 
and job and family ; it felt like a unilateral rewriting, to his disadvantage, of 
the rules of life. He was especially galled that the latest defector to the 
"alternative" was not some flaky Other from a family of Others or a class of 
Others but his own stylish and talented sister, who as recently as September 
had excelled in con ventional ways that his friends could read about in the 
New York Times. Now she'd quit her job and was wearing four rings and a 
flaming coat and reeking of tobacco . . .  
Carrying the aluminum stool, he followed her into the house. He compared 
her reception by Enid to the reception he'd received the day  
491 
before. He took note of the duration of the hug, the lack of instant crit icism, 
the smiles all around.  
Enid  cried: "I thought maybe you'd run into Chip at the airport and all three 
of you would be coming home!"  
"That scenario is implausible in eight different ways," Gary said.  
"He told you he'd be here today?" Denise said.  
"This afternoon," Enid said. "Tomorrow  at the latest."  
"Today, tomorrow, next April," Gary said. "Whatever."  
"He said there was some trouble in Lithuania," Enid said.  
While Denise went to find Alfred, Gary fetched the morning Chronicle from 
the den. In a box of international news sandwiched be tween lengthy features 
("New 'Peticures' Make Dogs 'Red in Claw' " and "Are Ophthalmologists 
Overpaid? —Docs Say No, Optometrists Say Yes") he located a paragraph 
about Lithuania: civil unrest following disputed parliamentary elections and 
attempted assass ination of President Vitkunas . . . three -fourths of the 
country 'without electricity . . . rival para military groups clashing on the 
streets of Vilnius . . . and the airport — 
"The airport is closed," Gary read aloud with satisfaction. "Mother? Did you 
hear me?"  
"He was already at the airport yesterday," Enid said. "I'm sure he got out."  
"Then why hasn't he called?"  
"He was probably running to catch a flight."  
At a certain point Enid's capacity for fantasy became physically painful to 
Gary. He opened his wallet and presented her with the re ceipt for the shower 
stool and safety bar.  
"I'll write you a check later," she said.  
"How about now, before you forget."  
Muttering and soughing, Enid complied with his wishes.  
Gary examined the check. "Why is this dated December twenty -six?"  
"Because that's the soonest you could possibly deposit it in Philadelphia."  
Their skirmishing continued through lunch. Gary slowly drank a beer and 
slowly drank a second, relishing the distress that he was caus - 
492 
ing Enid as she told him for a third time and a fourth time that he'd better get 
started on that shower project. When he finally stood up from the table, it 
occurred to him that his impulse to run Enid's life was the logical response to 
her own insistence on running his.  
The safely shower bar was a fifteen -inch length of beige enamel pipe with 
flanged elbows at each end. The stubby screws included in the package might 
have sufficed to attach the bar to plywood but were use less with ceramic tile. 
To secure the bar, he would have to run six -inch bolts through the wall into 
the little closet behind the shower.  
Down in Alfred's workshop, he was able to find masonry bits fo r the electric 
drill, but the cigar boxes that he remembered as cornucopias of useful 
hardware seemed mainly to contain corroded, orphaned screws and strike 
plates and toilet -tank fittings. Certainly no six -inch bolts.  
Departing for the hardware store, wea ring his I'm -a-jerk smile, he noticed 
Enid at the dining -room windows, peering out through a sheer curtain.  
"Mother," he said. "I think it's important not to get your hopes up about 
Chip."  
"I just thought I heard a car door in the street."  
Fine, go ahead, Gary thought as he left the house, fixate on whoever isn't 
here and oppress whoever is.  
On the front walk he passed Denise, who was returning from the 
supermarket with groceries. "I hope you're letting Mom pay for those," he 
said.  
His sister laughed in his  face. "What difference does it make to you?"  
"She's always trying to get away with things. It burns me up."  
"So redouble your vigilance," Denise said, proceeding toward the house.  
Why, exactly, had he been feeling guilty? He'd never promised to bring Jona h 
on the trip, and although he was currently ahead by $58,000 on his Axon 
investment he'd worked hard for those shares and he'd taken all the risk, and 
Bea Meisner herself had urged him not to give Enid the addictive drug; so 
why had he felt guilty?  
As he drove, he imagined the needle on his cranial -pressure gauge  
493 
creeping clockwise. He was sorry he'd offered his services to Enid. Given the 
brevity of his visit, it was stupid to spend the afternoon on a job she should 
have paid a handyman to d o. 
At the hardware store, he stood in the checkout line behind the fat test and 
slowest people in the central tier of states. They'd come to buy marshmallow 
Santas, packages of tinsel, Venetian blinds, eight -dollar blow -dryers, and 
holiday -theme pot -holder s. With their bratwurst fin gers they dug for exact 
change in tiny purses. White cartoon puffs of steam shot out of Gary's ears. 
All the fun things he could be doing in stead of waiting half an hour to buy six 
six-inch bolts assumed ravishing form in his i magination. He could be 
visiting the Collector's Room at the Museum of Transport gift shop, or 
sorting out the old bridge and track drawings from his father's early career at 
the Midland Pacific, or searching the under -porch storeroom for his long -
missing O-gauge model railroad equipment. With the lifting of his 
"depression," he'd developed a new interest, hobbylike in its intensity, in 
framable and collectible railroad memorabilia, and he could happily have 
spent the whole day — the whole week! — pursuing it ...  
Back at the house, as he was heading up the walk, he saw the sheer curtains 
part, his mother peering out again. Inside, the air was steamy and dense with 
the smell of foods that Denise was baking, simmering, and browning. Gary 
gave Enid the receipt for the bolts, which she regarded as the token of 
hostility that it was.  
"You can't afford four dollars and ninety -six cents?"  
"Mother," he said. "I'm doing the work like I promised. But this is not my 
bathroom. This is not my safety bar."  
"I'll get the mo ney for you later."  
"You might forget."  
"Gary, I will get the money for you later.''''  
Denise, in an apron, followed this exchange from the kitchen door way with 
laughing eyes.  
When Gary made his second trip to the basement, Alfred was snor ing in the 
big blue chair. Gary proceeded into the workshop, and here he was stopped in 
his tracks by a new discovery. A shotgun in a canvas case was leaning against 
the lab bench. He didn't remember having seen  
494 
THE CORRECTIONS  
it here earlier. Could he hav e somehow failed to notice it? Ordinarily the gun 
was kept in the under -porch storeroom. He was sorry indeed to see that it 
had moved.  
Do I let him shoot himself?  
The question was so clear in his mind that he almost spoke it out loud. And 
he considered. It  was one thing to intervene on behalf of Enid's safety and 
confiscate her drugs; there was life and hope and pleasure worth saving in 
Enid. The old man, however, was kaput.  
At the same time, Gary had no wish to hear a gunshot and come down and 
wade into th e gore. He didn't want his mother to go through this, either.  
And yet, horrible though the mess would be, it would be followed by a huge 
quantum uptick in the quality of his mother's life.  
Gary opened the box of shells on the bench and saw that none were missing. 
He wished that someone else, not he, had noticed that Alfred had moved the 
gun. But his decision, when it came, was so clear in his mind that he did 
speak it out loud. Into the dust y, uric, non -reverberative silence of the 
laboratory he said: "If that's what you want, be my guest. I ain't gonna stop 
you."  
Before he could drill holes in the shower, he had to clear the shelves of the 
little bathroom closet. This in itself was a substan tial job. Enid had saved, in a 
shoe box, every cotton ball she'd ever taken from a bot tle of aspirin or 
prescription medication. There were five hundred or a thousand cotton balls. 
There were petrified half -squeezed tubes of oint ment. There were plastic 
pitchers and utensils (in colors even worse, if possible, than beige) from 
Enid's admissions to the hospital for foot surgery, knee surgery, and 
phlebitis. There were dear little bottles of Mercurochrome and Anbesol that 
had dried up sometime in the 1960s.  There was a paper bag that Gary 
quickly, for the sake of his composure, threw to the back of a high shelf 
because it appeared to contain ancient menstrual belts and pads.  
The daylight was fading by the time he had the closet empty and was ready to 
drill s ix holes. It was then that he discovered that the old masonry bits were 
as dull as rivets. He leaned into the drill with all his weight, the tip of the bit 
turned bluish -black and lost its temper, and the  
 
495 
 
old drill began to smoke. Sweat cam e pouring down his face and chest.  
Alfred chose this moment to step into the bathroom. "Well, look at this," he 
said.  
"You got some pretty dull masonry bits here," Gary said, breathing heavily. "I 
should have bought some new ones while I was at the store."  
"Let me see," Alfred said.  
It hadn't been Gary's intention to attract the old man and the agi tated twin 
fingered animals that were his advance guard. He shied from the incapacity 
and greedy openness of these hands, but Alfred's eyes were fixed on the dri ll 
now, his face bright with the possibility of solving a problem. Gary 
relinquished the drill. He wondered how his father could even see what he 
was holding, the drill shook so violently. The old man's fingers crawled 
around its tarnished surface, groping  like eye less worms.  
"You got it on Reverse," he said.  
With the ridged yellow nail of his thumb, Alfred pushed the polar ity switch to 
Forward and handed the drill back to Gary, and for the first time since his 
arrival, their eyes met. The chill that ran through Gary was only partly from 
his cooling sweat. The old man, he thought, still had a few lights on upstairs. 
Alfred, indeed, looked downright happy: happy to have fixed a thing and even 
happier, Gary suspected, to have proved that he was smarter, in t his tiny 
instance, than his son.  
"We can see why I'm not an engineer," Gary said.  
"What's the project?"  
"I'm putting in this bar to hold on to. Are you going to use the shower if we 
put a stool and a bar in here?"  
"I don't know what they have planned for m e," Alfred said as he was leaving.  
That was your Christmas present, Gary told him silently. Flipping that switch 
was your present from me.  
An hour later he had the bathroom back together and was in a fully nasty 
mood again. Enid had second -guessed his siti ng of the bar, and Alfred, when 
Gary invited him to try the new stool, had announced that he preferred a 
bath.  
496 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"I've done my part and now I'm done," Gary said in the kitchen, pouring 
liquor. "Tomorrow I have a few things that /want to do."  
"It's a wonderful improvement in the bathroom," Enid said.  
Gary poured heavily. Poured and poured.  
"Oh, Gary," she said, "I thought we might open that champagne Bea brought 
us." 
"Oh, let's not," said Denise, who had baked a stollen, a coffee cake, and two 
loaves of cheese bread and was preparing, if Gary was not mis taken, a dinner 
of polenta and braised rabbit. Safe to say it was the first time this kitchen had 
ever seen a rabbit.  
Enid returned to hovering by the dining -room windows. "I'm wor ried that he 
isn't calling," she said.  
Gary joined her by the window, his glial cells purring with the first sweet 
lubrication of his drink. He asked if she was familiar with Occam's razor.  
"Occam's razor," he said with cocktail sententiousness, "invites us to choose 
the simpler of two explanations for a phenomenon."  
"Well, what's your point," Enid said.  
"My point," he said, "is that it's possible that Chip hasn't called you because 
of someth ing complicated that we know nothing about. Or it could be because 
of something very simple and well known to us, namely, his incredible 
irresponsibility."  
"He said he was coming and he said he would call," Enid answered flatly. "He 
said, I'm coming home."  
"All right. Fine. Stand at the window. It's your choice."  
Because he was expected to drive to The Nutcracker, Gary couldn't do as 
much drinking as he might have wished before dinner. He there fore did quite 
a bit more as soon as the family came home from the bal let and Alfred 
headed upstairs, practically at a run, and Enid bedded down in the den with 
the intention of letting her children handle any problems in the night. Gary 
drank scotch and checked in with Caroline. He drank scotch and searched the 
hous e for Denise and found no sign of her. From his own room he fetched his 
Christmas packages and arranged them under the tree. He was giving 
everybody the same gift: a  
437 
 
leather -bound copy of the Ail -Time Lambert Two Hundred album. He'd 
pushed hard to get all the printing done in time for the holiday, and now that 
the album was complete, he planned to dismantle the darkroom, spend some 
of his Axon profits, and build a mode l-railroad setup on the second floor of 
the garage. It was a hobby that he'd chosen for himself, rather than having it 
chosen for him, and as he laid his scotchy head on the cold pillow and turned 
out the light in his old St. Judean bedroom, he was gripped  by an ancient 
excitement at the prospect of running trains through mountains of papier -
mache, across high Popsicle -stick trestles . . .  
He dreamed ten Christmases in the house. He dreamed of rooms and people, 
rooms and people. He dreamed that Denise was n ot his sis ter and was going 
to murder him. His only hope was the shotgun in the basement. He was 
examining this shotgun, making sure that it was loaded, when he felt an evil 
presence behind him in the workshop. He turned around and didn't 
recognize Denise . The woman he saw was some other woman whom he had 
to kill or be killed by. And there was no resistance in the shotgun's trigger; it 
dangled, limp and futile. The gun was on Reverse, and by the time he got it 
on Forward, she was coming to kill him — 
He wo ke up needing to pee.  
The darkness in his room was relieved only by the glow of the digital clock 
radio, whose face he didn't check because he didn't want to know how early it 
still was. He could dimly see the loaf of Chip's old bed by the opposite wall. 
The silence of the house felt momentary and unpeaceful. Recently fallen.  
Honoring this silence, Gary eased himself out of bed and crept toward the 
door; and here the terror struck him.  
He was afraid to open the door.  
He strained to hear what was happening o utside it. He thought he could hear 
vague shiftings and creepings, faraway voices.  
He was afraid to go to the bathroom because he didn't know what he would 
find there. He was afraid that if he left his room he would find the wrong 
person, his mother maybe,  or his sister or his father, in his bed when he came 
back.  
498 
THE CORRECTIONS  
He was convinced that people were moving in the hallway. In his clouded, 
imperfect wakefulness, he connected the Denise who'd disap peared before he 
went to bed to the Denise -like phantom who was try ing to kill him in his 
dream.  
The possibility that this phantom killer was even now lurking in the hall 
seemed only ninety percent fantastical.  
It was safer all around, he thought, to stay in his room and pee into one of the 
decorative Austrian beer steins on his dresser.  
But what if his tinkling attracted the attention of whoever was creeping 
around outside his door?  
Moving on tiptoe, he took a beer stein into the closet that he'd shared with 
Chip ever since Denise was given the smaller bedroom and the boys were put 
together. He pulled the closet door shut afte r him, crowded up against the 
dry-cleaned garments and the bursting Nord strom bags of miscellany that 
Enid had taken to storing here, and re lieved himself into the beer stein. He 
lipped a fingertip ever the rim so that he could feel if he was going to ov erflow 
it. Just when the warmth of rising urine had reached this fingertip, his 
bladder finally emptied. He lowered the stein to the closet floor, took an 
envelope from a Nord strom bag, and covered the mouth of the receptacle.  
Quietly, quietly, then, he l eft the closet and returned to his bed. As he was 
swinging his legs off the floor, he heard Denise's voice. It was so distinct and 
conversational that she might have been in the room with him. She said, 
"Gary?"  
He tried not to move, but the bedsprings crea ked.  
"Gary? Sorry to bother you. Are you awake?"  
He had little choice now but to get up and open the door. Denise was right 
outside it, wearing white flannel pajamas and standing in a shaft of light from 
her own bedroom. "Sorry," she said. "Dad's been call ing for you."  
"Gary!" came Alfred's voice from the bathroom by her room.  
Gary, heart thudding, asked what time it was.  
"I have no idea," she said. "He woke me up calling Chip's name. Then he 
started calling yours. But not mine. I think he's more comfort able with you."  
499 
Cigarettes on her breath again.  
"Gary? Gary!" came the call from the bathroom.  
"Fuck this," Gary said.  
"It could be his medication."  
"Bullshit."  
From the bathroom: "Gary!"  
"Yeah, Dad, OK, I'm coming."  
Enid's bodiless voice floated up from the bottom of the stairs. "Gary, help 
your father."  
"Yeah, Mom. I'm all over it. You just go back to sleep."  
"What does he want?" Enid said.  
"Just go back to bed."  
Out in the hall he could smell the Christmas tree and the fireplace. He tapped 
on the bathroom door and opened it. His father was stand ing in the bathtub, 
naked from the waist down, with nothing but psy chosis in his face. Until now, 
Gary had seen faces like this mainly at the bus stops and the Burger King 
bathrooms of central Philadelphia.  
"Gary," Alfred said, "they're all over the place." The old man pointed at the 
floor with a trembling finger. "Do you see him?"  
"Dad, you're hallucinating."  
"Get him! Get him!"  
"You're hallucinating and it's time to get out of the tub and go back to bed."  
"Do you see them?"  
"You're hallucinating. Go back to bed."  
This went on for a while, ten or fifteen minutes, before Gary was able to lead 
Alfred out of the bathroom. A light was  burning in the mas ter bedroom, and 
several unused diapers were spread out on the floor. It seemed to Gary that 
his father was having a dream while he was awake, a dream as vivid as Gary's 
own dream about Denise, and that the awak ening that he, Gary, had  
accomplished in half a second was taking his father half an hour.  
"What is 'hallucinate'?" Alfred said finally.  
"It's like you're dreaming when you're awake."  
Alfred winced. "I'm concerned about this."  
500 
THE CORRECTIONS  
•I- 
"Well. Rightly so."  
"Help me with the diaper."  
"Yes, all right," Gary said.  
"I'm concerned that something is wrong with my thoughts."  
"Oh, Dad."  
"My head doesn't seem to work right."  
"I know. I know."  
But Gary himself was infected, there in the middle of the night, by his fa ther's 
disease. As the two of them collaborated on the problem of the diaper, which 
his father seemed to regard more as a lunatic conver sation piece than as an 
undergarment to be donned, Gary, too, had a sensation of things dissolving 
around him, of a nig ht that consisted of creepings and shirtings and 
metamorphoses. He had the sense that there were many more than two 
people in the house beyond the bed room door; he sensed a large population 
of phantoms that he could glimpse only dimly.  
Alfred's polar hair  was hanging in his face when he lay down. Gary pulled the 
blanket up over his shoulder. It was hard to believe that he'd been fighting 
with this man, taking him seriously as an adversary, three months ago.  
His clock radio showed 2:55 when he returned to h is room. The house was 
quiet again, Denise's door closed, the only sound an eighteen -wheeler on the 
expressway half a mile away. Gary wondered why his room smelled —faintly —
like somebody's cigarette breath.  
But maybe it wasn't cigarette breath. Maybe it was  that Austrian beer stein 
full of piss that he'd left on the closet floor!  
Tomorrow, he thought, is for me. Tomorrow is Gary's Recreation Day. And then on 
Thursday morning we're going to blow this house wide open. We 're going to put an 
end to this charade . 
After Brian Callahan had fired Denise, she'd carved herself up and put the 
pieces on the table. She told herself a story about a daughter in a family so 
hungry for a daughter that it would have eaten her alive if she hadn't run 
away. She told herself a s tory about a daughter who, in her desperation to 
escape, had taken refuge in whatever temporary shelters  
she could find —a career in cooking, a marriage to Emile Berger, an old -
person's life in Philadelphia, an affair with Robin Passafaro. But nat urally 
these refuges, chosen in haste, proved unworkable in the long run. By trying 
to protect herself from her family's hunger, the daughter accomplished just 
the opposite. She ensured that when her family's hunger reached its peak her 
life would fall ap art and leave her without a spouse, without kids, without a 
job, without responsibilities, without a defense of any kind. It was as if, all 
along, she'd been conspiring to make herself available to nurse her parents.  
Meanwhile her brothers had conspired to  make themselves unavail able. Chip 
had fled to Eastern Europe and Gary had placed himself un der Caroline's 
thumb. Gary, it was true, did "take responsibility" for his parents, but his idea 
of responsibility was to bully and give orders. The burden of lis tening to Enid 
and Alfred and being patient and under standing fell squarely on the 
daughter's shoulders. Already Denise could see that she would be the only 
child in St. Jude for Christmas dinner and the only child on duty in the weeks 
and months and year s after that. Her parents had better manners than to ask 
her to come and live with them, but she knew that this was what they wanted. 
As soon as she'd en rolled her father in Phase II testing of Corecktall and 
offered to house him, Enid had unilaterally ce ased hostilities with her. Enid 
had never again mentioned her adulterous friend Norma Greene. She'd never 
asked Denise why she'd "quit" her job at the Generator. Enid was in trouble, 
her daughter was offering to help, and so she could no longer afford the 
luxury of finding fault. And now the time had come, accord ing to the story 
that Denise told herself about herself, for the chef to carve herself up and feed 
the pieces to her hungry parents.  
Lacking a better story, she almost bought this one. The only tro uble was she 
didn't recognize herself in it.  
When she put on a white blouse, an antique gray suit, red lipstick, and a black 
pillbox hat with a little black veil, then she recognized her self. When she put 
on a sleeveless white T -shirt and boy's jeans and tied her hair back so tightly 
that her head ached, she recognized herself. When she put on silver jewelry, 
turquoise eye shadow, corpse -lip nail  
 
502 
THE CORRECTIONS  
polish, a searing pink jumper, and orange sneakers, she recognized her self as 
a living person and was breathless with the happiness of living.  
She went to New York to appear on the Food Channel and visit one of those 
clubs for people like herself who were  starting to Figure It Out and needed 
practice. She stayed with Julia Vrais in Julia's outstanding apartment on 
Hudson Street. Julia reported that in the discovery phase of her divorce 
proceedings she'd learned that Gitanas Misevicius had paid for this 
apartment with funds embezzled from the Lithuanian gov ernment.  
"Gitanas's lawyer claims it was an 'oversight,' " Julia told Denise, "but I find 
that hard to believe."  
"Does this mean you're going to lose the apartment?"  
"Well, no," Julia said, "in fact this makes it more likely that I'll get to keep it 
without paying anything. But still, I feel so awful! My apart ment rightfully 
belongs to the people of Lithuania!"  
The temperature in Julia's extra bedroom was about ninety. She gave Denise 
a foot -thick down co mforter and asked if she wanted a blanket, too.  
"Thanks, this looks like plenty," Denise said.  
Julia gave her flannel sheets and four pillows with flannel cases. She asked 
how Chip was doing in Vilnius.  
"It sounds like he and Gitanas are the best of friend s." 
"I hate to think what the two of them are saying about me," Julia mused 
happily.  
Denise said that it wouldn't surprise her if Chip and Gitanas avoided the topic 
altogether.  
Julia frowned. "Why wouldn't they talk about me?"  
"Well, you did painfully dump  both of them."  
"But they could talk about how much they hate me!"  
"I don't think anybody could hate you."  
"Actually," Julia said, "I was afraid you'd hate me for breaking up with Chip."  
"No, I never had anything at stake there."  
Clearly relieved to hear t his, Julia confided to Denise that she was  
503 
 
now being dated by a lawyer, nice but bald, with whom Eden Procure had set 
her up. "I feel safe with him," she said. "He's so confident in restaurants. And 
he's got tons of work, so he's not always after me for, you know, favors."  
"Really," Denise said, "the less you tell me about things with you and Chip, 
the happier I'll be."  
When Julia then asked if Denise was seeing anybody, it shouldn't have been 
so hard to tell her about Robin Passafaro, but it  was very hard. Denise didn't 
want to make her friend uncomfortable, didn't want to hear her voice go 
small and soft with sympathy. She wanted to soak up Julia's company in its 
familiar innocence, and so she said, "I'm seeing nobody."  
Nobody except, the next night, at a sapphic pasha's den two hun dred steps 
from Julia's apartment, a seventeen -year -old just off the bus from 
Plattsburgh, New York, with a drastic hairstyle and twin 800s on her recent 
SATs (she carried the official ETS pri ntout like a certificate of sanity or 
possibly of madness) and then, the night after that, a religious -studies major 
at Columbia whose father (she said) operated the largest sperm bank in 
Southern California.  
This accomplished, Denise went to a midtown stu dio and taped her guest 
appearance on Pop Food for Now People, making lambsmeat ravioli and 
other Mare Scuro standards. She met with some of the New York ers who'd 
tried to hire her away from Brian —a couple of Central Park West trillionaires 
seeking a feud al relationship with her, a Munich banker who believed she 
was the Weifiwurst Messiah who could restore German cooking to its former 
glory in Manhattan, and a young restau rateur, Nick Razza, who impressed 
her by itemizing and breaking down each of the mea ls he'd eaten at Mare 
Scuro and the Generator. Razza came from a family of purveyors in New 
Jersey and already owned a popular mid -range seafood grill on the Upper 
East Side. Now he wanted to jump into the Smith Street culinary scene in 
Brooklyn with a res taurant that starred, if possible, Denise. She asked him for 
a week to think it over.  
On  a  sunny  fall   Sunday  afternoon  she  took  the   subway  out  
504 
THE CORRECTIONS  
to Brooklyn. The borough seemed to her a Philadelphia rescued by adjace ncy 
to Manhattan. In half an hour she saw more beautiful, interesting -looking 
women than she saw in half a year in South Philly. She saw their brownstones 
and their nifty boots.  
Returning home by Amtrak, she regretted having hidden for so long in 
Philadelp hia. The little subway station under City Hall was as empty and 
echoing as a battleship in mothballs; every floor and wall and beam and 
railing was painted gray. Heartbreaking the little train that finally pulled up, 
after fifteen minutes, with a populatio n of riders who in their patience and 
isolation were less like commuters than like emergency -room supplicants. 
Denise surfaced from the Federal Street station among sycamore leaves and 
burger wrappers racing in waves down the Broad Street sidewalk, swirlin g up 
against the pissy fa£ades and barred windows and scattering among the 
Bondo -fendered cars that were parked at the curb. The urban vacancy of 
Philadelphia, the hegemony of wind and sky here, struck her as enchanted. 
As Narnian. She loved Philadelphia t he way she loved Robin Passafaro. Her 
heart was full and her senses were sharp, but her head felt liable to burst in 
the vacuum of her solitude.  
She unlocked the door of her brick penitentiary and collected her mail from 
the floor. Among the twenty people who'd left messages on her machine were 
Robin Passafaro, breaking her silence to ask if Denise might like to have a 
"little chat," and Emile Berger, politely informing her that he'd accepted 
Brian Callahan's offer of the job of executive chef at the Genera tor and was 
moving back to Philadelphia.  
At this news from Emile, Denise kicked the tiled south wall of her kitchen 
until she was afraid she'd broken her toe. She said, "I've got to get out of 
here!"  
But getting out was not so easy. Robin had had a month t o cool off and 
conclude that if sleeping with Brian was a sin then she was guilty of it also. 
Brian had rented a loft for himself in Olde City, and Robin, as Denise had 
suspected, was dead set on keeping custody of Sinead and Erin. To 
strengthen her case, she stayed put in the big house on Panama Street and 
rededicated herself to motherhood. But she was free during  
school hours and all day on Saturday when Brian took the girls out, and on 
mature reflection she decided that these free hours might b est be spent in 
Denise's bed.  
Denise still couldn't say no to the drug of Robin. She still wanted Robin's 
hands on her and at her and around her and inside her, that prepositional 
smorgasbord. But there was something in Robin, proba bly her propensity to 
blame herself for harms that other people inflicted on her, that invited 
betrayal and abuse. Denise went out of her way to smoke in bed now, because 
cigarette smoke irritated Robin's eyes. She dressed to the hilt when she met 
Robin for lunch, she did her be st to highlight Robin's dowdiness, and she 
held the gaze of anyone, female or male, who turned to look at her. She 
visibly winced at the volume of Robin's voice. She behaved like an adolescent 
with a parent except that an adolescent couldn't help rolling h er eyes whereas 
Denise's contempt was a deliberate, calculated form of cruelty. She shushed 
Robin angrily when they were in bed and Robin began to hoot self -
consciously. She said, "Keep your voice down. Please. Please." Exhilarated by 
her own cruelty, she stared at Robin's Gore -Tex raingear until Robin was pro -
voked to ask why. Denise said, "I'm just wondering if you're ever tempted to 
be slightly less uncool." Robin replied that she was never go ing to be cool and 
so she might as well be comfortable. Denis e allowed her lip to curl.  
Robin was eager to bring her lover back into contact with Sinead and Erin, 
but Denise, for reasons that she herself could only halfway fathom, refused to 
see the girls. She couldn't imagine looking them in the eye; the very thought 
of four -girl domesticity sickened her.  
"They adore you," Robin said.  
"I can't do it."  
"Because I don't feel like it. That's why."  
"All right. Whatever."  
"How long is 'whatever' going to be your word? Are you ever going to retire 
it? Or is it your word for life?"  
"Denise, they adore you," Robin squeaked. "They miss you. And you used to 
love to see them."  
506 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"Well, I'm not in a kid kind of mood. I don't know if I'll ever be, frankly. So 
please stop asking me."  
By now most people would have got the message; most people would have 
cleared out and never come back. But Robi n, it transpired, had a taste for 
cruel treatment. Robin said, and Denise believed her, that she would never 
have left Brian if Brian hadn't left her. Robin liked to be licked and stroked 
within a micron of coming and then abandoned and made to beg. And De nise 
liked to do this to her. Denise liked to get out of bed and get dressed and go 
downstairs while Robin waited for sexual release, because she wouldn't cheat 
and touch herself. Denise sat in the kitchen and read a book and smoked 
until Robin, humiliated , trembling, came down and begged. Denise's 
contempt then was so pure and so strong, it was almost better than sex.  
And so it went. The more Robin agreed to be abused, the more Denise 
enjoyed abusing her. She ignored Nick Razza's phone messages. She stayed  in 
bed until two in the afternoon. Her social cigarette habit bloomed into 
craving. She indulged fifteen years' accumulated laziness; she lived on her 
savings account. Every day, she considered all the work she had to do to 
prepare the house for her paren ts' arrival —putting a handle in the shower, 
carpeting the staircases, buying furniture for the living room, finding a better 
kitchen table, moving her bed down from the third floor and setting it up in 
the guest room —and concluded that she lacked the energ y. Her life consisted 
of waiting for the ax to fall. If her parents were coming for six months, there 
was no point in starting something else. She had to get all her slacking -off 
done now.  
What exactly her father thought about Corecktall was difficult to k now. 
The otve time she asked Kim directly, otv the phone, he didn't answer.  
"AL?" Enid prompted. "Denise wants to know HOW YOU FEEL .ABOUT 
CORECKTALL."  
Alfred's voice was sour. "You'd think they could have found a better name 
than that."  
"It's a completely different spelling," Enid said. "Denise wants to know if 
you're EXCITED ABOUT THE TREATMENT." Silence.  
507  
 
"Al, tell her how excited you are."  
"I find that my affliction gets a little worse every week. I can't see that 
another  drug is going to make much difference."  
"Al, it's not a drug, it's a radical new therapy that uses your patent!"  
"I've learned to put up with a certain amount of optimism. So, we will stick to 
the plan."  
"Denise," Enid said, "I can do lots to help out. I can make all the meals and 
do all the laundry. I think it will be a great adventure! It's so wonderful that 
you're offering."  
Denise couldn't imagine six months with her parents in a house and a city she 
was done with, six months of invisibility as the acc ommodat ing and 
responsible daughter that she could barely pretend to be. She'd made a 
promise, however; and so she took her rage out on Robin.  
On the Saturday night before Christmas she sat in her kitchen and blew 
smoke at Robin while Robin maddened her b y trying to cheer her up.  
"You're giving them a great gift," Robin said, "by inviting them to stay with 
you."  
"It would be a gift if I weren't a mess," Denise said. "But you should only offer 
what you can actually deliver."  
"You can deliver it," Robin said . "I'll help you. I can spend morn ings with 
your dad, and give your mom a break, and you can go off by yourself, and do 
whatever you want. I'll come three or four mornings a week."  
To Denise Robin's offer only made the prospect of those mornings bleaker 
and more suffocating.  
"Do you not understand?" she said. "I hate this house. I hate this city. I hate 
my life here. I hate family. I hate home. I'm ready to leave. Pm not a good 
person. And it only makes it worse to pretend I am."  
"I think you're a good per son," Robin said.  
"I treat you like garbage! Have you not noticed?"  
"It's because you're so unhappy."  
Robin came around the table and tried to lay a hand on her; Denise elbowed 
it aside. Robin tried again, and this time Denise caught her squarely in the 
cheek with the knuckles of her open hand.  
508                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
Robin backed away, her face crimson, as if she were bleeding on the inside. 
"You hit me," she said.  
"I'm aware of that."  
"You hit me rather hard. Why did you do that?"  
"Because I don't want you here. I don't want to be part of your life. I don't 
want to be  part of anybody's life. I'm sick of watching myself be cruel to you."  
Interconnecting flywheels of pride and love were spinning behind Robin's 
eyes. It was a while before she spoke. "OK, then," she said. "I'll leave you 
alone."  
Denise did nothing to stop her from leaving, but when she heard the front 
door close she understood that she'd lost the only person who could have 
helped her when her parents came to town. She'd lost Robin's company, her 
comforts. Everything she'd spurned a minute earlier she wanted  back.  
She flew to St. Jude.  
On her first day there, as on the first day of every visit, she warmed to her 
parents' warmth and did whatever her mother asked her to. She waved off the 
cash Enid tried to give her for the groceries. She re frained from commenting 
on the four -ounce bottle of rancid yellow glue that was the only olive oil in 
the kitchen. She wore the lavender synthetic turtleneck and the matronly 
gold -plate necklace that were re cent gifts from her mother. She effused, 
spontan eously, about the ado lescent ballerinas in The Nutcracker, she held 
her father's gloved hand as they crossed the regional theater's parking lot, she 
loved her parents more than she'd ever loved anything; and the minute they 
were both in bed she changed he r clothes and fled the house.  
She paused in the street, a cigarette on her lip, a matchbook (Dean 6" Trish * 
June 13, 1987) trembling in her fingers. She hiked to the field behind the 
grade school where she and Don Armour had once sat and smelled cattails 
and verbena; she stamped her feet, rubbed her hands, watched the clouds 
occult the constellations, and took deep fortifying breaths of selfhood.  
Later in the night, she undertook a clandestine operation on her mother's 
behalf, entering Gary's bedroom while  he was occupied with  
503 
 
Alfred, unzipping the inside pocket of his leather jacket, replacing the 
Mexican A with a handful of Advils, and spiriting Enid's drug away to a safer 
place before she finally, good daughter, fell asleep.  
On her second day in St. Jude, as on the second day of every visit, she woke 
up angry. The anger was an autonomous neurochemical event; no stopping it. 
At breakfast she was tortured by every word her mother said. Browning the 
ribs and soaking the sauerkraut according to  ancestral custom, rather than in 
the modern style she'd developed at the Generator, made her angry. (So 
much grease, such sacrifice of texture.) The bradykinetic languor of Enid's 
electric stove, which hadn't both ered her the day before, made her angry. The 
hundred -and-one refrig erator magnets, puppy -dog sentimental in their 
iconography and so feeble in their pull that you could scarcely open the door 
without send ing a snapshot of Jonah or a postcard of Vienna swooping to the 
floor, filled her with rage . She went to the basement to get the ancestral ten -
quart Dutch oven, and the clutter in the laundry -room cabinets made her 
furious. She dragged a trash can in from the garage and began to fill it with 
her mother's crap. This was arguably helpful to her mo ther, and so she went 
at it with abandon. She threw away the Korean barfle -berries, the fifty most 
obviously worthless plastic flowerpots, the assort ment of sand -dollar 
fragments, and the sheaf of silver -dollar plants whose dollars had all fallen 
off. She  threw away the wreath of spray -painted pinecones that somebody 
had ripped apart. She threw away the brandy -pumpkin "spread" that had 
turned a snottish gray -green. She threw away the Neolithic cans of hearts of 
palm and baby shrimps and miniature Chinese c orncobs, the turbid black 
liter of Romanian wine whose cork had rotted, the Nixon -era bottle of Mai 
Tai mix with an oozing crust around its neck, the collection of Paul Masson 
Chablis carafes with spider parts and moth wings at the bottom, the 
profoundly c orroded bracket for some long -lost wind chimes. She threw away 
the quart glass bottle of Vess Diet Cola that had turned the color of plasma, 
the ornamental jar of brandied kumquats that was now a fantasia of rock 
candy and amorphous brown gunk, the smelly thermos whose broken inner 
glass tinkled when she shook it, the mildewed half -peck produce basket full 
of smelly yogurt cartons, the hurricane lanterns sticky with  
510 
THE CORRECTIONS  
oxidation and brimming with severed moth wings, the lost empir es of florist's 
clay and florist's tape that hung together even as they crumbled and rusted . . 
. 
At the very back of the closet, in the cobwebs behind the bot tom shelf, she 
found a thick envelope, not old -looking, with no post age on it. The envelope 
was addressed to the Axon Corporation, 24 East Industrial Serpentine, 
Schwenksville, PA. The return addressee was Alfred Lambert. The words 
SEND CERTIFIED were also on the face.  
Water was running in the little half -bathroom by her father's labo ratory, the 
toilet tank refilling, faint sulfurous odors in the air. The door to the lab was 
ajar and Denise knocked on it.  
"Yes," Alfred said.  
He was standing by the shelves of exotic metals, the gallium and bismuth, 
and buckling his belt. She showed him the envelope a nd told him where she'd 
found it.  
Alfred turned it over in his shaking hands, as if an explanation might 
magically occur to him. "It's a mystery," he said.  
"Can I open it?"  
"You may do as you wish."  
The envelope contained three copies of a licensing agreem ent dated 
September 13, signed by Alfred, and notarized by David Schumpert.  
"What is this doing on the floor of the laundry -room closet?" Denise said.  
Alfred shook his head. "You'd have to ask your mother."  
She went out to the bottom of the stairs and rais ed her voice. "Mom? Can you 
come down here for a second?"  
Enid appeared at the top of the stairs, wiping her hands on a dish towel. 
"What is it? Can't you find the pot?"  
"I found the pot, but can you come down here?"  
Alfred, in the lab, was holding the Axo n documents loosely, not reading them. 
Enid appeared in the doorway with guilt on her face. "What?"  
"Dad wants to know why this envelope was in the laundry -room closet."  
511 
 
"Give me that," Enid said. She snatched the documents from Alfred and 
crumpled them in her fist. "This has all been taken care of. Dad signed 
another set of agreements and they sent us a check right away. This is 
nothing to worry about."  
Denise narrowed her eyes. "I thought you said you'd sent these in. When we 
were in New York, at the beginning of October. You said you'd sent these in."  
"I thought I had. But they were lost in the mail."  
"In the maiir  
Enid waved her hands vaguely. "Well, t hat's where I thought they were. But I 
guess they were in the closet. I must have set a stack of mail down there, 
when I was going to the post office, and then this fell down behind. You 
know, I can't keep track of every last thing. Sometimes things get lo st, Denise. 
I have a big house to take care of, and some times things get lost."  
Denise took the envelope from Alfred's workbench. "It says 'Send Certified.' If 
you were at the post office, how did you not notice that something you 
needed to send Certified  was missing? How did you not notice that you 
weren't filling out a Certified Mail slip?"  
"Denise." Alfred's voice had an angry edge. "That's enough now."  
"I don't know what happened," Enid said. "It was a busy time for me. It's a 
complete mystery to me, a nd let's just leave it that way. Be cause it doesn't 
matter. Dad got his five thousand dollars just fine. It doesn't matter."  
She further crumpled the licensing agreements and left the labora tory.  
Tm developing Garyitis, Denise thought.  
"You shouldn't be so hard on your mother," Alfred said.  
"I know. I'm sorry."  
But Enid was exclaiming in the laundry room, exclaiming in the Ping -Pong -
table room, returning to the workshop. "Denise," she cried, "you've got the 
whole closet completely torn up! What on earth a re you doing in there?"  
"I'm throwing food away. Food and other rotten junk."  
"All right, but why now? We have the whole weekend if you want  
 
512 
THE CORRECTIONS  
to help me clean some closets out. It's wonderful if you want to help me. But 
not today. Let's not get into it today."  
"It's bad food, Mom. If you leave it long enough, it turns to poison. Anaerobic 
bacteria will kill you."  
"Well, get it cleaned up now, and let's do the rest on the weekend. We don't 
have time for that today. I want you to  work on dinner so it's all ready and 
you don't have to think about it, and then I really want you to help Dad with 
his exercises, like you said you would!"  
"I will do that."  
"Al," Enid shouted, leaning past her, "Denise wants to help you with your 
exercis es after lunch!"  
He shook his head as if with disgust. "As you wish."  
Stacked up on one of the old family bedspreads that had long served as a 
dropcloth were wicker chairs and tables in early stages of scraping and 
painting. Lidded coffee cans were cluster ed on an open section of newspaper; 
a gun in a canvas case was by the workbench.  
"What are you doing with the gun, Dad?" Denise said.  
"Oh, he's been meaning to sell that for years," Enid said. "AL, ARE YOU 
EVER GOING TO SELL THAT GUN?"  
Alfred seemed to run this sentence through his brain several times in order to 
extract its meaning. Very slowly, he nodded his head. "Yes," he said. "I will 
sell the gun."  
"I hate having it in the house," Enid said as she turned to leave. "You know, 
he nev er used it. Not once. I don't think it's ever been fired."  
Alfred came smiling at Denise, making her retreat toward the door. "I will 
finish up in here," he said.  
Upstairs it was Christmas Eve. Packages were accumulating be neath the tree. 
In the front yar d the nearly bare branches of the swamp white oak swung in a 
breeze that had shifted to more snow -threatening directions; the dead grass 
snagged dead leaves.  
Enid was peering out through the sheer curtains again. "Should I be worried 
about Chip?"  
"I would worry that he's not coming," Denise said, "but not that he's in 
trouble."  
513 
"The paper says rival factions are fighting for control of central Vilnius."  
"Chip can take care of himself."  
"Oh, here," Enid said, leading Denise to the front door, "I want you to hang 
the last ornament on the Advent calendar."  
"Mother, why don't you do that."  
"No, I want to see you do it."  
The last ornament was the Christ baby in a walnut shell. Pinning it to t he tree 
was a task for a child, for someone credulous and hopeful, and Denise could 
now see very clearly that she'd made a program of steeling herself against the 
emotions of this house, against the satura tion of childhood memory and 
significance. She could not be the child to perform this task.  
"It's your calendar," she said. "You should do it."  
The disappointment on Enid's face was disproportionately large. It was an 
ancient disappointment with the refusal of the world in general and her 
children in part icular to participate in her preferred enchant ments. "I guess 
I'll ask Gary if he'll do it," she said with a scowl.  
"I'm sorry," Denise said.  
"I remember you used to love pinning on the ornaments, when you were a 
little girl. You used to love it. But if y ou don't want to do it, you don't want to 
do it."  
"Mom." Denise's voice was unsteady. "Please don't make me."  
"If I'd known it would seem like such a chore," Enid said, "I never would have 
asked you."  
"Let me watch you do it!" Denise pleaded.  
Enid shook he r head and walked away. "I'll ask Gary when he gets back from 
shopping."  
"I'm so sorry."  
She went outside and sat on the front steps smoking. The air had a disturbed 
southern snowy flavor. Down the street Kirby Root was winding pine rope 
around the post of  his gas lamp. He waved and she waved back.  
"When did you start smoking?" Enid asked her when she came inside.  
514 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"About fifteen years ago."  
"I don't mean to criticiz e," Enid said, "but it's a terrible habit for your health. 
It's bad for your skin, and frankly, it's not a pleasant smell for others."  
Denise, with a sigh, washed her hands and began to brown the flour for the 
sauerkraut gravy. "If you're going to come and  live with me," she said, "we 
need to get some things clear."  
"I said I wasn't criticizing."  
"One thing we need to be clear about is that I'm having a hard time. For 
example, I didn't quit the Generator. I was fired."  
"Fired?"  
"Yes. Unfortunately. Do you w ant to know why?"  
"No!"  
"Are you sure?"  
"Yes!"  
Denise, smiling, stirred more bacon grease into the bottom of the Dutch 
oven.  
"Denise, I promise you," her mother said, "we will not be in your way. You 
just show me where the supermarket is, and how to use yo ur washer, and 
then you can come and go as you please. I know you have your own life. I 
don't want to disrupt anything. If I could see any other way to get Dad into 
that program, believe me, I would do it. But Gary never invited us, and I don't 
think Carol ine would want us anyway."  
The bacon fat and the browned ribs and the boiling kraut smelled good. The 
dish, as prepared in this kitchen, bore little relation to the high -art version 
that she'd plated for a thousand strangers. The Gener ator's ribs and the 
Generator's monkfish had more in common than the Generator's ribs and 
these homemade ribs had. You thought you knew what food was, you thought 
it was elemental. You forgot how much restaurant there was in restaurant 
food and how much home was in homemade.  
She said to her mother: "Why aren't you telling me the story of Norma 
Greene?"  
"Well, you got so angry with me last time," Enid said.  
"1 was mainly mad at Gary."  
515 
 
"My only concern is that you not be hurt like Norma'was. I want to see you 
happ y and settled."  
"Mom, I'm never going to get married again."  
"You don't know that."  
"Yes, in fact, I do know that."  
"Life is full of surprises. You're still very young and very darling."  
Denise put more bacon fat into the pot; there was no reason to hold back 
now. She said, "Are you listening to me? I'm quite certain that I will never get 
married again."  
But a car door had slammed in the street and Enid was running into the 
dining room to part the sheer curtains.  
"Oh, it's Gary," she said, disappointed. "Just Gary."  
Gary breezed into the kitchen with the railroad memorabilia that he'd bought 
at the Museum of Transport. Obviously refreshed by a morning to himself, he 
was happy to indulge Eni d by pinning the Christ baby to the Advent calendar; 
and, as quickly as that, Enid's sym pathies shifted away from her daughter 
and back to her son. She crowed about the beautiful job that Gary done in the 
downstairs shower and what a huge improvement the stool there 
represented. Denise miserably finished the dinner preparations, assembled a 
light lunch, and washed a mountain of dishes while the sky in the windows 
turned fully gray.  
After lunch she went to her room, which Enid had finally redeco rated into 
near -perfect anonymity, and wrapped presents. (She'd bought clothes for 
everyone; she knew what people liked to wear.) She uncrum -pled the Kleenex 
that contained thirty sunny caplets of Mexican A and considered wrapping 
them up as a gift for Enid, but she had to respect the limits of her promise to 
Gary. She balled the caplets back into the Kleenex, slipped out of her room 
and down the stairs, and stuffed the drug into the freshly vacated twenty -
fourth pocket of the Advent calen dar. Everybody else was in t he basement. 
She was able to glide back upstairs and shut herself in her room as if she'd 
never left.  
When she was young, when Enid's mother had browned the ribs in the 
kitchen and Gary and Chip had brought home their unbelievably beautiful 
girlfriends and everybody's idea of a good time was to buy Denise a lot of 
presents, this had been the longest aftern oon of the year.  
516 
THE CORRECTIONS  
An obscure natural law had forbidden whole -family gatherings before 
nightfall; people had scattered to wait in separate rooms. Sometimes, as a 
teenager, Chip had taken mercy on the last child in the house and played 
chess or Monopoly with her. When she got a little older, he'd brought her 
along to the mall with his girlfriend of the moment. There was no greater 
bliss for her at ten and twelve than to be so included: to take instruction from 
Chip in the evils of  late capitalism, to gather cou -turial data on the girlfriend, 
to study the length of the girlfriend's bangs and the height of her heels, to be 
left alone for an hour at the book store, and then to look back, from the top of 
the hill above the mall, on the  silent slow choreography of traffic in the 
faltering light.  
Even now it was the longest afternoon. Snowflakes a shade darker than the 
snow -colored sky had begun to fall in quantity. Their chill found its way past 
the storm windows, it skirted the flows an d masses of furnace -heated air 
from the registers, it came right at your neck. Denise, afraid of getting sick, 
lay down and pulled a blanket over her self.  
She slept hard, with no dreams, and awoke —where? what time? what day? —
to angry voices. Snow had webb ed the corners of the win dows and frosted the 
swamp white oak. There was light in the sky but not for long.  
Al, Gary went to ALL that trouble — 
/ never asked him to!  
Well, can 'tyou try it at least once? After all the work he did yesterday?  
I am entitled t o a bath if I want to take a bath.  
Dad, it's only a matter of time before you fall on the stairs and break your neck!  
I am not asking anyone for help.  
You're damn right you're not! Because I have forbidden Mom —-forbidden her —
to go anywhere near that bathtu b— 
Al, please, just try the shower — 
Mom, forget it, let him break his neck, we'd all be better off -Gary — 
The voices were coming closer as the contretemps moved up the stairs. 
Denise heard her father's heavy tread pass her door. She put her  
 
 
577  
 
glasses on and opened the door just as Enid, slow on her bad hip, reached the 
top of the stairs. "Denise, what are you doing?"  
"I took a nap."  
"Go talk to your father. Tell him it's important that he try the shower that 
Gary did so much work on. He'll listen to you."  
The depth of her sleep and the manner of her awakening had put Denise out 
of phase with external reality; the scene in the hall and the scene in the hall 
windows had faint antimatter shadows; sounds were at once too loud and 
barely au dible. "Why —" she said. "Why are we mak ing an issue of this 
today?"  
"Because Gary's leaving tomorrow and I want him to see if the shower's going 
to work for Dad."  
"And tell me again what's wrong with the bath?"  
"He gets stuck. And he's so bad on the stair s." 
Denise closed her eyes, but this substantially worsened the phase -sync 
problem. She opened them.  
"Oh, plus, and Denise," Enid said, "you haven't worked with him on his 
exercises yet like you promised!"  
"Right. I'll do that."  
"Do it now, before he gets cleaned up. Here, I'll get you the sheet from Dr. 
Hedgpeth."  
Enid limped back down the stairs, and Denise raised her voice. "Dad?"  
No answer.  
Enid came halfway up the stairs and pushed through the rails of the banister 
a violet s heet of paper ("MOBILITY IS GOLDEN") on which stick figures 
illustrated seven stretching exercises. "Really teach him," she said. "He gets 
impatient with me, but he'll listen to you. Dr. Hedgpeth keeps asking if Dad's 
doing his exercises. It's very importa nt that he really learn these. I had no 
idea you were sleeping all this time."  
Denise took the instruction sheet into the master bedroom and found Alfred 
in the doorway of his closet, naked from the waist down.  
"Whoa, Dad, sorry," she said, retreating.  
"Wh at is it?"  
"We need to work on your exercises."  
518 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"I'm already undressed."  
"Just put some pajamas on. Loose clothing is better anyway."  
It took her five minutes to calm him down and stretch him out on his back on 
the bed in his wool shirt and his pajama bottoms; and here at last the truth 
came pouring out.  
The first exercise required that Alfred take his right knee in his hands and 
draw it toward his chest, and then do the same with his left knee. Denise 
guided his wayward hands to his right knee, and although she was dismayed 
by how rigid he was getting, he was able, with her help, to stretch his hip past 
ninety degrees.  
"Now do your left knee," she said.  
Alfred put his hands on his right knee again and pulled it toward his chest . 
"That's great," she said. "But now try it with your left."  
He lay breathing hard and did nothing. He wore the expression of a man 
suddenly remembering disastrous circumstances.  
"Dad? Try it with your left knee."  
She touched his left knee, to no avail. In  his eyes she saw a desper ate wish for 
clarification and instruction. She moved his hands to his left knee, and the 
hands immediately fell off. Possibly his rigidity was worse on the left side? 
She put his hands back on his knee and helped him raise it.  
If anything, he was more flexible on the left.  
"Now you try it," she said.  
He grinned at her, breathing like someone very scared. "Try what."  
"Put your hands on your left knee and lift it."  
"Denise, I've had enough of this."  
"You'll feel a lot better if you can do a little stretching," she said. "Just do 
what you just did. Put your hands on your left knee and raise it."  
The smile she gave him came reflected back as confusion. His eyes met hers 
in silence.  
"Which is my left? "h e said.  
She touched his left knee. "This one."  
"And what do I do?"  
"Put your hands on it and pull it toward your chest."  
His eyes wandered anxiously, reading bad messages on the ceiling.  
"Dad, just concentrate."  
"There's not much point."  
"OK." Sh e took a deep breath. "OK, let's leave that one and try the second 
exercise. All right?"  
He looked at her as if she, his only hope, were sprouting fangs and antlers.  
"So in this one," she said, trying to ignore his expression, "you cross your 
right leg ove r your left leg, and then let both legs fall to the right as far as they 
can go. I like this exercise," she said. "It stretches your hip flexor. It feels 
really good."  
She explained it to him two more times and then asked him to raise his right 
leg. 
He lif ted both legs a few inches off the mattress.  
"Just your right leg," she said gently. "And keep your knees bent."  
"Denise!" His voice was high with strain. "There's no point!"  
"Here," she said. "Here." She pushed on his feet to bend his knees. She lifted 
his right leg, supporting it by the calf and thigh, and crossed it over his left 
knee. At first there was no resistance, and then, all at once, he seemed to 
cramp up violently.  
"Dense."  
"Dad, just relax."  
She already knew that he was never coming to Philadelphia. But now a 
tropical humidity was rising off him, a tangy almost -smell of let ting go. The 
pajama fabric on his thigh was hot and wet in her hand, and his entire body 
was trembling.  
"Oh, shoot," she said, releasing his leg.  
Snow was swirling in the windows, lights appearing in the neigh bors' houses. 
Denise wiped her hand on her jeans and lowered her eyes to her lap and 
listened, her heart beating hard, to the labored breathing of her father and 
the r hythmic rustling of his limbs on the bedspread. There was an arc of soak 
on the bedspread near his crotch and a longer  
520 
THE CORRECTIONS  
capillary -action reach of wetness down one leg of his pajamas. The initial 
almost -smell of fresh piss had r esolved, as it cooled in the underheated room, 
into an aroma quite definite and pleasant.  
"I'm sorry, Dad," she said. "Let me get you a towel."  
Alfred smiled up at the ceiling and spoke in a less agitated voice. "I lie here 
and I can see it," he said. "Do you see it?"  
"See what?"  
He pointed vaguely skyward with one finger. "Bottom on the bot tom. Bottom 
on the bottom of the bench," he said. "Written there. Do you see it?"  
Now she was confused and he wasn't. He cocked an eyebrow and gave her a 
canny look. "You know who wrote that, don't you? The fuh. The fuh. Fellow 
with the you know."  
Holding her gaze, he nodded significantly.  
"I don't understand what you're talking about,"  Denise said.  
"Your friend," he said. "Fellow with the blue cheeks."  
The first one percent of comprehension was born at the back of her neck and 
began to grow to the north and to the south.  
"Let me get a towel," she said, going nowhere.  
Her father's eyes r olled up toward the ceiling again. "He wrote that on the 
bottom of the bench. Bommunnuthuh. Bottomofthebench. And I lie there 
and I can see it."  
"Who are we talking about?"  
"Your friend in Signals. Fellow with the blue cheeks."  
"You're confused, Dad. You'r e having a dream. I'm going to get a towel."  
"See, there was never any point in saying anything."  
"I'm getting a towel," she said.  
She crossed the bedroom to the bathroom. Her head was still in the nap that 
she'd been taking, and the problem was getting wo rse. She was falling further 
out of sync with the waveforms of reality that constituted towel -softness, sky -
darkness, floor -hardness, air -clearness. Why this talk of Don Armour? Why 
now?  
Her father had swung his legs out of bed and peeled off his pajama  
bottoms. He extended his hand for the towel when she returned. "I'll clean 
this mess up," he said. "You go help your mother."  
"No, I'll do it," she said. "You take a bath."  
"Just give me the rag. It's not your job."  
"Dad, take a bath."  
"It was no t my intention to involve you in this."  
His hand, still extended, flopped in the air. Denise averted her eyes from his 
offending, wetting penis. "Stand up," she said. "I'm going to take the 
bedspread off."  
Alfred covered his penis with the towel. "Leave th at to your mother," he said. 
"I told her Philadelphia's a lot of nonsense. I never in tended to involve you in 
any of this. You have your own life. Just have fun and be careful."  
He remained seated on the edge of the bed, his head bowed, his hands like 
large empty fleshy spoons on his lap.  
"Do you want me to start the bathwater?" Denise said.  
"I nuh -nunnunnunn -unh," he said. "Told the fellow he was talking a lot of 
nonsense, but what can you do?" Alfred made a gesture of self -evidence or 
inevitability. "Tho ught he was going to Little Rock. You guh. I said! Gotta 
have seniority. Well, that's a lot of nonsense. I told him to get the hell out." 
He gave Denise an apologetic look and shrugged. "What else could I do?"  
Denise had felt invisible before, but never li ke this. "I'm not sure what you're 
saying," she said.  
"Well." Alfred made a vague gesture of explanation. "He told me to look 
under the bench. Simple as that. Look under the bench if I didn't believe 
him."  
"What bench?"  
"It was a lot of nonsense," he said. "Simpler for everybody if I just quit. You 
see, he never thought of that."  
"Are we talking about the railroad?"  
Alfred shook his head. "Not your concern. It was never my inten tion to 
involve you in any of this. I want you to go and have fun. And be careful. Tell 
your mother to come up here with a rag."  
With this, he launched himself across the carpeting and shut the  
522 
THE CORRECTIONS  
bathroom door behind him. Denise, to be doing something, stripped the bed 
and balled everything up, including her father's wet pajamas, and carried it 
downstairs.  
"How's it going up there!" Enid asked from her Christmas -card, station in the 
dining room.  
"He wet the bed," Denise said.  
"Oh my word."  
"He doesn't know his left leg from his right."  
Enid's face darkened. "I thought maybe he'd listen better to you."  
"Mother, he doesn't know his left leg from his right."  
"Sometimes the medication —" 
"Yeah! Yeah!" De nise's voice was plangent. "The medication!"  
Having silenced her mother, she proceeded to the laundry room to sort and 
soak the linens. Here Gary, all smiles, accosted her with an O -gauge model 
railroad engine in his hands.  
"I found it," he said.  
"Found wh at." 
Gary seemed hurt that Denise hadn't been paying close attention to his 
desires and activities. He explained that half of his childhood model -railroad 
set—"the important half, with the cars and the transformer" — had been 
missing for decades and presume d lost. "I just took the entire storeroom 
apart," he said. "And where do you think I found it?"  
"Where."  
"Guess," he said.  
"At the bottom of the rope box," she said.  
Gary's eyes widened. "How did you know that? I've been looking for 
decades."  
"Well, you sh ould have asked me. There's a smaller box of railroad stuff 
inside the big rope box."  
"Well, anyway." Gary shuddered to accomplish a shift of focus away from her 
and back to him. "I'm glad I had the satisfaction of finding it, although I wish 
you'd told me ." 
"I wish you'd asked!"  
"You know, I'm having a great time with this railroad stuff. There are some 
truly neat things that you can buy."  
523 
 
"Good! I'm happy for you!"  
Gary marveled at the engine he was holding. "I never thought I'd see this 
again."  
When he was gone and she was alone in the basement, she went to Alfred's 
laboratory with a flashlight, knelt among the Yuban cans, and examined the 
underside of the bench. Th ere, in shaggy pencil, was a heart the size of a 
human heart:  
 
She slumped onto her heels, her knees on the stone -cold floor. Little Rock. 
Seniority. Simpler if I just quit.  
Absently, she raised the lid of a Yuban can. It was full to the brim with lurid 
orange fermented piss.  
"Oh boy," she said to the shotgun.  
As she ran up to her bedroom and put on her coat and gloves, she felt sorriest 
about her mother, because no matter how often and how bitterly Enid had 
complained to her, she'd never got it through her  head that life in St. Jude 
had turned into such a nightmare; and how could you permit yourself to 
breathe, let alone laugh or sleep or eat well, if you were unable to imagine 
how hard another person's life was?  
Enid was at the dining -room curtains again, looking out for Chip.  
"Going for a walk!" Denise called as she closed the front door be hind her.  
Two inches of snow lay on the lawn. In the west the clouds were breaking up; 
violent eye -shadow shades of lavender and robin's -egg blue marked the 
cutting edg e of the latest cold front. Denise walked down the middle of tread -
marked twilit streets and smoked until the nicotine had dulled her distress 
and she could think more clearly.  
She gathered that Don Armour,  after the Wroth brothers had  
THE CORRECTIONS  
bought the Midland Pacific and commenced their downsizing of it, had failed 
to make the cut for Little Rock and had gone to Alfred and com plained. 
Maybe he'd threatened to brag about his conquest of Alfred's daughter or 
maybe he'd asserted his r ights as a quasi member of the Lambert family; 
either way, Alfred had told him to go to hell. Then Al fred had gone home and 
examined the underside of his workbench.  
Denise believed that there had been a scene between Don Armour and her 
father, but she hat ed to imagine it. How Don Armour must have loathed 
himself for crawling to his boss's boss's boss and trying to beg or blackmail 
inclusion in the railroad's move to Little Rock; how betrayed Alfred must 
have felt by this daughter who'd won such praise for her work habits; how 
dismally the entire intolerable scene must have turned on the insertion of 
Don Armour's dick into this and that guilty, unexcited orifice of hers. She 
hated to think of her father kneeling be neath his workbench and locating that 
penci led heart, hated the idea of Don Armour's drecky insinuations entering 
her father's prudish ears, hated to imagine how keenly it offended a man of 
such discipline and privacy to learn that Don Armour had been roaming and 
poking through his house at will.  
It was never my intention to involve you in this.  
Well, and sure enough: her father had resigned from the railroad. He'd saved 
her privacy. He'd never breathed a word of any of this to Denise, never given 
any sign of thinking less of her. For fifteen years  she'd tried to pass for a 
perfectly responsible and careful daughter, and he'd known all along that she 
was not.  
She thought there might be comfort in this idea if she could man age to keep it 
in her head.  
As she left her parents' neighborhood, the houses  got newer and bigger and 
boxier. Through windows with no mullions or fake plastic mullions she could 
see luminous screens, some giant, some miniature. Evidently every hour of 
the year, including this one, was a good hour for staring at a screen. Denise 
unbuttoned her coat and turned back, taking a shortcut through the field 
behind her old grade school.  
She'd never really known her father. Probably nobody had. With  
525 
 
his shyness and his formality and his tyrannical rages he protected his 
interi or so ferociously that if you loved him, as she did, you learned that you 
could do him no greater kindness than to respect his privacy.  
Alfred, likewise, had shown his faith in her by taking her at face value: by 
declining to pry behind the front that she presented. She'd felt happiest with 
him when she was publicly vindicating his faith in her: when she got straight 
A's; when her restaurants succeeded; when re viewers loved her.  
She understood, better than she would have liked to, what a disaster it had 
been for him to wet the bed in front of her. Lying on a stain of fast -cooling 
urine was not the way he wished to be with her. They only had one good way 
of being together, and it w asn't going to work much longer.  
The odd truth about Alfred was that love, for him, was a matter not of 
approaching but of keeping away. She understood this better than Chip and 
Gary did, and so she felt a particular responsibility for him.  
To Chip, unfort unately, it seemed that Alfred cared about his chil dren only to 
the degree that they succeeded. Chip was so busy feeling misunderstood that 
he never noticed how badly he himself misunder stood his father. To Chip, 
Alfred's inability to be tender was the p roof that Alfred didn't know, or care, 
who he was. Chip couldn't see what everyone around him could: that if there 
was anybody in the world whom Alfred did love purely for his own sake, it 
was Chip. Denise was aware of not delighting Alfred like this; they  had little 
in common be yond formalities and achievements. Chip was the one whom 
Alfred had called for in the middle of the night, even though he knew Chip 
wasn't there.  
I made it as clear to you as I could, she told her idiot brother in her head as 
she c rossed the snowy field. I can't make it any clearer.  
The house to which she returned was full of light. Gary or Enid had swept the 
snow from the front walk. Denise was scuffing her feet on the hemp mat 
when the door flew open.  
"Oh, it's you," Enid said. "I  thought it might be Chip."  
"No. Just me."  
She went in and pried her boots off. Gary had built a fire and was  
52B                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
sitti ng in the armchair closest to it, a stack of old photo albums at his feet.  
"Take my advice," he told Enid, "and forget about Chip."  
"He must be in some sort of trouble," Enid said. "Otherwise he would have 
called."  
"Mother, he's a sociopath. Get it through  your head."  
"You don't know a thing about Chip," Denise said to Gary.  
"I know when somebody refuses to pull his weight."  
"I just want us all to be together!" Enid said.  
Gary let out a groan of tender sentiment. "Oh, Denise," he said. "Oh, oh. 
Come and see  this baby girl."  
"Maybe another time."  
But Gary crossed the living room with the photo album and foisted it on her, 
pointing at the photo image on a family Christmas card. The chubby, mop -
headed, vaguely Semitic little girl in the picture was Denise at ab out eighteen 
months. There was not a particle of trouble in her smile or in the smiles of 
Chip and Gary. She sat between them on the living -room sofa in its pre -
reupholstered instantiation; each had an arm around her; their clear -skinned 
boy faces nearly t ouched above her own.  
"Is that a cute little girl?" Gary said.  
"Oh, how darling," Enid said, crowding in.  
From the center pages of the album fell an envelope with a Regis tered Mail 
sticker. Enid snatched it up and took it to the fireplace and fed it direc tly to 
the flames.  
"What was that?" Gary said.  
"Just that Axon business, which is taken care of now."  
"Did Dad ever send half the money to Orfic Midland?"  
"He asked me to do it but I haven't yet. I'm so swamped with insur ance 
forms."  
Gary laughed as he we nt upstairs. "Don't let that twenty -five hundred burn 
any holes in your pocket."  
Denise blew her nose and went to peel potatoes in the kitchen.  
"Just in case," Enid said, joining her, "be sure there's enough for Chip. He 
said this afternoon at the latest."  
 
"I think it's officially evening now," Denise said.  
"Well, I want a lot of potatoes."  
All of her mother's kitchen knives were butter -knife dull. Denise re sorted to a 
carrot scraper. "Did Dad ever tell you why he didn't go to Little Rock with 
Orfic Midland?"  
"No," Enid said emphatically. "Why?"  
"I just wondered."  
"He told them yes, he was going. And, Denise, it would have made all the 
difference for us financially. It would have nearly doubled his pension, just 
those two years. We would have bee n in so much better shape now. He told 
me he was going to do it, he agreed it was the right thing, and then he came 
home three nights later and said he'd changed his mind and quit."  
Denise looked into the eyes semireflected in the window above the sink. "A nd 
he never told you why."  
"Well, he couldn't stand those Wroths. I assumed it was a personal ity clash. 
But he never talked about it with me. You know —he never tells me anything. 
He just decides. Even if it's a financial disaster, it's his decision and it 's final."  
Here came the waterworks. Denise let potato and scraper fall into the sink. 
She thought of the drugs she'd hidden in the Advent calendar, she thought 
they might stop her tears long enough to let her get out of town, but she was 
too far from wher e they were stashed. She'd been caught defenseless in the 
kitchen.  
"Sweetie, what is it?" Enid said.  
For a while there was no Denise in the kitchen, just mush and wet ness and 
remorse. She found herself kneeling on the rag rug by the sink. Little balls of 
soaked Kleenex surrounded her. She was reluctant to raise her eyes to her 
mother, who was sitting beside her on a chair and feed ing her dry tissues.  
"So many things you think are going to matter," Enid said with a new 
sobriety, "turn out not to matter."  
"Some things still matter," Denise said.  
Enid gazed bleakly at the unpeeled potatoes by the sink. "He's not going to 
get better, is he."  
528  
THE CORRECTIONS  
Denise was happy to let her mother think that she'd been crying about 
Alfred's health. "I don't think so," she said.  
"It's probably not the medication, is it."  
"It probably isn't."  
"And there's probably no point in going to Philadelphia," Enid said, "if he 
can't follow instructions."  
"You're right. There probably isn't."  
"Denise, what are we go ing to do?"  
"I don't know."  
"I knew something was wrong this morning," Enid said. "If you'd found that 
envelope three months ago, he would have exploded at me. But you saw 
today. He didn't do a thing."  
"I'm sorry I put you on the spot there."  
"It didn't even matter. He didn't even know."  
"I'm sorry anyway."  
The lid on a pot of white beans boiling on the stove began to rattle. Enid 
stood up to reduce the heat. Denise, still kneeling, said, "I think there's 
something in the Advent calendar for yo u." 
"No, Gary pinned the last ornament."  
"In the 'twenty -four' pocket. There might be something for you."  
"Well, what?"  
"I don't know. You might go check, though."  
She heard her mother make her way to the front door and then re turn. 
Although the pattern o f the rag rug was complex, she thought she would soon 
have it memorized from staring.  
"Where did these come from?" Enid said.  
"I don't know."  
"Did you put them there?"  
"It's a mystery."  
"You must have put them there."  
"No."  
Enid set the pills on the counter, took two steps away from them, and 
frowned at them severely. "I'm sure whoever put these there meant well," she 
said. "But I don't want them in my house."  
"That's probably a good idea."  
529 
"I want the real thin g or I don't want anything."  
With her right hand Enid herded the pills into her left hand. She dumped 
them into the garbage grinder, turned on water, and ground them up.  
"What's the real thing?" Denise said when the noise subsided.  
"I want us all together for one last Christmas."  
Gary, showered and shaved and dressed in his aristocratic style, entered the 
kitchen in time to catch this declaration.  
"You'd better be willing to settle for four out of five," he said, open ing the 
liquor cabinet. "What's wrong w ith Denise?"  
"She's upset about Dad."  
"Well, it's about time," Gary said. "There's plenty to be upset about."  
Denise gathered up the Kleenex balls. "Pour me a lot of whatever you're 
having," she said.  
"I thought we could have Bea's champagne tonight!" Enid  said.  
"No," Denise said.  
"No," Gary said.  
"We'll save it and see if Chip comes," Enid said. "Now, what's taking Dad so 
long upstairs?"  
"He's not upstairs," Gary said.  
"Are you sure?"  
"Yes, I'm sure."  
"Al?" Enid shouted. "AL?"  
Gases snapped in the neglected fire in the living room. White beans 
simmered on moderate heat; the registers breathed warm air. Out in the 
street somebody's tires were spinning on snow.  
"Denise," Enid said. "Go see if he's in the basement."  
Denise didn't a sk "Why me?" although she wanted to. She went to the top of 
the basement stairs and called her father. The basement lights were on, and 
she could hear a cryptic faint rustling from the workshop.  
She called again: "Dad?"  
There was no answer.  
THE CORRECTIONS  
Her fear, as she descended the stairs, was like a fear from the un happy year 
of her childhood when she'd begged for a pet and received a cage containing 
two hamsters. A dog or a cat might have harmed Enid's fabrics, but these 
young hamsters, a pair of siblings from a litter at the Driblett residence, were 
permitted in the house. Every morning, when Denise went to the basement to 
give them pellets and change their wa ter, she dreaded to discover what new 
deviltry they'd hatched in the night for h er private spectation —maybe a nest 
of blind, wriggling, incest -crimson offspring, maybe a desperate pointless 
wholesale rearrangement of cedar shavings into a single great drift beside 
which the two parents were trembling on the bare metal of the cage's fl oor, 
looking bloated and evasive after eating all their children, which couldn't 
have left an agreeable aftertaste, even in a hamster's mouth.  
The door to Alfred's workshop was shut. She tapped on it. "Dad?"  
Alfred's reply came immediately in a strained, s trangled bark: "Don't come 
in!" 
Behind the door something hard scraped on concrete.  
"Dad? What are you doing?"  
"I said don't come in!"  
Well, she'd seen the gun and she was thinking: Of course it's me down here. 
She was thinking: And I have no idea what to do. 
"Dad, I have to come in."  
"Denise —" 
"I'm coming in," she said.  
She opened the door to brilliant lighting. In a single glance she took in the old 
paint -spattered bedspread on the floor, the old man on his back with his hips 
off the ground and his knees trembling, his wide eyes fixed on the underside 
of the workbench while he struggled with the big plastic enema apparatus 
that he'd stuck into his rectum.  
"Whoops, sorry!" she said, turning away, her hands raised.  
Alfred breathed stertorously and said nothi ng more.  
She pulled the door partway shut and filled her lungs with air. Up stairs the 
doorbell was ringing. Through the walls and the ceiling she could hear 
footsteps approaching the house.  
"That's him, that's him!" Enid cried.  
A burst of song —"It's Beginning to Look a Lot Like Christmas" — punctured 
her illusion.  
Denise joined her mother and brother at the front door. Familiar faces were 
clustered around the snowy stoop, Dale Driblett, Honey Driblett, Steve and 
Ashley Driblett, Kirby Root with s everal daughters and buzz -cut sons -in-law, 
and the entire Person clan. Enid corralled Denise and Gary and hugged them 
closer, bouncing on her toes with the spirit of the moment. "Run and get 
Dad," she said. "He loves the carolers."  
"Dad's busy," Denise sai d. 
For the man who'd taken care to protect her privacy and who had only ever 
asked that his privacy be respected, too, wasn't the kindest course to let him 
suffer by himself and not compound his suffering with the shame of being 
witnessed? Hadn't he, with every question that he'd ever failed to ask her, 
earned the right to relief from any uncomfortable question she might want to 
ask him now? Like: What's with the enema, Dad?  
The carolers seemed to be singing straight at her. Enid was swaying to the 
tune, Ga ry had easy tears in his eyes, but Denise felt like the in tended 
audience. She would have liked to stay there with the happier side of her 
family. She didn't know what it was about difficulty that made such a 
powerful claim on her allegiance. But as Kirby  Root, who directed the choir at 
Chiltsville Methodist, led a segue into "Hark, the Herald Angels Sing," she 
began to wonder if respecting Alfred's privacy wasn't a little bit too easy. He 
wanted to be left alone? Well, how nice for her! She could go back to 
Philadelphia, live her own life, and be doing exactly what he wanted. He was 
embarrassed to be seen with a plastic squirter up his ass? Well, how 
convenient! She was pretty god damned embarrassed herself!  
She extricated herself from her mother, waved to  the neighbors, and returned 
to the basement.  
The workshop door was ajar, as she'd left it. "Dad?"  
"Don't come in!"  
"I'm sorry," she said, "but I have to come in."  
532  
THE CORRECTIONS  
"I never intended to involve you in this. Not your worry."  
"I know. But I have to come in anyway."  
She found him in much the same position, with an old beach towel wadded 
up between his legs. Kneeling among the shit smells and piss smells, she 
rested a hand on his quaking shoulder. "I'm sorry," she said.  
His face was  covered with sweat. His eyes glittered with madness. "Find a 
telephone," he said, "and call the district manager."  
Chip's great revelation had come at about six o'clock on Tuesday morn ing, as 
he was walking in near -perfect darkness down a road surfaced w ith 
Lithuanian gravel, between the tiny hamlets of Neravai and Miskiniai, a few 
kilometers from the Polish border.  
Fifteen hours earlier, he'd reeled out of the airport and had nearly been run 
over by Jonas, Aidaris, and Gitanas as they veered to the curb in their Ford 
Stomper. The three men had been on their way out of Vilnius when they'd 
heard the news of the airport's closing. Pulling a U -turn on the road to 
Ignalina, they'd returned to rescue the pathetic American. The Stomper's rear 
cargo area was full y constipated with luggage and computers and telephone 
equipment, but by bungee -cording two suitcases to the roof they made room 
for Chip and his bag.  
"We'll get you to a small checkpoint," Gitanas said. "They're putting 
roadblocks on all the big roads. Th ey salivate when they see Stampers."  
Jonas had then driven at unsafe speeds on suitably awful roads west of 
Vilnius, skirting the towns of Jieznas and Alytus. The hours had passed in 
darkness and jostling. At no point did they see a working streetlight or a law -
enforcement vehicle. Jonas and Aidaris listened to Metallica in the front seat 
while Gitanas pressed buttons on his cell phone in the forlorn hope that 
Transbaltic Wireless, of which he was still nominally the controlling 
shareholder, had managed to restore power to its transceiver station in the 
midst of a national blackout and the mobilization of Lithuania's armed 
forces.  
"This is a calamity for Vitkunas," Gitanas said. "Mobilizing just makes him 
look more Soviet. Troops in the street and no electri city: this will not endear 
your government to the Lithuanian people."  
 
 
 
 
 
"Is anybody actually shooting at people?" Chip asked.  
"No, it's mostly posturing. A tragedy rewritten as a farce."  
Toward midnight the Stomper rounded a sharp curve near Lazdijai, the last 
sizable town before the Polish frontier, and passed a three -Jeep convoy 
heading in the opposite direction. Jonas accelerated on the corduroy road 
and conferred with Gitanas in Lithua nian. The glacial moraine in this region 
was rolling but unforested. It was possible to look back and see that two of 
the Jeeps had turned around and com menced pursuit of the Stomper. It was 
likewise possible, if you were in the Jeeps, to see Jonas making  a sharp left 
onto a gravel road and speed ing alongside the whiteness of a frozen lake.  
"We'll outrun 'em," Gitanas assured Chip approximately two sec onds before 
Jonas, encountering an elbow curve, rolled the Stomper off the road.  
We're having an acciden t, Chip thought while the vehicle was airborne. He 
experienced huge retroactive affection for good traction, low centers of 
gravity, and non -angular varieties of momentum. There was time for quiet 
reflection and gritting of teeth and then no time at all, j ust blow af ter blow, 
noise upon noise. The Stomper tried out several versions of the vertical —
ninety, two -seventy, three -sixty, one -eighty —and finally came to rest on its 
left side with its engine dead and its lights still burning.  
Chip's hips and chest f elt seriously bruised by his lap and shoulder belts. 
Otherwise he seemed to be in one piece, as did Jonas and Aidaris.  
Gitanas had been thrown around and bludgeoned by loose luggage. He was 
bleeding from wounds on his chin and forehead. He spoke to Jonas u rgently, 
apparently telling him to cut the lights, but it was too late. There was a sound 
of great downshifting on the road behind them. The pursuing Jeeps pulled up 
at the elbow curve, and uniformed men in ski masks piled out.  
"Police in ski masks," Chip said. "I'm struggling to put a positive construction 
on this."  
The Stomper had crashed in a frozen -over marsh. In the intersect ing high 
beams of two Jeeps, eight or ten masked "officers" surrounded it and ordered 
everybody out. Chip, pushing open the door  above him, felt like a Jack 
emerging from its box.  
534 
THE CORRECTIONS  
Jonas and Aidaris were relieved of their weapons. The contents of the vehicle 
were methodically dumped on the crusty snow and broken reeds that covered 
the ground. A "policem an" pressed the muzzle of a rifle into Chip's cheek, and 
Chip received a one -word order that Gitanas translated: "He's inviting you to 
take your clothes off."  
Death, that overseas relation, that foul -breathed remittance man, had 
suddenly appeared in the im mediate neighborhood. Chip was quite afraid of 
the gun. His hands shook and lost feeling; it took the entire sum of his will to 
apply them to the task of unzipping and unbuttoning himself. Apparently 
he'd been singled out for this humiliation because of th e quality of the leather 
goods he was wearing. Nobody seemed to care about Gitanas's red motocross 
jacket or Jonas's denim. But ski -masked "policemen" gathered round and 
fingered the fine grain of Chip's pants and coat. Puffing frost through O -
shaped mouth  holes with their weirdly decontexualized lips, they tested the 
flexure of his left boot's sole.  
A cry went up when a wad of U.S. currency fell from the boot. Again the gun 
muzzle was in Chip's cheek. Chilly fingers discovered the big envelope of cash 
unde r his T -shirt. The "police" examined his wal let as well but didn't steal his 
litai or his credit cards. Dollars were all they wanted.  
Gitanas, with blood congealing on several quadrants of his head, lodged a 
protest with the captain of the "police." The e nsuing argu ment, in which 
Gitanas and the captain repeatedly gestured at Chip and used the words 
"dollars" and "American," ended when the captain pointed a pistol at 
Gitanas's bloody forehead and Gitanas raised his hands to concede that the 
captain had a point.  
Chip's sphincter had meanwhile dilated nearly to the degree of un conditional 
surrender. It seemed very important to contain himself, however, and so he 
stood in his socks and underwear and pressed his butt cheeks together as well 
as he could with h is shaking hands. Pressed and pressed and fought the 
spasms manually. He didn't care how ridicu lous this looked.  
The "police" were finding much to steal from the luggage. Chip's bag was 
emptied on the snowy ground and his belongings picked  
throu gh. He and Gitanas looked on while the "pol'ice" shredded the 
Stamper's upholstery, tore up its floor, and located Gitanas's reserves of cash 
and cigarettes.  
"What exactly is the pretext here?" Chip said, still shivering vio lently but 
winning the really important battle.  
"We're accused of smuggling currency and tobacco," Gitanas said.  
"And who's accusing us?"  
"I'm afraid they're what they seem to be," Gitanas said. "In other words, 
national police in ski masks. There's kind o f a Mardi Gras atmosphere in the 
country tonight. Kind of an anything -goes type of spirit."  
It was 1 a.m. when the "police" finally roared away in their Jeeps. Chip and 
Gitanas and Jonas and Aidaris were left with frozen feet, a smashed -up 
Stomper, wet clo thes, and demolished luggage.  
On the plus side, Chip thought, I didn't shit myself.  
He still had his passport and the $2,000 that the "police" had failed to locate 
in his T -shirt pocket. He also had gym shoes, some loose -fitting jeans, his 
good tweed sport  coat, and his favorite sweater, all of which he hurried to put 
on. 
"This pretty much ends my career as a criminal warlord," Gitanas 
commented. "I have no further ambitions in that direction."  
Using cigarette lighters, Jonas and Aidaris were inspecting the  Stamper's 
undercarriage. Aidaris delivered the verdict in English for Chip's benefit: 
"Truck fucked up."  
Gitanas offered to walk with Chip to the border crossing on the road to Sejny, 
fifteen kilometers to the west, but Chip was painfully aware that if hi s friends 
hadn't circled back to the airport they would probably be safe now with their 
relatives in Ignalina, their vehicle and their cash reserves intact.  
"Eh," Gitanas said with a shrug. "We might have got shot on the road to 
Ignalina. Maybe you saved o ur life."  
"Truck fucked up," Aidaris repeated with spite and'delight.  
"So I'll see you in New York," Chip said.  
Gitanas sat down on a seventeen -inch computer monitor with a  
536 
THE CORRECTIONS  
stove -in screen. He carefully felt his bloody forehead. "Yeah, right. New 
York."  
"You can stay in my apartment."  
"I'll think about it."  
"Let's just do it," Chip said somewhat desperately.  
"I'm a Lithuanian," Gitanas said.  
Chip felt more hurt, more disappoi nted and abandoned, than the situation 
called for. However, he contained himself. He accepted a road map, a 
cigarette lighter, an apple, and the Lithuanians' sincere good wishes and set 
off in the darkness.  
Once he was alone, he felt better. The longer he walked, the more he 
appreciated the comfort of his jeans and gym shoes as hiking gear, relative to 
his boots and leather pants. His tread was lighter, his stride freer; he was 
tempted to start skipping down the road. How pleasant to be out walking in 
these  gym shoes!  
But this was not his great revelation. His great revelation came when he was a 
few kilometers from the Polish border. He was straining to hear whether any 
of the homicidal farm dogs in the surrounding darkness might be unleashed, 
he had his arm s outstretched, he was feel ing more than a little ridiculous, 
when he remembered Gitanas's re mark: tragedy rewritten as a farce. All of a 
sudden he understood why nobody, including himself, had ever liked his 
screenplay: he'd written a thriller where he should have written farce.  
Faint morning twilight was overtaking him. In New York he'd honed and 
polished the first thirty pages of "The Academy Purple" un til his memory of 
them was nearly eidetic, and now, as the Baltic sky brightened, he bore down 
with a mental red pencil on his mental re construction of these pages, made a 
little trim here, added emphasis or hyperbole there, and in his mind the 
scenes became what they'd wanted to be all along: ridiculous. The tragic BILL 
QUAINTENCE became a comic fool.  
Chip picked up his pace as if hurrying toward a desk at which he could begin 
to revise the script immediately. He came over a rise and saw the blacked -out 
Lithuanian town of Eisiskes and, farther in the dis - 
tance, beyond the frontier, some outdo or lights in Poland. Two dray horses, 
straining their heads over a barbed -wire fence, nickered at him 
optimistically.  
He spoke out loud: "Make it ridiculous. Make it ridiculous."  
Two Lithuanian customs officials and two "policemen" manned the tiny 
border c heckpoint. They handed Chip's passport back to him with out the 
bulky stack of litai that he'd filled it with. For no discernible reason except 
petty cruelty, they made him sit in an overheated roorn for several hours 
while cement mixers and chicken trucks  and bicyclists came and went. It was 
late morning before they let him walk over into Poland.  
A few kilometers down the road, in Sejny, he bought zlotys and, using the 
zlotys, lunch. The shops were well stocked, it was Christ mastime. The men of 
the town w ere old and looked a lot like the Pope.  
Rides in three trucks and a city taxi got him to the Warsaw airport by noon 
on Wednesday. The improbably apple -cheeked personnel at the LOT Polish 
Airlines ticket counter were delighted to see him. LOT had added extr a 
holiday flights to its schedule to accommodate the tens of thousands of Polish 
guest workers returning to their families from the West, and many of the 
westbound flights were underbooked. All the red -cheeked counter girls wore 
little hats like drum major ettes. They took cash from Chip, gave him a ticket, 
and told him Run.  
He ran to the gate and boarded a 767 that then sat on the runway for four 
hours while a possibly faulty instrument in the cockpit was ex amined and 
finally, reluctantly, replaced.  
The fl ight plan was a great -circle route to the great Polish city of Chicago, 
nonstop. Chip kept sleeping in order to forget that he owed Denise $20,500, 
was maxed out on his credit cards, and now had neither a job nor any 
prospect of finding one.  
The good news in Chicago, after he'd cleared Customs, was that two rental -
car companies were still doing business. The bad news, which he learned 
after standing in line for half an hour, was that people with maxed -out credit 
cards could not rent cars.  
He went down the l ist of airlines in the phone book until he found  
538 
THE CORRECTIONS  
one—Prairie Hopper, never heard of it —that had a seat on a St. Jude flight at 
seven the next morning.  
By now it was too late to call St. Jude. He chose an out -of-the-way patch of 
airport carpeting and lay down on it to sleep. He didn't under stand what had 
happened to him. He felt like a piece of paper that had once had coherent 
writing on it but had been through the wash. He felt roughened, bleached, 
and worn out along the fold lines. He semi -dreamed of disembodied eyes and 
isolated mouths in ski masks. He'd lost track of what he wanted, and since 
who a person was was what a person wanted, you could say th at he'd lost 
track of himself.  
How strange, then, that the old man who opened the front door at nine -thirty 
in St. Jude the next morning seemed to know exactly who he was.  
A holly wreath was on the door. The front walk was edged with snow and 
evenly spaced broom marks. The midwestern street struck the traveler as a 
wonderland of wealth and oak trees and conspicuously use less space. The 
traveler didn't see how such a place c ould exist in a world of Lithuanias and 
Polands. It was a testament to the insulatory effectiveness of political 
boundaries that power didn't simply arc across the gap between such 
divergent economic voltages. The old street with its oak smoke and snowy 
flat-topped hedges and icicled eaves seemed precarious. It seemed mirage -
like. It seemed like an exceptionally vivid memory of something beloved and 
dead.  
"Well!" Alfred said, his face blazing with joy, as he took Chip's hand in both of 
his. "Look who's here !" 
Enid tried to elbow her way into the picture, speaking Chip's name, but 
Alfred wouldn't let go of his hand. He said it twice more: "Look who's here! 
Look who's here!"  
"Al, let him come in and close the door," Enid said.  
Chip was balking at the doorway. The world outside was black and white and 
gray and swept by fresh, clear air; the enchanted interior was dense with 
objects and smells and colors, humidity, large personalities. He was afraid to 
enter.  
"Come in, come in," Enid squeaked, "and shut the door. " 
539  
To protect himself from spells, he privately spoke an incantation: I'm stay ing for 
three days and then Pin going back to New York, I'm finding a job, I'm putting 
aside five hundred dollars a month, minimum, until I'm out of debt, and I'm 
working every night on the script.  
Invoking this charm, which was all he had now, the paltry sum of his identity, 
he stepped through the doorway.  
"My word, you're scratchy and smelly," Enid said, kissing him. "Now, where's 
your suitcase?"  
"It's by the side of a gravel road in western Lithuania."  
"I'm just happy you're home safely."  
Nowhere in the nation of Lithuania was there a room like the Lambert living 
room. Only in this hemisphere could carpeting so sumptuously woolen and 
furniture so big and so well ma de and so opulently upholstered be found in a 
room of such plain design and ordinary situation. The light in the wood -
framed windows, though gray, had a prairie optimism; there wasn't a sea 
within six hundred miles to trouble the atmosphere. And the postur e of the 
older oak trees reaching toward this sky had a jut, a wildness and 
entitlement, predat ing permanent settlement; memories of an unfenced 
world were written in the cursive of their branches.  
Chip apprehended it all in a heartbeat. The continent, hi s home land. 
Scattered around the living room were nests of opened presents and little 
leavings of spent ribbon, wrapping -paper fragments, labels. At the foot of the 
fireside chair that Alfred always claimed for himself, Denise was kneeling by 
the largest nest of presents.  
"Denise, look who's here," Enid said.  
As if out of obligation, with downcast eyes, Denise rose and crossed the room. 
But when she'd put her arms around Chip and he'd squeezed her in return 
(her height, as always, surprised him), she would n't let go. She clung to him —
kissed his neck, fastened her eyes on him, and thanked him.  
Gary came over and embraced Chip awkwardly, his face averted. "Didn't 
think you were going to make it," he said.  
"Neither did I," Chip said.  
"Well!" Alfred said again,  gazing at him in wonder.  
540 
 
"Gary has to leave at eleven," Enid said, "but we can all have break fast 
together. You get cleaned up, and Denise and I will start breakfast. Oh, this is 
just what I wanted," she said, hurrying to the kitchen. "Thi s is the best 
Christmas present I've ever had!"  
Gary turned to Chip with his I'm -a-jerk face. "There you go," he said. "Best 
Christmas present she's ever had."  
"I think she means having all five of us together," Denise said. "Well, she'd 
better enjoy it in  a hurry," Gary said, "because she owes me a discussion and 
I'm expecting payment."  
Chip, detached from his own body, trailed after it and wondered what it was 
going to do. He removed an aluminum stool from the downstairs bathroom 
shower. The blast of water was strong and hot. His impressions were fresh in 
a way that he would either remem ber all his life or instantly forget. A brain 
could absorb only so many impres sions before it lost the ability to decode 
them, to put them in coherent shape and order. His nearly sleepless night on 
a patch of airport carpet ing, for example, was still ver y much with him and 
begging to be processed. And now here was a hot shower on Christmas 
morning. Here were the familiar tan tiles of the stall. The tiles, like every 
other physical constituent of the house, were suffused with the fact of their 
ownership by  Enid and Alfred, saturated with an aura of belonging to this 
family. The house felt more like a body —softer, more mortal and organic —
than like a building.  
Denise's shampoo had the pleasing, subtle scents of late -model Western 
capitalism. In the seconds it  took Chip to lather his hair, he forgot where he 
was. Forgot the continent, forgot the year, forgot the time of day, forgot the 
circumstances. His brain in the shower was piscine or amphibian, registering 
impressions, reacting to the moment. He wasn't far  from terror. At the same 
time, he felt OK. He was hungry for breakfast and thirsty, in particular, for 
coffee.  
With a towel around his waist he stopped in the living room, where Alfred 
leaped to his feet. The sight of Alfred's suddenly aged face, its disi ntegration -
in-progress, its rednesses and asymmetries, cut Chip like a bullwhip.  
"Well!" Alfred said. "That was quick."  
541 
 
"Can I borrow some clothes of yours?"  
"I will leave that to your judgment."  
Upstairs in his father's closet the ancient s having kits, shoehorns, electric 
razors, shoe trees, and tie rack were all in their accustomed places. They'd 
been on duty here each hour of the fifteen hundred days since Chip had last 
been in this house. For a moment he was angry (how could he not be?) t hat 
his parents had never moved anywhere. Had simply stayed here waiting.  
He took underwear, socks, wool slacks, a white shirt, and a gray cardigan to 
the room that he'd shared with Gary in the years between Denise's arrival in 
the family and Gary's depart ure for college. Gary had an overnight bag open 
on "his" twin bed and was packing it.  
"I don't know if you noticed," he said, "but Dad's in bad shape."  
"No, I noticed."  
Gary put a small box on Chip's dresser. It was a box of ammuni tion—twenty -
gauge shotgu n shells.  
"He had these out with the gun in the workshop," Gary said. "I went down 
there this morning and I thought, better safe than sorry."  
Chip looked at the box and spoke instinctively. "Isn't that kind of Dad's own 
decision?"  
"That's what I was thinki ng yesterday," Gary said. "But if he wants to do it, 
he's got other options. It's supposed to be down near zero tonight. He can go 
outside with a bottle of whiskey. I don't want Mom to find him with his head 
blown off."  
Chip didn't know what to say. He sil ently dressed in the old man's clothes. 
The shirt and pants were marvelously clean and fit him better than he would 
have guessed. He was surprised, when he put the cardi gan on, that his hands 
did not begin to shake, surprised to see such a young face in t he mirror.  
"So what have you been doing with yourself?" Gary said.  
"I've been helping a Lithuanian friend of mine defraud Western investors."  
"Jesus, Chip. You don't want to be doing that."  
Everything else in the world might be strange, but Gary's con descension 
galled Chip exactly as it always had.  
542                                                                                                                                THE 
CORRECTIONS  
 
"From a strictly moral viewpoint," Chip said, "I h ave more sympa thy for 
Lithuania than I do for American investors."  
"You want to be a Bolshevik?" Gary said, zipping up his bag. "Fine, be a 
Bolshevik. Just don't call me when you get arrested."  
"It would never occur to me to call you," Chip said.  
"Are you  fellas about ready for breakfast?" Enid sang from halfway up the 
stairs.  
A holiday linen tablecloth was on the dining table. In the center was an 
arrang ement of pinecones, white holly and green holly, red candles, and 
silver bells. Denise was bringing food out —Texan grapefruit, scrambled eggs, 
bacon, and a stollen and breads that she'd baked.  
Snow cover boosted the strong prairie light.  
Per custom, Gary s at alone on one side of the table. On the other side, Denise 
sat by Enid and Chip by Alfred.  
"Merry, merry, merry Christmas!" Enid said, looking each of her children in 
the eye in turn.  
Alfred, head down, was already eating.  
Gary also began to eat, rapidly , with a glance at his watch.  
Chip didn't remember the coffee being so drinkable in these parts.  
Denise asked him how he'd gotten home. He told her the story, omitting only 
the armed robbery.  
Enid, with a scowl of judgment, was following every move of Gary 's. "Slow 
down" she said. "You don't have to leave until eleven."  
"Actually," Gary said, "I said quarter to eleven. It's past ten -thirty, and we 
have some things to discuss."  
"We're finally all together," Enid said. "Let's just relax and enjoy it."  
Gary se t his fork down. "I've been here since Monday, Mother, waiting for us 
all to be together. Denise has been here since Tuesday morning. It's not my 
fault if Chip was too busy defrauding American in vestors to get here on time."  
"I just explained why I was la te," Chip said. "If you were listening."  
"Well, maybe you -should have left a little earlier."  
"What does he mean, defrauding?" Enid said. "I thought you were doing 
computer work."  
 
"I'll explain it to you later, Mom."  
"No," Gary said. "Explain it  to her now."  
"Gary," Denise said.  
"No, sorry," Gary said, throwing down his napkin like a gauntlet. "I've had it 
with this family! I'm done waiting! I want some answers now."  
"I was doing computer work," Chip said. "But Gary's right, strictly speaking, 
the intent was to defraud American investors."  
"I don't approve of that at all," Enid said.  
"I know you don't," Chip said. "Although it's a little more compli cated than 
you might —" 
"What is so complicated about obeying the law?"  
"Gary, for God's sake," Deni se said with a sigh. "It's Christmas?"  
"And you're a thief," Gary said, wheeling on her.  
"What?"  
"You know what I'm talking about. You sneaked into somebody's room and 
you took a thing that didn't belong —" 
"Excuse me," Denise said hotly, "I restored a thing that was stolen from its 
rightful —" 
"Bullshit, bullshit, bullshit!"  
"Oh, I'm not sitting here for this," Enid wailed. "Not on Christmas morning!"  
"No, Mother, sorry, you're not going anywhere," Gary said. "We're going to sit 
here and have our littl e talk right now."  
Alfred gave Chip a complicit smile and gestured at the others. "You see what I 
have to put up with?"  
Chip arranged his face in a facsimile of comprehension and agree ment.  
"Chip, how long are you here for?" Gary said.  
"Three days."  
"And,  Denise, you're leaving on —" 
"Sunday, Gary. I'm leaving on Sunday."  
"So what's going to happen on Monday, Mom? How are you going to make 
this house work on Monday?"  
"I'll think about that when Monday comes."  
544 
THE CORRECTIONS  
Alfred, still smil ing, asked Chip what Gary was talking about.  
"I don't know, Dad."  
"You really think you're going to go to Philadelphia?" Gary said. "You think 
CorecktalFs going to fix all this?"  
"No, Gary, I don't," Enid said.  
Gary didn't seem to hear her answer. "Dad, he re, do me a favor," he said. "Put 
your right hand on your left shoulder."  
"Gary, stop it," Denise said.  
Alfred leaned close to Chip and spoke confidentially. "What's he asking?"  
"He wants you to put your right hand on your left shoulder."  
"That's a lot of nonsense."  
"Dad?" Gary said. "Come on, right hand, left shoulder."  
"Stop it, " Denise said.  
"Let's go, Dad. Right hand, left shoulder. Can you do that? You want to show 
us how you follow simple instructions? Come on! Right hand. Left shoulder."  
Alfred shook  his head. "One bedroom and a kitchen is all we need."  
"Al, I don't want one bedroom and a kitchen," Enid said.  
The old man pushed his chair away from the table and turned once more to 
Chip. He said, "You can see it's not without its difficulties."  
As he stood up, his leg buckled and he pitched to the floor, drag ging his plate 
and place mat and coffee cup and saucer along with him. The crash might 
have been the last bar of a symphony. He lay on his side amid the ruins like a 
wounded gladiator, a fal len horse.  
Chip knelt down and helped him into a sitting position while Denise hurried 
to the kitchen.  
"It's quarter to eleven," Gary said as if nothing unusual had hap pened. 
"Before I leave, here's a summary. Dad is demented and inconti nent. Mom 
can't h ave him in this house without a lot of help, which she says she doesn't 
want even if she could afford it. Corecktall is obviously not an option, and so 
what I want to know is what you're going to do. Now, Mother. I want to know 
now."  
Alfred rested his shak ing hands on Chip's shoulders and gazed in wonder at 
the room's furnishings. Despite his agitation, he was smiling.  
545 
"My question," he said. "Is who owns this house? Who takes care of all of 
this?"  
"You own it, Dad."  
Alfred shook his head as i f this didn't square with the facts as he understood 
them.  
Gary was demanding an answer.  
"I guess we'll have to try the drug holiday," Enid said.  
"Fine, try that," Gary said. "Put him in the hospital, see if they ever let him 
out. And while you're at it, you might take a drug holiday your self."  
"Gary, she got rid of it," Denise said from the floor, where she'd knelt with a 
sponge. "She put it in th e Disposall. So just lay off."  
"Well, I hope you learned your lesson there, Mother."  
Chip, in the old man's clothes, wasn't able to follow this conversa tion. His 
father's hands were heavy on his shoulders. For the second time in an hour, 
somebody was clinging to him, as if he were a person of substance, as if there 
were something to him. In fact, there was so little to him that he couldn't 
even say whether his sister and his father were mistaken about him. He felt 
as if his consciousness had been shorn of all identifying marks and 
transplanted, metempsychotically, into the body of a steady son, a 
trustworthy brother . . .  
Gary had dropped into a crouch beside Alfred. "Dad," he said, "I'm sorry it 
had to end this way. I love you and I'll see you again soon."  
"Well. Yurrr vollb. Yeaugh," Alfred replied. He lowered his head and looked 
around with rank paranoia.  
"And j/oa, my feckless sibling." Gary spread his fingers, clawlike, on top of 
Chip's head in what he apparently meant as a gesture of affection. "I'm 
counting on you to help out here."  
"I'll do my best," Chip said with less irony than he'd aimed for.  
Gary stood up. "I'm sorry I ruined your breakfast, Mom. But I, for one, feel 
better for having got this off my chest."  
"Why you couldn't have waited till aft er the holiday," Enid mut tered.  
Gary kissed her cheek. "Call Hedgpeth tomorrow morning. Then  
54B  
THE CORRECTIONS  
call me and tell me what the plan is. I'm going to monitor this closely."  
It seemed unbelievable to Chip that Gary could simply walk  out of the house 
with Alfred on the floor and Enid's Christmas breakfast in ruins, but Gary 
was in his most rational mode, his words had a formal hollowness, his eyes 
were evasive as he put on his coat and gathered up his bag and Enid's bag of 
gifts for P hiladelphia, because he was afraid. Chip could see it clearly now, 
behind the cold front of Gary's wordless departure: his brother was afraid.  
As soon as the front door had closed, Alfred made his way to the bathroom.  
"Let's all be happy," Denise said, "that Gary got that off his chest and feels so 
much better now."  
"No, he's right," Enid said, her eyes resting bleakly on the holly centerpiece. 
"Something has to change."  
After breakfast the hours passed in the sickishne ss, the invalid wait ing, of a 
major holiday. Chip in his exhaustion had trouble staying warm, but his face 
was flushed with the heat from the kitchen and the smell of baking turkey 
that blanketed the house. Whenever he entered his father's field of vision , a 
smile of recognition and pleasure spread over Alfred's face. This recognition 
might have had the character of mistaken identity if it hadn't been 
accompanied by Alfred's exclamation of Chip's name. Chip seemed beloved to 
the old man. He'd been arguing with Alfred and deploring Alfred and feeling 
the sting of Alfred's disap proval for most of his life, and his personal failures 
and his political views were, if anything, more extreme than ever now, and 
yet it was Gary who was fighting with the old man, it  was Chip who 
brightened the old man's face.  
At dinner he took the trouble to describe in some detail his activi ties in 
Lithuania. He might as well have been reciting the tax code in a monotone. 
Denise, normally a paragon of listening, was absorbed in hel ping Alfred with 
his food, and Enid had eyes only for her husband's deficiencies. She flinched 
or sighed or shook her head at every spilled bite, every non sequitur. Alfred 
was quite visibly making her life a hell  
now.  
547 
 
Tm the hast unhappy pe rson at this table, Chip thought.  
He helped Denise wash the dishes while Enid spoke to her grand sons on the 
telephone and Alfred went to bed.  
"How long has Dad been like this?" he asked Denise.  
"Like this? Just since yesterday. But he wasn't great before that."  
Chip put on a heavy coat of Alfred's and took a cigarette outside. The cold was 
deeper than any he'd experienced in Vilnius. Wind rattled the thick brown 
leaves still clinging to the oaks, those most conservative of trees; snow 
squeaked beneath his feet. Near zero tonight, Gary had said. He can go 
outside with a bottle of whiskey. Chip wanted to pursue the important 
question of suicide while he had a cigarette to enhance his mental 
performance, but his bronchi and nasal passages were so trau matized by cold 
that the trauma of smoke barely registered, and the ache in his fingers and 
ears —the damned rivets —was fast becoming un bearable. He gave up and 
hurried inside just as Denise was leaving.  
"Where are you going?" Chip asked.  
"I'll be back."  
Enid, by the fire in the living room, was gnawing at her lip with naked 
desolation. "You haven't opened your presents," she said.  
"Maybe in the morning," Chip said.  
"I'm sure I didn't get you anything you'll like."  
"It's nice you got me anything."  
Enid shook her head. "This wasn't the Christmas I'd hoped for. Suddenly Dad 
can't do a thing. Not one single thing."  
"Let's give him a drug holiday and see if that helps."  
Enid might have been reading bad prognoses in the fire. "Will you stay for a 
week an d help me take him to the hospital?"  
Chip's hand went to the rivet in his earlobe as to a talisman. He felt like a 
child out of Grimm, lured into the enchanted house by the warmth and the 
food; and now the witch was going to lock him in a cage, fatten him up, and 
eat him.  
He repeated the charm he'd invoked at the front door. "I can only stay three 
days," he said. "I've got to start working right away. I owe Denise some 
money that I need to pay her back."  
548 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"Just a week" the witch  said. "Just a week, until we see how things go in the 
hospital."  
"I don't think so, Mom. I've got to go back."  
Enid's bleakness deepened, but she didn't seem surprised by his re fusal. "I 
guess this is my responsibility, then," she said. "I guess I always knew it 
would be."  
She retired to the den, and Chip put more logs on the fire. Cold drafts were 
finding ways through the windows, faintly stirring the open curtains. The 
furnace was running almost constantly. The world was colder and emptier 
than Chip had realized, the adults had gone away.  
Toward eleven, Denise came inside reeking of cigarettes and look ing two -
thirds frozen. She waved to Chip and tried to go straight up stairs, but he 
insisted that she sit by the fire. She knelt and bowed her head, sniffling 
steadily, and put her hands out toward the embers. She kept her eyes on the 
fire as if to ensure that she not look at him. She blew her nose on a wet shred 
of Kleenex.  
"Where 'd you go?" he said.  
"Just on a walk."  
"Long walk."  
"Yuh."  
"You sent me some e -mails that I deleted before I really read them."  
"Oh."  
"So what's going on?" he said.  
She shook her head. "Just everything."  
"I had almost thirty thousand dollars in cash on Mon day. I was going to give 
you twenty -four thousand of it. But then we got robbed by uniformed men in 
ski masks. Implausible as that may sound."  
"I want to forgive that debt," Denise said.  
Chip's hand went to the rivet again. "I'm going to start paying you a  
minimum of four hundred a month until the principal and interest are paid 
off. It's my top priority. Absolute highest priority."  
His sister turned and raised her face to him. Her eyes were blood shot, her 
forehead as red as a newborn's. "I said I forgive the debt. You owe me 
nothing."  
549 
"Appreciate it," he said quickly, looking away. "But I'm'going to pay you 
anyway."  
"No," she said. "I'm not going to take your money. I forgive the debt. Do you 
know what 'forgive' means?"  
In her peculiar mood, with her unexpected words, she was making Chip 
anxious. He pulled on the rivet and said, "Denise, come on. Please. At least 
show me the respect of letting me pay you back. I real ize I've been a shit. But 
I don't want to be a shit all my life."  
"I want to forgive that debt," she said.  
"Really. Come on." Chip smiled desperately. "You've got to let me pay you."  
"Can you stand to be forgiven?"  
"No," he said. "Basically, no. I can't. It's better all around if I pay you."  
Still kneeling, Denise bent over and tuc ked in her arms and made herself into 
an olive, an egg, an onion. From within this balled form came a low voice. 
"Do you understand what a huge favor you'd be do ing me if you would let me 
forgive the debt? Do you understand that it's hard for me to ask th is favor? 
Do you understand that coming here for Christmas is the only other favor I've 
ever asked you? Do you un derstand that I'm not trying to insult you? Do you 
understand that I never doubted that you wanted to pay me back, and I know 
I'm asking you t o do something very hard? Do you understand that I wouldn't 
ask you to do something so hard if I didn't really, really, really need it?"  
Chip looked at the trembling balled human form at his feet. "Tell me what's 
wrong."  
"I'm having trouble on numerous fro nts," she said.  
"This is a bad time to talk about the money, then. Let's forget it for a while. I 
want to hear what's bothering you."  
Still balled up, Denise shook her head emphatically, once. "I need you to say 
yes here, now. Say 'Yes, thank you.'''  
Chip made a gesture of utter bafflement. It was near midnight and his father 
had begun to thump around upstairs and his sister was curled up like an egg 
and begging him to accept relief from the principal tor ment of his life.  
 
 
550 
THE CORRECTIONS  
"Let's talk about it tomorrow," he said.  
"Would it help if I asked you for something else?"  
"Tomorrow, OK?"  
"Mom wants somebody here next week," Denise said. "You could stay a week 
and help her. That would be a huge relief for me. I'm going to di e if I stay past 
Sunday. I will literally cease to exist."  
Chip was breathing hard. The door of the cage was closing on him fast. The 
sensation he'd had in the men's room at the Vilnius Airport, the feeling that 
his debt to Denise, far from being a burden,  was his last defense, returned to 
him in the form of dread at the prospect of its being forgiven. He'd lived with 
the affliction of this debt until it had assumed the character of a 
neuroblastoma so intricately implicated in his cerebral architecture that  he 
doubted he could survive its removal.  
He wondered if the last flights east had left the airport or whether he might 
still escape tonight.  
"How about we split the debt in half?" he said. "So I only owe you ten. How 
about we both stay here till Wednesday ?" 
"Nope."  
"If I said yes," he said, "would you stop being so weird and lighten up a 
little?"  
"First say yes."  
Alfred was calling Chip's name from upstairs. He was saying, "Chip, can you 
help me?"  
"He calls your name even when you're not here," Denise said . 
The windows shook in the wind. When had it happened that his parents had 
become the children who went to bed early and called down for help from the 
top of the stairs? When had this happened?  
"Chip," Alfred called. "I don't understand this blanket. CAN Y OU HELP ME?"  
The house shook and the storms rattled and the draft from the win dow 
nearest Chip intensified; and in a gust of memory he remembered the 
curtains. He remembered when he'd left St. Jude for college. He re membered 
packing the hand -carved Austr ian chessmen that his parents had given him 
for his high -school graduation, and the six -volume Sand burg biography of 
Lincoln that they'd given him for his eighteenth  
551 
 
birthday, and his new navy -blue blazer from Brooks Brothers' ("It makes yo u 
look like a handsome young doctor!" Enid hinted), and great stacks of white 
T-shirts and white jockey underpants and white long Johns, and a fifth -grade 
school picture of Denise in a Lucite frame, and the very same Hudson Bay 
blanket that Alfred had take n as a freshman to the University of Kansas four 
decades earlier, and a pair of leather -clad wool mittens that likewise dated 
from Alfred's deep Kansan past, and a set of heavy -duty thermal curtains that 
Alfred had bought for him at Sears. Reading Chip's c ollege orientation 
materials, Alfred had been struck by the sentence New England -winters can 
be very cold. The curtains he'd bought at Sears were of a plasticized brown -
and-pink fabric with a backing of foam rubber. They were heavy and bulky 
and stiff. "Y ou'll appreciate these on a cold night," he told Chip. "You'll be 
surprised how much they cut down drafts." But Chip's freshman roommate 
was a prep -school product named Roan McCorkle who would soon be leav ing 
thumbprints, in what appeared to be Vaseline, on the fifth -grade photo of 
Denise. Roan laughed at the curtains and Chip laughed, too. He put them 
back in the box and stowed the box in the basement of the dorm and let it 
gather mold there for the next four years. He had noth ing against the 
curtains pe rsonally. They were simply curtains and they wanted no more 
than what any curtains wanted —to hang well, to ex clude light to the best of 
their ability, to be neither too small nor too large for the window that it was 
their task in life to cover; to be pull ed this way in the evening and that way in 
the morning; to stir in the breezes that came before rain on a summer night; 
to be much used and little noticed. There were numberless hospitals and 
retirement homes and budget motels, not just in the Midwest but in the East 
as well, where these particular brown rubber -backed curtains could have had 
a long and useful life. It wasn't their fault that they didn't belong in a dorm 
room. They'd betrayed no urge to rise above their station; their material and 
patterning  contained not a hint of unseemly ambition. They were what they 
were. If anything, when he finally dug them out on the eve of graduation, 
their virginal pinkish folds turned out to be rather less plasticized and homely 
and Sears -like than he remembered. Th ey were nowhere near as shameful as 
he'd thought.  
552                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
"I don't understand these blankets," Alfred said. "All right," Ch ip told Denise 
as he started up the stairs. "If it makes you feel better, I won't pay you back."  
The question was: How to get out of this prison?  
The big black lady, the mean one, the bastard, was the one he had to keep an 
eye on. She intended t o make his life a hell. She stood at the far end of the 
prison yard throwing him significant glances to remind him that she hadn't 
forgotten him, she was still in hot pursuit of her vendetta. She was a lazy 
black bastard and he said so at a shout. He curse d the bastards, black and 
white, all around him. Goddamned sneaky bastards with their pinheaded 
regulations. EPA bureaucrats, OSHA functionaries, insolent so -and-sos. They 
were keeping their dis tance now, sure, because they knew he was onto them, 
but just  let him nod off for one minute, just let him let his guard down, and 
watch what they would do to him. They could hardly wait to tell him he was 
noth ing. They could hardly wait to show their disrespect. That fat black bas -
tard, that nasty black bitch over  there, held his eye and nodded across the 
white heads of the other prisoners: Pm gonna get you. That's what her nod 
said to him. And nobody else could see what she was doing to him. All the 
rest were timid useless strangers talking nonsense. He'd said hel lo to one of 
the fellows, asked him a simple question. The fellow didn't even understand 
English. It ought to have been simple enough, ask a simple question, get a 
simple answer, but evidently not. He was on his own now, he was by himself 
in a corner; and the bastards were out to get him.  
He didn't understand where Chip was. Chip was an intellectual and had ways 
of talking sense to these people. Chip had done a good job yesterday, better 
than he could have done himself. Asked a simple ques tion, got a simpl e 
answer, and then explained it in a way that a man could understand. But 
there was no sign of Chip now. Inmates sema phoring one another, waving 
their arms like traffic cops. Just try giving a simple order to these people, just 
try it. They pretended you didn't exist. That fat bastard black woman had 
them all scared witless. If she figured out that the prisoners were on his side, 
if she found out they'd  
 
aided him in any way, she'd make them pay. Oh, she had'that look. She had 
that Fm gonna make  you hurt look. And he, at this point in his life, he'd had 
just about enough of this insolent black type of woman, but what could you 
do? It was a prison. It was a public institution. They'd throw anybody in here. 
White -haired women semaphoring. Hairless fairies touching toes. But why 
him, for God's sake? Why him? It made him weep to be thrown into a place 
like this. It was hell to get old even without being persecuted by that waddling 
black so -and-so. 
And here she came again.  
"Alfred?"  Sassy.  Insolent.  "You gonna let me stretch your legs  
nowr 
"You're a goddamned bastard!" he told her.  
"I is what I is, Alfred. But I know who my parents are. Now why don't you put 
your hands down, nice and easy, and let me stretch your legs and help you 
feel better."  
He lunged as she came at him, but his belt had got stuck in the chair, in the 
chair somehow, in the chair. Got stuck in the chair and he couldn't move.  
"You keep that up, Alfred," the mean one said, "and we're gonna have to take 
you back to your room."  
"Bastard! Bastard! Bastard!"  
She pulled an insolent face and went away, but he knew that she'd be back. 
They always came back. His only hope was to get his belt free of the chair 
somehow. Get himself free, make a dash, put an end to it. Bad design to build 
a prison yard this many stories up. A man could see clear to Illinois. Big 
window right there. Bad design if they meant to house prisoners here. From 
the look of the glass it was thermal pane, two layers. If he hit it with his head 
and pitched forward he cou ld make it. But first he had to get the goddamned 
belt free.  
He struggled with its smooth nylon breadth in the same way over and over. 
There was a time when he'd encountered obstacles philosoph ically but that 
time was past. His fingers were as weak as gra ss when he tried to work them 
under the belt so he could pull on it. They bent like soft bananas. Trying to 
work them under the belt was so obviously and  
554 
THE CORRECTIONS  
utterly hopeless —the belt had such overwhelming advantages of tough ness 
and tightness —that his efforts soon became merely a pageant of spite and 
rage and incapacity. He caught his fingernails on the belt and then flung his 
arms apart, letting his hands bang into the arms of his captivating chair and 
painfully ricochet this wa y and that way, because he was so goddamned 
angry — 
"Dad, Dad, Dad, whoa, calm down," the voice said.  
"Get that bastard! Get that bastard!"  
"Dad, whoa, it's me. It's Chip."  
Indeed, the voice was familiar. He looked up at Chip carefully to make sure 
the spea ker really was his middle child, because the bastards would try to 
take advantage of you any way they could. Indeed, if the speaker had been 
anybody in the world but Chip, it wouldn't have paid to trust him. Too risky. 
But there was something in Chipper th at the bastards couldn't fake. You 
looked at Chipper and you knew he'd never lie to you. There was a sweetness 
to Chipper that nobody else could counterfeit.  
As his identification of Chipper deepened toward certainty, his breathing 
leveled out and somethin g like a smile pushed through the other, warring 
forces in his face.  
"Well!" he said finally.  
Chip pulled another chair over and gave him a cup of ice water for which, he 
realized, he was thirsty. He took a long pull on the straw and gave the water 
back to  Chip.  
"Where's your mother?"  
Chip set the cup on the floor. "She woke up with a cold. I told her to stay in 
bed."  
"Where's she living now?"  
"She's at home. Exactly where she was two days ago."  
Chip had already explained to him why he had to be here, and the 
explanation had made sense as long as he could see Chip's face and hear his 
voice, but as soon as Chip was gone the explanation fell apart.  
The big black bastard was circling the two of them with her evil eye.  
555  
 
"This is a physical -therapy room," Chip said. "We're on the eighth floor of St. 
Luke's. Mom had her foot operation here, if you remember that."  
"That woman is a bastard," he said, pointing.  
"No, she's a physical therapist, " Chip said, "and she's been trying to help 
you."  
"No, look at her. Do you see the way she's? Do you see it?"  
"She's a physical therapist, Dad."  
"The what? She's a?"  
On the one hand, he trusted the intelligence and assurance of his intellectual 
son. On the  other hand, the black bastard was giving him the Eye to warn him 
of the harm she intended to do him at her earliest opportunity; there was a 
grand malevolence to her manner, plain as day. He couldn't begin to 
reconcile this contradiction: his belief that Chip was absolutely right and his 
conviction that that bastard absolutely wasn't any physicist.  
The contradiction opened into a bottomless chasm. He stared into its depths, 
his mouth hanging open. A warm thing was crawling down his chin.  
And now some basta rd's hand was reaching for him. He tried to slug the 
bastard and realized, in the nick of time, that the hand be longed to Chip.  
"Easy, Dad. I'm just wiping your chin."  
"Ah God."  
"Do you want to sit here a little, or do you want to go back to your room?"  
"I leave it to your discretion."  
This handy phrase came to him all ready to be spoken, neat as you please.  
"Let's go back, then." Chip reached behind the chair and made  
I                          adjustments. Evidently the chair had casters and levers of 
enormous  
complexity. "See if you can get my belt unhooked," he said. "We'll go back to 
the room, and then you can walk around." Chip wheeled him out of the yard 
and up the cellblock to his cell.  
 
THE CORRECTIONS  
He couldn't get over how luxurious the appointments were. Like a first -class 
hotel room except for the bars on the bed and the shackles and the radios, the 
prisoner -control equipment.  
Chip parked him near the window, left the room with a Styrofoam pitcher,  
and returned a few minutes later in the company of a pretty little girl in a 
white jacket.  
"Mr. Lambert?" she said. She was pretty like Denise, with curly black hair 
and wire glasses, but smaller. "I'm Dr. Schulman. You may remember we met 
yesterday."  
"Well!" he said, smiling wide. He remembered a world where there were girls 
like this, pretty little girls with bright eyes and smart brows, a world of hope.  
She placed a hand on his head and bent down as if to kiss him. She scared the 
hell out of him. He almost hit her.  
"I didn't mean to scare you," she said. "I just want to look in your eye. Is that 
all right with you?"  
He turned to Chip for reassurance, but Chip himself was staring at the girl.  
"Chip!" he said.  
Chip took his eyes off her. "Yeah, Dad?"  
Well, now that he'd attracted Chip's attention, he had to say some thing, and 
what he said was this: "Tell your mother not to worry about the mess down 
there. I'll take care of all that."  
"OK. I'll tell her."  
The girl's clever fingers and soft face were all around his head. She asked him 
to make a fist, she pinched him and prodded him. She was talking like the 
television in somebody else's room.  
"Dad?" Chip said.  
"I didn't hear."  
"Dr. Schulman wants to know if you'd prefer 'Alfred' or 'Mr. Lambert.' What 
woul d you rather she called you?"  
He grinned painfully. "I'm not following."  
"I think he prefers 'Mr. Lambert,' " Chip said.  
"Mr. Lambert," said the little girl, "can you tell me where we are?"  
He turned again to Chip, whose expression was expectant but un - 
557 
helpful. He pointed toward the window. "That's Illinois in that direc tion," he 
said to his son and to the girl. Both were listening with great interest now, 
and he felt he should say more. "There's a window," he said, "which ... if you 
get it open . . . would be what I want. I couldn't get the belt undone. And 
then."  
He was failing and he knew it.  
The little girl looked down on him kindly. "Can you tell me who our President 
is?" 
He grinned, it was an easy one.  
"Well," he said. "She's got so muc h stuff down there. I doubt she'd even 
notice. We ought to pitch the whole lot of it."  
The little girl nodded as if this were a reasonable answer. Then she held up 
both her hands. She was pretty like Enid, but Enid had a wed ding ring, Enid 
didn't wear gla sses, Enid had lately gotten older, and he probably would have 
recognized Enid, although, being far more famil iar to him than Chip, she was 
that much harder to see.  
"How many fingers am I holding up?" the girl asked him.  
He considered her fingers. As far as he could tell, the message they were 
sending was Relax. Unclench. Take it easy.  
With a smile he let his bladder empty.  
"Mr. Lambert? How many fingers am I holding up?"  
The fingers were there. It was a beautiful thing. The relief of irre sponsibility. 
The less he knew, the happier he was. To know nothing at all would be 
heaven.  
"Dad?"  
"I should know that," he said. "Can you believe I'd forget a thing like that?"  
The little girl and Chip exchanged a look and then went out into the corridor.  
He'd enjoyed unclenching, but after a minute or two he felt clammy. He 
needed to change his clothes now and he couldn't. He sat in his mess as it 
chilled.  
"Chip?" he said.  
A stillness had fallen on the cellblock. He couldn't rely on Chip, he was always 
disappearing. He couldn't rely on anybody but himself.  
558 
THE CORRECTIONS  
With no plan in his head and no power in his hands he attempted to loosen 
the belt so he could take his pants off and dry himself. But the belt was as 
maddening as ever. Twe nty times he ran his hands along its length and 
twenty times he failed to find a buckle. He was like a person of two 
dimensions seeking freedom in a third. He could search for all eternity and 
never find the goddamned buckle.  
"Chip!" he called, but not lou dly, because the black bastard was lurking out 
there, and she would punish him severely. "Chip, come and help me."  
He would have liked to remove his legs entirely. They were weak and restless 
and wet and trapped. He kicked a little and rocked in his unrock ing chair. His 
hands were in a tumult. The less he could do about his legs, the more he 
swung his arms. The bastards had him now, he'd been betrayed, and he 
began to cry. If only he'd known! If only he'd known, he could have taken 
steps, he'd had the gun, he'd had the bottomless cold ocean, if only he'd 
known.  
He swatted a pitcher of water against the wall, and finally somebody came 
running.  
"Dad, Dad, Dad. What's wrong?"  
Alfred looked up at his son and into his eyes. He opened his mouth, but the 
only word he could produce was "I —" 
j__ 
I have made mistakes — 
I am alone — 
I am wet — 
I want to die — 
I am sorry — 
I did my best — 
I love my children — 
I need your help — 
I want to die — 
"I can't be here," he said.  
Chip crouched on the floor by the chair. "Listen," he said. "You have to stay 
here another week so they can monitor you. We need to find out what's 
wrong."  
He shook his head. "No! You have to get me out of here!"  
"Dad, I'm sorry," Chip said, "but I can't take you home. You have to stay here 
for another week at least."  
Oh, how his son tried his patience! By now Chip should have understood 
what he was asking for without being told again.  
"I'm saying put an end to it! " He banged on the arms of his capti vating chair. 
"You have to help me put an end to it!"  
He looked at the window through which he was ready, at last, to throw 
himself. Or give him a gun, give him an ax, give him anything, but get him 
out of here. He had to make Chip understand this.  
Chip covered his shaking hands with his own.  
"I'll stay with you, Dad," he said. "But I can't do that for you. I can't put an 
end to it like that. I'm sorry."  
Like a wife who had died or a house that had burned, the clarity to  think and 
the power to act were still vivid in his memory. Through a window that gave 
onto the next world, he could still see the clarity and see the power, just out 
of reach, beyond the window's thermal panes. He could see the desired 
outcomes, the drown ing at sea, the shotgun blast, the plunge from a height, 
so near to him still that he refused to believe he'd lost the opportunity to avail 
himself of their relief.  
He wept at the injustice of his sentence. "For God's sake, Chip," he said 
loudly, because h e sensed that this might be his last chance to liber ate 
himself before he lost all contact with that clarity and power and it was 
therefore crucial that Chip understand exactly what he wanted. "I'm asking 
for your help! You've got to get me out of this! Y ou have to put an end to it!"  
Even red -eyed, even tear -streaked, Chip's face was full of power and clarity. 
Here was a son whom he could trust to understand him as he understood 
himself; and so Chip's answer, when it came, was absolute. Chip's answer 
told him that this was where the story ended. It ended with Chip shaking his 
head, it ended with him saying: "I can't, Dad. I  
560 
 
 
THE CORRECTION, when it finally came, was not an overnight bursting of a 
bubble but a much more gentle letdow n, a year -long leakage of value from 
key financial markets, a contraction too gradual to generate head lines and 
too predictable to seriously hurt anybody but fools and the working poor.  
It seemed to Enid that current events in general were more muted or i nsipid 
nowadays than they'd been in her youth. She had memories of the 1930s, 
she'd seen firsthand what could happen to a country when the world 
economy took its gloves off; she'd helped her mother pass out leftovers to 
homeless men in the alley behind the ir roominghouse. But disasters of this 
magnitude no longer seemed to befall the United States. Safety features had 
been put in place, like the squares of rubber that every modern playground 
was paved with, to soften impacts.  
Nevertheless, the markets did c ollapse, and Enid, who hadn't dreamed that 
she would ever be glad that Alfred had locked their assets up in annuities and 
T-bills, weathered the downturn with less anxiety than her high -flying 
friends. Orfic Midland did, as threatened, termi nate her tradi tional health 
insurance and force her into an HMO, but her old neighbor Dean Driblett, 
with the stroke of a pen, bless his heart, upgraded her and Alfred to 
DeeDeeCare Choice Plus, which allowed her to keep her favorite doctors. She 
still had major non reimbursable monthly nursing -home expenses, but by 
scrimping she was able to pay the bills with Alfred's pension and Railroad 
Retirement benefits, and meanwhile her house, which she owned outright, 
contin ued to appreciate. The simple truth was that, although  she wasn't rich, 
she also wasn't poor. Somehow this truth had eluded her during the years of 
her anxiety and uncertainty about Alfred, but as soon as he was out of the 
house and she'd caught up on her sleep, she saw it clearly.  
She saw everything more cle arly now, her children in particular.  
563  
When Gary returned to St. Jude with Jonah a few months after the 
catastrophic Christmas, she had nothing but fun with them. Gary still wanted 
her to sell the house, but he could no longer argue that Alfre d was going to 
fall down the stairs and kill himself, and by then Chip had done many of the 
jobs (wicker -painting, waterproofing, gutter -cleaning, crack -patching) which, 
as long as they'd been neglected, had been Gary's other good argument for 
selling the house. He and Enid did bicker about money, but this was 
recreational. Gary hounded her for the $4.96 that she still "owed" him for six 
six-inch bolts, and she coun tered by asking, "Is that a new watch?" He 
conceded that, yes, Caroline had given him a new Rolex for Christmas, but 
more recently he'd taken a nasty little bath on a biotech IPO whose shares he 
couldn't sell before June 15, and anyway, there was a principle at stake here, 
Mother, a prin ciple. But Enid refused, on principle, to give him the $4.9 6. 
She en joyed knowing that she would go to her grave refusing to pay for those 
six bolts. She asked Gary which biotech stock, exactly, he'd taken the bath on. 
Gary said never mind.  
After Christmas Denise moved to Brooklyn and went to work at a new 
restau rant, and in April she sent Enid a plane ticket for her birth day. Enid 
thanked her and said she couldn't make the trip, she couldn't possibly leave 
Alfred, it would not be right. Then she went and enjoyed four wonderful days 
in New York City. Denise looke d so much happier than she had at Christmas 
that Enid chose not to care that she still didn't have a man in her life or any 
discernible desire to get one.  
Back in St. Jude, Enid was playing bridge at Mary Beth Schumpert's one 
afternoon when Bea Meisner beg an to vent her Christian disap proval of a 
famous "gay" actress.  
"She's a terrible role model for young people," Bea said. "I think if you make 
an evil choice in your life, the least you can do is not brag about it. Especially 
when they have all these new programs that can help people like that."  
Enid, who was Bea's partner for that rubber and was already annoyed by 
Bea's failure to respond to an opening two -bid, mildly commented that she 
didn't think "gays" could help being "gay."  
"Oh, no, it's definitely a choice," Bea said. "It's a weakness and it  
 
 
564 
THE CORRECTIONS  
starts in adolescence. There's no question about that. All tfie experts agree."  
"I loved that thriller her girlfriend made with Harrison Ford," Mary Beth 
Schumpert said. "What was it called?"  
"I don't believe it's a choice," Enid insisted quietly. "Chip said an interesting 
thing to me once. He said that with so many people hating 'gay s' and 
disapproving of them, why would anybody choose to be 'gay' if they could 
help it? I thought that was really an interesting perspec tive."  
"Well, no, it's because they want special rights," Bea said. "It's be cause they 
want to have 'gay pride.' That 's why so many people don't like them, even 
apart from the immorality of what they're doing. They can't just make an evil 
choice. They have to brag about it, too."  
"I can't remember the last time I saw a really good movie," said Mary Beth.  
Enid was no cham pion of "alternative" lifestyles, and the things she disliked 
about Bea Meisner she'd disliked for forty years. She couldn't have said why 
this particular bridge -table conversation made her decide that she no longer 
needed to be friends with Bea Meisner. N or could she have said why Gary's 
materialism and Chip's failures and Denise's childlessness, which had cost 
her countless late -night hours of fretting and punitive judgment over the 
years, distressed her so much less once Alfred was out of the house.  
It m ade a difference, certainly, that all three of her kids were help ing out. 
Chip in particular seemed almost miraculously transformed. After Christmas, 
he stayed with Enid for six weeks, visiting Alfred every day, before returning 
to New York. A month later  he was back in St. Jude, minus his awful earrings. 
He proposed that he extend his visit to a length that delighted and astonished 
Enid until it emerged that he'd got himself involved with the chief neurology 
resident at St. Luke's Hospital.  
The neurologis t, Alison Schulman, was a kinky -haired and rather plain -
looking Jewish girl from Chicago. Enid liked her well enough, but she was 
mystified that a successful young doctor wanted anything to do with her 
semi -employed son. The mystery deepened in June when  
Chip announced that he was moving to Chicago to commence an im moral 
cohabitation with Alison, who had joined a group practice in Skokie. Chip 
neither confirmed nor denied that he had no real job and no intention of 
paying his fair share of house hold expenses. He claimed to be working on a 
screenplay. He said that "his" producer in New York had "loved" his "new" 
version and asked for a rewrite. His only gainful employment, however, as far 
as Enid knew, was part -time substitute teaching. Enid did a ppreciate that he 
drove to St. Jude from Chicago once a month and spent several long days 
with Alfred; she loved having a child of hers back in the Midwest. But when 
Chip informed her that he was going to be the father of twins with a woman 
he wasn't even married to, and when he then invited Enid to a wedding at 
which the bride was seven months pregnant and the groom's current "job" 
consisted of rewriting his screenplay for the fourth or fifth time and the 
majority of the guests not only were extremely Jewi sh but seemed delighted 
with the happy couple, there was certainly no shortage of material for Enid to 
find fault with and condemn! And it didn't make her proud of herself, it 
didn't make her feel good about her nearly fifty years of marriage, to think 
that if Alfred had been with her at the wedding, she would have found fault 
and she would have condemned. If she'd been sitting beside Alfred, the 
crowd bearing down on her would surely have seen the sour look on her face 
and turned away, would surely not hav e lifted her and her chair off the 
ground and carried her around the room while the klezmer music played, and 
she would surely not have loved it.  
The sorry fact seemed to be that life without Alfred in the house was better 
for everyone but Alfred.  
Hedgpeth  and the other doctors, including Alison Schulman, had kept the old 
man at St. Luke's through January and into February, lustily billing Orfic 
Midland's soon -to-be-former health insurer while they explored every 
conceivable avenue of treatment, from ECT to  Haldol. Alfred was finally 
discharged with a diagnosis of parkinsonism, dementia, depression, and 
neuropathy of the legs and urinary tract. Enid felt morally obliged to offer to 
care for him at home, but her chil dren, thank God, wouldn't hear of it. Alfr ed 
was installed in the Deep -mire Home, a long -term care facility adjacent to the 
country club, and  
56B                                                                                                                THE CORRECTIONS  
Enid undertook to visit him every day, to keep him well dressed, and to bring 
him homemade treats.  
She was glad, if nothing else, to have his body back. She'd always loved his 
size, his shape, his smell, and he was much more available now that he was 
restrained in a geri  chair and unable to formulate coherent objections to 
being touched. He let himself be kissed and didn't cringe if her lips lingered a 
little; he didn't flinch if she stroked his hair.  
His body was what she'd always wanted. It was the rest of him that was the 
problem. She was unhappy before she went to visit him, un happy while she 
sat beside him, and unhappy for hours afterward. He'd entered a phase of 
deep randomness. Enid might arrive and find him sunk deeply in a funk, his 
chin on his chest and a cookie -sized drool spot on his pants leg. Or he might 
be chatting amiably with a stroke vic tim or a potted plant. He might be 
unpeeling the invisible piece of fruit that occupied his attention hour after 
hour. He might be sleeping. Whatever he was doing, though , he wasn't 
making sense.  
Somehow Chip and Denise had the patience to sit and converse with him 
about whatever demented scenario he inhabited, whatever train wreck or 
incarceration or luxury cruise, but Enid couldn't tolerate the least error. If he 
mistook  her for her mother, she corrected him an grily: "Al, it's me, Enid, your 
wife of forty -eight years." If he mistook her for Denise, she used the very 
same words. She'd felt Wrong all her life and now she had a chance to tell 
him how Wrong he was. Even as s he was loosening up and becoming less 
critical in other areas of life, she re mained strictly vigilant at the Deepmire 
Home. She had to come and tell Alfred that he was wrong to dribble ice 
cream on his clean, freshly pressed pants. He was wrong not to rec ognize Joe 
Person when Joe was nice enough to drop in. He was wrong not to look at 
snapshots of Aaron and Caleb and Jonah. He was wrong not to be excited 
that Alison had given birth to two slightly underweight but healthy baby girls. 
He was wrong not to be  happy or grateful or even remotely lucid when his 
wife and daughter went to enormous trouble to bring him home for 
Thanksgiving dinner. He was wrong to say, after that dinner, when they 
returned him to the Deepmire Home, "Better not to leave here than to have 
to come back." He was wrong, if he could be so lucid as to produce  
567 
a sentence like that, not to be lucid at any other time: He was wrong to 
attempt to hang himself with bedsheets in the night. He was wrong to hurl 
himself against a windo w. He was wrong to try to slash his wrist with a 
dinner fork. Altogether he was wrong about so many things that, except for 
her four days in New York and her two Christmases in Philadelphia and her 
three weeks of recovery from hip surgery, she never failed  to visit him. She 
had to tell him, while she still had time, how wrong he'd been and how right 
she'd been. How wrong not to love her more, how wrong not to cherish her 
and have sex at every opportu nity, how wrong not to trust her financial 
instincts, how  wrong to have spent so much time at work and so little with 
the children, how wrong to have been so negative, how wrong to have been so 
gloomy, how wrong to have run away from life, how wrong to have said no, 
again and again, instead of yes: she had to te ll him all of this, every single 
day. Even if he wouldn't listen, she had to tell him.  
He'd been living at the Deepmire Home for two years when he stopped 
accepting food. Chip took time away from parenthood and his new teaching 
job at a private high school  and his eighth revision of the screenplay to visit 
from Chicago and say goodbye. Alfred lasted longer after that than anyone 
expected. He was a lion to the end. His blood pressure was barely measurable 
when Denise and Gary flew into town, and still he liv ed another week. He lay 
curled up on the bed and barely breathed. He moved for nothing and 
responded to nothing except to shake his head emphatically, once, if Enid 
tried to put an ice chip in his mouth. The one thing he never forgot was how 
to refuse. All  of her correction had been for naught. He was as stubborn as 
the day she'd met him. And yet when he was dead, when she'd pressed her 
lips to his forehead and walked out with Denise and Gary into the warm 
spring night, she felt that nothing could kill her hope now, nothing. She was 
seventy -five and she was going to make some changes in her life.  
