Alan Hollinghurst 
“The Line of Beauty” 
 
(Winner of the Booker Prize, 2004)  
 
  
  
'What do you know about this business?' the King said to ice. 
'Nothing,' said Alice. 'Nothing whatever?' persisted the King. 'Nothing 
whatever,' said Alice. 'That's very important,' the King said, turning to 
the jury. hey were just beginning to write this down on their slates, 
when the White Rabbit interrupted: ' f/wimportant, your Majesty 
means, of course,' he said in a very respectful tone, but frowning and 
making faces at him as he spoke. 
 ' Cwimportant, of course, I meant,' the King hastily said, and 
went on to himself in an undertone, 'important - unimportant - 
unimportant - important -' as if he were trying which word sounded 
best. 
 Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, chapter 12  
 THE LOVE-CHORD (1983)  
 
 
 
 
Peter Crowther's book on the election was already in the shops. It was 
called Landslide!, and the witty assistant at Dillons had arranged the 
window in a scaled-down version of that natural disaster. The pale-gilt 
image of the triumphant Prime Minister rushed towards die customer 
in a gleaming slippage. 
 Nick stopped in the street, and then went in to look at a copy. He 
had met Peter Crowther once, and heard him described as a hack and 
also as a 'mordant analyst': his faint smile, as he flicked through the 
pages, concealed his uncertainty as to which account was nearer the 
truth. There was clearly something hacklike in the speed of 
publication, only two months after the event; and in the actual writing, 
of course. The book's mordancy seemed to be reserved for the efforts of 
the Opposition. Nick looked carefully at trie photographs, but only one 
of them had Gerald in it: a group picture of 'The 101 New Tory MPs', in 
which he'd been clever enough, or quick enough, to get into the front 
row. He sat there smiling and staring as if in his own mind it was 
already the front bench. The smile, the white collar worn with a dark 
shirt, the floppy breast-pocket handkerchief would surely be famous 
when the chaps in the rows behind were mere forgotten grins and 
frowns. Even so, he was mentioned only twice in the text - as a 'bon 
viveur', and as one of the 'dwindling minority' of Conservative MPs who 
had passed, 'as Gerald Fedden, the new Member for Barwick, so 
obviously has', through public school and Oxbridge. Nick left the shop 
with a shrug; but out in the street he felt delayed pride at this sighting 
of a person he knew in a published book. 
 He had a blind date at eight that evening, and the hot August day 
was a shimmer of nerves, with little breezy interludes of lustful 
dreaming. The date wasn't totally blind - 'just very short-sighted', 
Catherine Fedden said, when Nick showed her the photograph and the 
letter. She seemed to like the look of the man, who was called Leo, and 
who she said was so much her type; but his handwriting made her 
jumpy. It was both elaborate and impetuous. Catherine had a 
paperback called Graphology: The Mind in the Hand, which gave her 
all sorts of warnings about peoples tendencies and repressions ('Artist 
or Madman?' 
 'Pet or Brute?'). 'It's those enormous ascenders, darling,' she 
said: 'I see a lot of ego.' They had pursed their lips again over the little 
square of cheap blue writing paper. 'You're sure that doesn't just mean 
a very strong sex drive?' 
 Nick asked. But she seemed to think not. He had been excited, 
and even rather moved, to get this letter from a stranger; but it was 
true the text itself raised few expectations. 'Nick - OK! Ref your letter, 
am in Personnel (London Borough of Brent). We can meet up, discuss 
Interests and Ambitions. Say When. 
 Say Where' - and then the enormous rampant L of Leo going 
halfway down the page. 
 Nick had moved into the Feddens' big white Notting Hill house a 
few weeks before. His room was up in the roof, still clearly the 
children's zone, with its lingering mood of teenage secrets and 
rebellions. Toby's orderly den was at the top of the stairs, Nick's room 
just along the skylit landing, and Catherine's at the far end; Nick had 
no brothers or sisters but he was able to think of himself here as a lost 
middle child. It was Toby who had brought him here, in earlier 
vacations, for his London 'seasons', long thrilling escapes from his own 
far less glamorous family; and Toby whose half-dressed presence still 
haunted the attic passage. Toby himself had never perhaps known why 
he and Nick were friends, but had amiably accepted the evidence that 
they were. In these months after Oxford he was rarely there, and Nick 
had been passed on as a friend to his little sister and to their 
hospitable parents. He was a friend of the family; and there was 
something about him they trusted, a gravity, a certain shy polish, 
something not quite apparent to Nick himself, which had helped the 
family agree that he should become their lodger. When Gerald had won 
Barwick, which was Nick's home constituency, the arrangement was 
jovially hailed as having the logic of poetry, or fate. 
 
 Gerald and Rachel were still in France, and Nick found himself 
almost resenting their return at the end of the month. The 
housekeeper came in early each morning, to prepare the day's meals, 
and Gerald's secretary, with sunglasses on top of her head, looked in 
to deal with the imposing volume of post. The gardener announced 
himself by the roar of the mower outside an open window. Mr Duke, 
the handyman (His Grace, as the family called him), was at work on 
various bits of maintenance. And Nick was in residence, and almost, 
he felt, in possession. He loved coming home to Kensington Park 
Gardens in the early evening, when the wide treeless street was raked 
by the sun, and the two white terraces stared at each other with the 
glazed tolerance of rich neighbours. He loved letting himself in at the 
three-locked green front door, and locking it again behind him, and 
feeling the still security of the house as he looked into the red-walled 
dining room, or climbed the stairs to the double drawing room, and up 
again past the half-open doors of the white bedrooms. The first flight of 
stairs, fanning out into the hall, was made of stone; the upper flights 
had the confidential creak of oak. He saw himself leading someone up 
them, showing the house to a new friend, to Leo perhaps, as if it was 
really his own, or would be one day: the pictures, the porcelain, the 
curvy French furniture so different from what he'd been brought up 
with. In the dark polished wood he was partnered by reflections as dim 
as shadows. He'd taken the % chance to explore the whole house, from 
the wedge-shaped attic cupboards to the basement junk room, a dim 
museum in itself, referred to by Gerald as the trou de gloire. Above the 
drawing-room fireplace there was a painting by Guardi, a capriccio of 
Venice in a gilt rococo frame; on the facing wall were two large gilt-
framed mirrors. Like his hero Henry James, Nick felt that he could 
'stand a great deal of gilt'. 
 Sometimes Toby would have come back, and there would be loud 
music in the drawing room; or he was in his father's study at the back 
of the house making international phone calls and having a gin-and-
tonic - all this done not in defiance of his parents but in rightful 
imitation of their own freedoms in the place. He would go into the 
garden and pull his shirt off impatiently and sprawl in a deckchair 
reading the sport in the Telegraph. Nick would see him from the 
balcony and go down to join him, slightly breathless, knowing Toby 
quite liked his rower's body to be looked at. It was the easy charity of 
beauty. They would have a beer and Toby would say, 'My sis all right? 
Not too mad, I hope,' and Nick would say, 'She's fine, she's fine,' 
shielding his eyes from the dropping August sun, and smiling back at 
him with reassurance, among other unguessed emotions. 
 Catherines ups and downs were part of Nick's mythology of the 
house. Toby had told him about them, as a mark of trust, one evening 
in college, sitting on a bench by the lake. 'She's pretty volatile, you 
know,' he said, quietly impressed by his own choice of word. 'Yah, she 
has these moods.' To Nick the whole house, as yet only imagined, took 
on the light and shade of moods, the life that was lived there as 
steeped in emotion as the Oxford air was with the smell of the lake 
water. 'She used to, you know, cut her arms, with a razor blade.' Toby 
winced and nodded. 'Thank god she's grown out of all that now.' This 
sounded more challenging than mere moods, and when Nick first met 
her he found himself glancing tensely at her arms. On one forearm 
there were neat parallel lines, a couple of inches long, and on the other 
a pattern of right-angled scars that you couldn't help trying to read as 
letters; it might have been an attempt at the word ELLE. But they were 
long healed over, evidence of something that would otherwise be 
forgotten; sometimes she traced them abstractedly with a finger. 
 'Looking after the Cat' was how Gerald had put it before they 
went away, with the suggestion that the task was as simple as that, 
and as responsible. It was Catherine's house but it was Nick who was 
in charge. She camped nervously in the place, as though she and not 
Nick was the lodger. She was puzzled by his love of its pompous 
spaces, and mocked his knowledgeable attachment to the paintings 
and furniture. 'You're such a snob,' she said, with a provoking laugh; 
coming from the family he was thought to be snobbish about, this was 
a bit of a facer. 'I'm not really,' said Nick, as if a small admission was 
the best kind of denial, 'I just love beautiful things.' Catherine peered 
around comically, as though at so much junk. In her parents' absence 
her instincts were humbly transgressive, and mainly involved smoking 
and asking strangers home. Nick came back one evening to find her 
drinking in the kitchen with an old black minicab driver and telling 
him what the contents of the house were insured for. 
 At nineteen she already had a catalogue of failed boyfriends, each 
with a damning epithet, which was sometimes all Nick knew them by: 
'Crabs' or 'Drip-Dry' or 'Quantity Surveyor'. A' lot of them seemed 
almost consciously chosen for their unacceptability at Kensington Park 
Gardens: a tramplike Welshman in his forties whom she'd met in the 
Notting Hill Record Exchange; a beautiful punk with FUCK tattooed on 
his neck; a Rastafarian from round the corner who moaned 
prophetically about Babylon and the downfall of Thatcher. 
 Others were public schoolboys and sleek young professionals on 
the make in the Thatcher slump. Catherine was slight but physically 
reckless; what drew boys to her often frightened them away. Nick, in 
his secret innocence, felt a certain respect for her experience with men: 
to have so many failures required a high rate of preliminary success. 
He could never judge how attractive she was. In her case the genetic 
mixture of two good-looking parents had prdduced something different 
from Toby's sleepy beauty: Gerald's large confidence-winning mouth 
had been awkwardly squashed into the slender ellipse of Rachel's face. 
Catherine's emotions always rushed to her mouth. 
 She loved anything satirical, and was a clever vocal mimic. When 
she and Nick got drunk she did funny imitations of her family, so that 
oddly they seemed not to have gone away. There was Gerald, with his 
facetious boom, his taste for the splendid, his favourite tags from the 
Alice books. 'Really, Catherine,' protested Catherine, you would try the 
patience of an oyster.' Or, 'You recall the branches of arithmetic, Nick? 
Ambition, Distraction, Uglification, and Derision…?' Nick joined in, 
with a sense of treacherously bad manners. It was Rachel's style that 
attracted him more, as a code both aristocratic and distantly foreign. 
Her group sounded nearly Germanic, and the sort of thing she would 
never belong to; her philistine, pronounced as a French word, seemed 
to cover, by implication, anyone who said it differently. Nick tried this 
out on Catherine, who laughed but perhaps wasn't much impressed. 
Toby she couldn't be bothered to mimic; and it was true that he was 
hard to 'get'. She did a funny turn as her godmother, the Duchess of 
Flintshire, who as plain Sharon Feingold had been Rachel's best friend 
at Cranborne Chase school, and whose presence in their lives gave a 
special archness to their joke about Mr Duke the odd-job man. 
 The Duke that Sharon had married had a twisted spine and a 
crumbling casde, and the Feingold vinegar fortune had come in very 
handy. Nick hadn't met the Duchess yet, but after Catherine's 
impression of a thoughtless social dynamo he felt he'd had the 
pleasure without the concomitant anxiety. Nick never talked to 
Catherine about his crush on her brother. He was afraid she would 
find it funny. 
 But they talked; i good deal about Leo, in the week of waiting, a 
week that crawled and jumped and crawled. There wasn't much to go 
on, but enough for two lively imaginations to build a character from: 
the pale-blue letter, with its dubious ascenders; his voice, which only 
Nick had heard, in the stilted cheerful chat which finalized the plans, 
and which was neutrally London, not recognizably black, though he 
sensed a special irony and lack of expectation in it; and his colour 
photograph, which showed that if Leo wasn't as handsome as he 
claimed he still demanded to be looked at. He was sitting on a park 
bench, seen from the waist up and leaning back - it was hard to tell 
how tall he was. He was wearing a dark bomber jacket and gazed away 
with a frown, which seemed to cast a shadow over his features, or to 
be a shadow rising within them. Behind him you could see the silver-
grey crossbar of a racing bike, propped against the bench. 
 The substance of the original ad ('Black guy, late 20s, v. good-
looking, interests cinema, music, politics, seeks intelligent like-minded 
guy 18-40') was half-obliterated by Nick's later dreamings and 
Catherine's premonitions, which dragged Leo further and further off 
into her own territory of uncomfortable sex and bad faith. At times 
Nick had to reassure himself that he and not Catherine was the one 
who had a date with him. Hurrying home that evening he glanced 
through the requirements again. He couldn't help feeling he was going 
to fall short of his new lovers standards. He was intelligent, he had just 
got a first-class degree from Oxford University, but people meant such 
different things by music and politics. Well, knowing the Feddens 
would give him an angle. 
 He found the tolerant age range comforting. He was only twenty, 
but he could have been twice that age and Leo would still have wanted 
him. In fact he might be going to stay with Leo for twenty years: that 
seemed to be the advertisement's coded promise. 
 The second post was still scattered across the hall, and there was 
no sound from upstairs; but he felt, from a charge in the air, that he 
wasn't alone. He gathered up the letters and found that Gerald had 
sent him a postcard. It was a black-and-white picture of a 
Romanesque doorway, with flanking saints and a lively Last 
Judgement in the tympanum: 'Eglise de Podier, XII siecle'. Gerald had 
large, impatient handwriting, in which most of the letters were missed 
out, and perhaps unnegotiable with his very thick nib. The author of 
Graphology might have diagnosed an ego as big as Leo's, but the main 
impression was of almost evasive haste. He had a sign-off that could 
have been 'Love' but could have been 'Yours' or even, absurdly, 'Hello' - 
so you didn't quite know where you stood with him. As far as Nick 
could make out they were enjoying themselves. He was pleased to have 
the card, but it cast a slight shadow, by reminding him that the 
August idyll would soon be over. 
 He went into the kitchen, where Catherine, it must be, had made 
a mess since Elena's early morning visit. The cutlery drawers tilted 
heavily open. There was a vague air of intrusion. He darted into the 
dining room, but the boulle clock ticked on in its place on the 
mantelpiece, and the silver safe was locked. The brown Lenbach 
portraits of Rachel's forebears stared as sternly as Leo himself. 
 Upstairs in the drawing room the windows were open on to the 
curving rear balcony, but the blue lagoon of the Guardi still gleamed 
and flashed above the mantelpiece. A low cupboard in the break-
fronted bookcase stood open. Funny how mere living in a house like 
this could have the look of a burglary. He peered down from the 
balcony, but there was no one in the garden. He went more calmly up 
the further three flights of stairs, and when his nerves about Leo took 
hold of him again they were almost a relief from the grown-up anxieties 
of guarding the house. He saw Catherine moving in her room, and 
called out to her. A breeze had slammed his door and his own room 
was stifling, the books and papers on the table by the window curled 
up and hot. He said, 'I thought we'd had a break-in for a moment' - but 
the fear of it had already gone. 
 He picked out two possible shirts on their hangers, and was 
looking in the mirror when Catherine came in and stood behind him. 
He sensed at once her desire to touch him and her inability to do so. 
She didn't meet his eye in the mirror, she simply looked at him, at his 
shoulder, as though he would know what to do. 
 She had the bewildered slight smile of someone only just coping 
with pain. Nick smiled back more broadly, to make a few seconds of 
delay, as if it might still be one of their jokes. 'Blue or white?' he said, 
covering himself with the shirts again, like two wings. Then he dropped 
his arms and the shirts trailed on the floor. He saw night falling 
already and Leo on his racing bike racing home to Willesden. 'Not too 
good?' he said. 
 She walked over and sat on the bed, where she leant forward and 
glanced up at him, with her ominous hint of a smile. He had seen her 
in this little flowered dress day after day, it was what she strode about 
the streets in, something off the Portobello Road that looked just right 
for the district or her fantasy of it, but now, armless, backless, legless, 
seemed hardly a garment at all. Nick sat beside her and gave her a hug 
and a rub, as if to warm her up, though she felt hot as a sick child. 
She let it happen, then shifted away from him a little. Nick said, "What 
can I do, then?' and saw that he was hoping to be comforted himself. 
In the deep, bright space of the mirror he noticed two young people in 
an undisclosed crisis. 
 She said, 'Can you get the stuff out of my room. Yeah, take it all 
downstairs.' 
 'OK.' 
 Nick went along the landing and into her room, where as usual 
the curtains were closed and the air soured with smoke. The dense red 
gauze wrapped round the lampshade gave off a dangerous smell, and 
filtered the light across a chaos of bedclothes, underwear, LPs. 
Drawers and cupboards had been gone through - the imaginary 
burglary might have reached its frustrated climax here. Nick peered 
around and though he was alone he mugged a good-natured readiness 
to take control. His mind was working quickly and responsibly, but he 
clung to his last few moments of ignorance. He made a low quiet 
concentrating sound, looking over the table, the bed, the junk heap on 
the lovely old walnut chest. The cupboard in the corner had a wash-
basin in it, and Catherine had laid out half a dozen things on the tiled 
surround, like instruments before an operation: a heavy carving knife, 
a curved two-handled chopper, a couple of honed-down filleting knives, 
and the two squat little puncheons that Nick had seen Gerald use to 
grapple and turn a joint with, almost as though it might still get away. 
He gathered them up in an awkward clutch, and took them carefully 
downstairs, with new, heavy-hearted respect for them. 
 She was adamant that he shouldn't call anyone - she hinted that 
worse things would follow if he did. Nick paced about in his 
uncertainty over this. His ignorance of what to do was a sign of his 
much larger ignorance about the world in which he'd recently arrived. 
He pictured the sick shock of her parents when they found out, and 
saw the stain on the record of his new life with the Feddens. He was 
untrustworthy after all, as he had suspected he was, and they had not. 
He had a dread of being in the wrong, but was also frightened of taking 
action. Perhaps he should try to find Toby? But Toby was a non-
person to Catherine, treated at best with inattentive politeness. Nick 
was shaping the story in his head. He persuaded himself that disaster 
had been contemplated, stared at, and rejected. There had been a 
ritual of confrontation, lasting an hour, a minute, all afternoon - and 
maybe it would never have been more than a ritual. Now she was 
almost silent, passive, she yawned a lot, and Nick wondered if the 
episode had already been taken away, screened and isolated by some 
effective mechanism. Perhaps his own return had always played a part 
in her design. Certainly it made it hard for him to refuse her when she 
said, 'For god's sake don't leave me alone.' He said, 'Of course I won't,' 
and felt the occasion close in on him, suffocatingly, from a great 
distance. It was something else Toby had mentioned, by the lake: there 
are times when she can't be alone, and she has to have someone with 
her. Nick had yearned then to share Toby's duty, to steep himself in 
the difficult romance of the family. And now here he was, with his own 
romance about to unfold in the back bar of the Chepstow Castle, and 
he was the person she had to have with her. She couldn't explain, but 
no one else would do. 
 Nick brought her down to the drawing room and she chose some 
music by going to the record cupboard and pulling out a disc without 
looking and then putting it on. She seemed to say she could act, but 
that deliberations were beyond her. It came on jarringly. The arm had 
come down in the wrong place, as if looking for a single. 'Ah yes…!' 
said Nick. It was the middle of the scherzo of Schumann's Fourth 
Symphony. He kept an eye on her, and felt he understood the way she 
let the music take care of her; he saw her drifting along in it, not 
knowing where she was particularly, but grateful and semi-interested. 
He was agitated by indecision, but he went with it himself for a few 
moments. The trio returned, but only for a brief airing before the 
magical transition to the finale… based, very obviously, on that of 
Beethoven's Fifth: he could have told her that, and how it was really 
the second symphony, and how all the material grew from the opening 
motif, except the unexpected second subject of the finale… He stood 
back and decided, in the bleak but proper light of responsibility, that 
he would go downstairs at once and ring Catherine's parents. But 
then, as he left the room, he thought suddenly of Leo, and felt sure he 
was losing his only chance with him: so he rang him instead, and put 
off the call to France until later. He didn't know how to explain it to 
Leo: the bare facts seemed too private to tell a stranger, and a watered- 
down version would sound like an invented excuse. 
 Again he saw himself in the wrong. He kept clearing his throat as 
he dialled the number. 
 Leo answered very briskly, but that was only because he was 
having his dinner and still had to get ready - facts which Nick found 
illuminating. His voice, with its little reserve of mockery, was exactly 
what he had heard before, but had lost in the remembering. Nick had 
only begun his apologies when Leo got the point and said in an 
amiable way that he was quite relieved, and dead busy himself. 'Oh 
good,' said Nick, and then felt almost at once that Leo could have been 
more put out. 'If you're sure you don't mind…' he added. 
 'That's all right, my friend,' said Leo quietly, so that Nick had the 
impression there was someone else there. 'I'd still really like to meet 
you.' There was a pause before Leo said, 'Absolutely.' 
 'Well, what about the weekend?' 
 'No. The weekend I cannot do.' 
 Nick wanted to say 'Why not?' but he knew the answer must be 
that Leo would be seeing other hopefuls then; it must be like 
auditions. 'Next week?' he said with a shrug. He wanted to do it before 
Gerald and Rachel got back, he wanted to use the house. 'Yeah, going 
to the Carnival?' said Leo. 
 'Perhaps on the Saturday - we're away over the bank holiday. 
Let's get together before then.' Nick longed for the Carnival, but felt 
humbly that it was Leo's element. He saw himself losing Leo on their 
first meeting, where a whole street moves in a solid current and you 
can't turn back. 'The best thing is, if you give us a ring next week,' said 
Leo. 
 'I most certainly will,' said Nick, pretending he thought all this 
was positive but feeling abruptly miserable and stiff in the face. 'Look, 
I'm really sorry about tonight, I'll make it up to you.' There was 
another pause in which he knew his sentence was being decided - his 
whole future perhaps. But then Leo said, in a throaty whisper, 'You bet 
you will!' - and as Nick started to giggle he hung up. So that little 
pause had been conspiratorial, a conspiracy of strangers. It wasn't so 
bad. It was beautiful even. Nick hung up too and went to look at 
himself in the high gilt arch of the hall mirror. With the sudden hilarity 
of relief he thought how nice-looking he was, small but solid, clear-
skinned and curly-headed. He could see Leo falling for him. Then the 
colour drained from him, and he climbed the stairs. When it had 
cooled Nick and Catherine went down into the garden and out through 
the gate into the communal gardens beyond. The communal gardens 
were as much a part of Nick's romance of London as the house itself: 
big as the central park of some old European city, but private, and 
densely hedged on three sides with holly and shrubbery behind high 
Victorian railings. There were one or two places, in the surrounding 
streets, where someone who wasn't a keyholder could see through to a 
glade among the planes and tall horse chestnuts - across which 
perhaps a couple would saunter or an old lady wait for her even slower 
dog. And sometimes in these summer evenings, with thrush and 
blackbird song among the leaves, Nick would glimpse a boy walking 
past on the outside and feel a surprising envy of him, though it was 
hard to know how a smile would be received, coming from the inside. 
There were hidden places, even on the inside, the path that curled, as 
if to a discreet convenience, to the gardeners' hut behind a larch-lap 
fence; the enclosure with the sandpit and the children's slide, where 
genuine uniformed nannies still met and gossiped with a faint air of 
truancy; and at the far end the tennis courts, whose overlapping 
rhythms of serves and rallies and calls lent a calming reminder of 
other people's exertions to the August dusk. From end to end, just 
behind the houses, ran the broad gravel walk, with its emphatic 
camber and its metaledged gutters where a child's ball would come to 
rest and the first few plane leaves, dusty but still green, were already 
falling, since the summer had been so hot and rainless all through. 
Nick and Catherine strolled along there, arm in arm, like a slow old 
couple; Nick felt paired with Catherine in a new, almost formal way. At 
regular intervals there were Victorian cast-iron benches, made with no 
thought of comfort, and between them on the grass a few people were 
sitting or picnicking in the warm early twilight. 
 After a minute Nick said, 'Feeling a bit better?' and Catherine 
nodded and pressed against him as they walked. The sense of 
responsibility came back to him, a grey weight in his chest, and he saw 
them from the point of view of the picnickers or an approaching jogger: 
not a dear old couple at all but a pair of kids, a skinny girl with a large 
nervous mouth and a solemn little blond boy pretending he wasn't out 
of his depth. Of course he must ring France, and hope that he got 
Rachel, since Gerald wasn't always good with these things. He wished 
he knew more about what had happened and why, but he was 
squeamish too. 'You'll be all right,' he said. He thought that asking her 
about it might only reopen the horror, and added, 'I wonder what it 
was all about,' as if referring to a mystery of long ago. She gave him a 
look of painful uncertainty, but didn't answer. 'Can't really say?' Nick 
said, and heard, as he sometimes did, his own father's note of evasive 
sympathy. It was how his family sidled round its various crises; 
nothing was named, and you never knew for sure if the tone was 
subtly comprehensive, or just a form of cowardice. 'No, not really.' 
 'Well, you know you always can tell me,' he said. 
 At the end of the path there was the gardener's cottage, huddled 
quaintly and servilely under the cream cliff of the terrace. Beyond it a 
gate gave on to the street and they stood and looked out through its 
iron scrolls at the sporadic evening traffic. Nick waited, and thought 
despairingly of Leo at large in the same summer evening. Catherine 
said, 'It's when everything goes black and glittering.' 
 'Mm.' 
 'It's not like when you're down in the dumps, which is brown.' 
 'Right…' 
 'Oh, you wouldn't understand.' 
 'No, please go on.' 
 'It's like that car,' she said, nodding at a black Daimler that had 
stopped across the road to let out a distinguished-looking old man. 
The yellow of the early street lights was reflected in its roof, and as it 
pulled away reflections streamed and glittered in its dark curved sides 
and windows. 'It sounds almost beautiful.' 
 'It is beautiful, in a sense. But that isn't the point.' 
 Nick felt he had been given an explanation which he was too 
stupid, or unimaginative, to follow. 'It must be horrible as well,' he 
said, 'obviously…' 
 'Well, it's poisonous, you see. It's glittering but it's deadly at the 
same time. It doesn't want you to survive it. That's what it makes you 
realize.' She stepped away from Nick, so as to use her hands. 'It's the 
whole world just as it is,' she said, stretching out to frame it or hold it 
off: 'everything exactly the same. And it's totally negative. You can't 
survive in it. It's like being on Mars or something.' Her eyes were fixed 
but blurred. 'There you are, that's the best I can do,' she said, and 
turned her back. He followed her. 'But then it changes back again…' 
he said. 
 'Yes, Nick, it does,' she said, with the offended tone that 
sometimes follows a moment of self-exposure. 
 'I'm only trying to understand.' He thought her tears might be a 
sign of recovery, and put an arm round her shoulder - though after a 
few seconds she made another gesture that meant freeing herself. Nick 
felt a hint of sexual repudiation, as if she thought he was taking 
advantage of her. Later on, in the drawing room, she said, 'Oh, god, 
this was your night with Leo.' 
 Nick couldn't believe that she'd only just thought of that. But he 
said, 'It's all right. I've put him off till next week.' 
 Catherine smiled ruefully. 'Well, he wasn't really your type,' she 
said. 
 Schumann had given way to The Clash, who in turn had yielded 
to a tired but busy silence between them. Nick prayed that she 
wouldn't put on any more music - most of the stuff she liked had him 
clenched in resistance. He looked at his watch. 
 They were an hour later in France, it was too late to ring them 
now, and he welcomed this rational and thoughtful postponement with 
a sense of cloudy relief. He went over to the much-neglected piano, its 
black lid the podium for various old art folios and a small bronze bust 
of Liszt - which seemed to give a rather pained glance at his sight-
reading from the Mozart album on the stand. To Nick himself the 
faltering notes were like raindrops on a sandy path, and he was filled 
with a sense of what his evening could have been. The simple Andante 
became a vivid dialogue in his mind between optimism and recurrent 
pain; in fact it heightened both feelings to an unnecessary degree. It 
wasn't long until Catherine stood up and said, 'For god's sake, darling, 
it's not a fucking funeral.' 
 'Sorry, darling,' said Nick, and vamped through a few seconds of 
what they called Waldorf music before getting up and wandering out 
on to the balcony. They had only just started calling each other 
darling, and it seemed a nice part of the larger conspiracy of life at 
Kensington Park Gardens; but outside in the cool of the night Nick felt 
he was play-acting, and that Catherine was frighteningly strange to 
him. Her mirage of the beautiful poisonous universe shimmered before 
him again for a moment, but he couldn't hold it, and it slipped quickly 
ay. 
 There was a supper party in a nearby back garden, and the rlk 
and light clatter carried on the still air. A man called: eoffrey was 
making everyone laugh, and the women kept calling out his name in 
excited protest between the semi-audible paragraphs of his story. Out 
in the communal gardens someone was walking a small white dog, 
which looked almost luminous as it bobbed and scampered in the late 
dusk. Above the trees and rooftops the dingy glare of the London sky 
faded upwards into weak violet heights. In summer, when windows 
everywhere were open, night seemed made of sound as much as 
shadow, the whisper of the leaves, the unsleeping traffic rumble, far-off 
car horns and squeals of brakes; voices, faint shouts, a waveband 
twiddle of unconnected music. Nick yearned for Leo, away to the north, 
three miles up the long straight roads, but possibly anywhere, moving 
with invisible speed on his silver bike. He wondered again in which 
park the photo of him had been taken; and of course what person, 
routinely intimate with Leo, had taken it. He felt hollow with 
frustration and delay. The girl with the white dog came back along the 
gravel path, and he thought how he might appear to her, if she glanced 
up, as an enviable figure, poised against the shining accomplished 
background of the lamplit room. Whereas, looking out, leaning out 
over the iron railing, Nick felt he had been swept to the brink of some 
new promise, a scented vista or vision of the night, and then held 
there. 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 
 
'Something for everybody!' Gerald Fedden said, striding into the 
kitchen with a rattling brown-paper carrier bag. 'All must have prizes!' 
He was tanned and tireless, and a lost energy came back into the 
house with him, the flash of his vanity and confidence - it was almost 
as though the words of the returning officer were fresh in his ears and 
he were responding to applause with these high-spirited promises. On 
the side of the bag was the emblem of a famous Perigueux 
delicatessen, a blue goose with its head through what looked like a life-
saving ring, its beak curling Disney-wise in a complacent smile. 'Yuk, 
not foie gras,' Catherine said. 
 'In fact this quince jelly is for the Purring One,' said Gerald, 
taking out a jar in a gingham cap and bow and sliding it across the 
kitchen table. 
 Catherine said, 'Thanks,' but left it there and wandered away to 
the window. 
 'And what was it for Tobias?' 
 'The… um…' Rachel gestured. 'The carnet' 
 'Of course. Gerald rummaged discreetly before passing his son a 
small notebook, bound in odorous green suede.. 'Thanks, Pa,' said 
Toby, who was sprawling in shorts on the long banquette and obliquely 
reading the paper while he listened to his mother's news. Behind him, 
the wall was a great hilarious page of family history, with numerous 
framed photographs of holidays and handshakes with the famous, as 
well as two wicked caricatures of Gerald, which he had made a point of 
buying from the cartoonists. When Gerald was in the kitchen, guests 
always found themselves contrasting him with his grinning, hawk-
nosed cartoon image; the comparison was obviously to his advantage, 
though it couldn't help stirring the suspicion that under his handsome 
everyday mask this predatory goon might indeed be lurking. 
 Now, in linen shorts and espadrilles, busying back and forth 
from the car, he was full of anecdotes about life at the manoir, and 
mentioned particular local characters to stir up amusement and regret 
in his children. 'It's such a shame we couldn't all be there together. 
And you know, you really should come down one year, Nick.' 
 'Well, I'd love to,' said Nick, who had been hovering with an 
encouraging but modest expression. Of course it would have been 
grand to summer with the Feddens at the manoir, but less marvellous, 
he couldn't help feeling, than staying in London without them. How 
different the room looked now, with all of them noisily and 
unnoticingly back in it. Their return marked the end of his 
custodianship, and his real pleasure in seeing them again was stained 
with a kind of sadness he associated with adolescence, sadness of time 
flying and missed opportunities. He was keen for a word of gratitude to 
ease the mysterious ache. Of course his main achievement, in the 
crisis with Catherine, went unmentioned. It seemed an omission which 
could still be redeemed, by a quick firm gesture of good conscience, 
and Catherine herself looked nervously aware of the unstated subject; 
but Nick saw, in the unsuspecting presence of her parents, that he 
had somehow sided with her, and that it was never going to be 
declared. 
 'However,' said Gerald, 'it was simply great for us that you could 
be here to look after the Cat that Walks by Herself. I hope she wasn't 
any trouble?' 
 'Well…' Nick grinned and looked down. 
 As an outsider, he had no pet name, and was exempt from the 
heavy drollery of the family lingo. His own gift was a small knobbly 
bottle of cologne called 'Je Promets'. He took an appreciative sniff, and 
read into it various nice discriminations on the part of the donors; 
certainly his own parents would never have given him anything so 
fragrant or ambiguous. 'I trust it's all right,' said Gerald, as if to say 
he'd made a generous stab at something outside his competence. 
 'It's wonderful - thank you so much,' said Nick. As an outsider he 
found himself floating again in a pleasant medium of social charm and 
good humour. Toby and Catherine could frown and sulk, and exercise 
their prerogative not to be impressed or amused by their parents. Nick, 
though, conversed with his hosts in an idiom of tremendous 
agreement. 'Did you have glorious weather?' 
 'I must say we had glorious weather.' 
 'I hope the traffic wasn't too frightful…' 
 'Frightful!' 
 'I'd love to see the little church at Podier.' 
 'I think you'd love the little church at Podier.' So they knitted 
their talk together. Even disagreements, for instance over Gerald's 
taste for Richard Strauss, had a glow of social harmony to them, of 
relished licence, and counted almost as agreements transposed into a 
more exciting key. 
 There was a lot of wine in the back of the Range Rover and Nick 
offered to help Gerald carry it in. He couldn't help noticing the almost 
annoying firmness of the MP's backside, pumped up no doubt by daily 
tennis and swimming in France. 
 The suntanned legs were a further hint of sexual potential that 
Nick would normally have thought impossible in a man of forty-five - 
he thought perhaps he was so excited by the prospect of Leo that he 
was reacting to other men with indiscriminate alertness. When the last 
case was in, Gerald said, 'We were stung for a hell of a lot of duty on 
this stuff.' 
 Toby said, 'Of course if trade barriers were lifted in the EC you 
wouldn't have to worry about that sort of thing.' Gerald smiled thinly 
to show he wasn't rising to the bait. There were a couple of bottles for 
Elena, who was involved in an anxious transfer of household powers to 
Rachel, and put them aside in her black shopping bag, to take home. 
Elena, a widow in her sixties, was treated with affection and a careful 
pretence of equality by the family, so it was revealing to see her 
nervousness as she accounted for what she had done in their absence. 
Nick couldn't quite rid himself of a sense of embarrassment with her, 
the ghost of an elaborate but misdirected courtesy. On his first visit to 
Kensington Park Gardens, he'd been welcomed by Toby and then left 
briefly alone in the house, with the warning tliat his mother would 
soon be home. Hearing the front door open and close, Nick went 
downstairs and introduced himself to the good-looking woman with 
jet-black hair who was sorting out the mail on the hall stand. He spoke 
excitedly about the painting he'd been looking at in the drawing room, 
and it was only slowly, in face of the woman's smiling deference and 
heavily accented murmurings, that he realized he wasn't talking to the 
Honourable Rachel but to the Italian housekeeper. Of course there was 
nothing wrong in being charming to the housekeeper, and Elena's 
views on Guardi were probably just as interesting as Rachel's and 
more so than Gerald's, but still the moment which she seemed to 
remember for its charm Nick recalled as a tiny faux pas. 
 Even so, sliding on to the seat beside Toby, taking in the soap 
and coffee smell of him, pressing briefly against his bare knee as he 
reached for the sugar, he felt what a success he had had. That was a 
year ago, and now everything was rich with association. He picked up 
the notebook, which had barely been looked at, and stroked the soft 
pile of its cover, to make up for Toby's lack of appreciation and 
remotely, too, as if he were diumbing some warm and hairy part of 
Toby himself. Toby was talking of becoming a journalist, so the gift was 
vaguely insulting, a lary attempt at aptness, die sense of mere duty in 
die givers disguised by the stinking costliness of the production. The 
notebook wouldn't open flat, and a few addresses or 'ideas' would have 
filled it. It was certainly hard to imagine Toby using it as he visited a 
picket line or jostled for an answer from a camera-mobbed minister. 
'You heard about Maltby, of course,' said Toby. 
 Immediately Nick felt the air in the room begin to tingle, as if at 
the onset of an allergic reaction. Hector Maltby, a junior minister in 
the Foreign Office, had been caught with a rent boy in his Jaguar at 
Jack Straw's Castle, and had rapidly resigned from his post and, it 
seemed, from his marriage. The story had been all over the papers last 
week, and it was silly of Nick to feel as self-conscious as he suddenly 
did, blushing as if he'd been caught in a Jaguar himself. It was often 
like this when the homosexual subject came up, and even in the 
Feddens' tolerant kitchen he stiffened in apprehension about what 
might carelessly be said - some indirect insult to swallow, a joke to be 
weakly smiled at. Even the case of the absurd fat Maltby, a real-life 
cartoon of the greedy 'new' Tory, seemed to Nick to allude to his own 
quiet case and, in a brief twinge of paranoia, to raise a question about 
his closeness to Toby's beautiful brown leg. 'Silly old Hector,' said 
Gerald. 
 'I don't think we were terribly surprised,' Rachel said, with her 
characteristic tremor of irony. 
 'You must have known him?' Toby asked, in a ponderous new 
'interview' style he had. 'A bit,' said Rachel. 'Not really,' said Gerald. 
 Catherine was still gazing out of the window, indulging her 
dream of not being connected to her family. 'I really don't see why he 
has to go to jail,' she said. 
 'He's not going to jail, you daft old puss,' Gerald said. 'Unless you 
know something I don't. He was only caught with his trousers down.' 
By some half-conscious association he looked to Nick for confirmation 
of this. 'As far as I know,' said Nick, trying to make the five little words 
sound both casual and judicious. It was horrible to imagine Hector 
Maltby with his trousers down; and the disgraced MP didn't seem after 
all to merit much in the way of solidarity. Nick's taste was for 
aesthetically radiant images of gay activity, gathering in a golden 
future for him, like swimmers on a sunlit bank. 
 "Well, I don't see why he had to resign,' Catherine said. 'Who 
cares if he likes a blow-job now and then?' 
 Gerald smoothed this over but he was clearly shocked. 'No, no, 
he had to go. 
 There was really no alternative.' His tone was ruffled but 
responsible, and the sense of his own voice submitting to the common 
line and formula of politics was vaguely disturbing, though Catherine 
laughed at it. 
 'It may all do him good,' she said. 'Help him to find out who he 
really is.' 
 Gerald frowned, and pulled a bottle from the cardboard crate. 
'You have the oddest idea of what might do people good,' he said, 
musingly but indignantly. 
 'Now I thought we might have the Podier St-Eustache with 
dinner.' 
 'Mm, lovely,' Rachel murmured. 'The thing is, darling, quite 
simply, that it's vulgar and unsafe,' she said, in one of her sudden 
hard formulations. 
 Gerald said, 'You'll dine with us tonight, Nick?' 
 ' Nick smiled and looked away because the generous question 
raised a new uncertainty about his status on subsequent nights. How 
much and how often would he be sharing with them? They had 
mentioned he might sometimes be called on to make up numbers. 'I'm 
terribly sorry, but I can't tonight,' he said. 'Oh… what a shame, our 
first night back…' 
 He wasn't sure how to put it. Catherine watched his hesitation 
with a fascinated smile. 'No, Nick can't because he's got a date,' she 
said. It was annoying to have her frankness applied to his tender 
plans, and a treacherous reward for his silence about her affairs. He 
coloured, and felt a further crackle of social static pass through the 
room. Everyone seemed to be humming, doubtful, encouraging, 
embarrassed, he couldn't tell. Nick had never been on a date with a 
man before, and was much less experienced than Catherine imagined. 
In the course of their long conversations about men he had let one or 
two of his fantasies assume the status of fact, had lied a little, and had 
left some of Catherine's assumptions about him unchallenged. His 
confessed but entirely imaginary seductions took on -partly through 
the special effort required to invent them and repeat them consistently 
- the quality of real memories. He sometimes had the sense, from a 
hint of reserve in people he was talking to, that while they didn't 
believe him they saw he was beginning to believe himself. He had only 
come out fully in his last year at Oxford, and had used his new licence 
mainly to flirt with straight boys. His heart was given to Toby, with 
whom flirting would have been inappropriate, almost sacrilegious. He 
wasn't quite ready to accept the fact that if he was going to have a 
lover it wouldn't be Toby, or any other drunk straight boy hopping the 
fence, it would be a gay lover - that compromised thing that he himself 
would then become. Proper queens, whom he applauded and feared 
and hesitantly imitated, seemed often to find something wrong with 
him, pretty and clever though he was. At any rate they didn't want to 
go to bed with him, and he was free to wander back, in inseparable 
relief and discouragement, to his inner theatre of sexual make-believe. 
There the show never ended and the actors never tired and a certain 
staleness of repetition was the only hazard. So the meeting with Leo, 
pursued through all the obstacles of the system which alone made it 
possible, was momentous for Nick. Pausing for a last hopeful gaze into 
the gilt arch of the hall mirror, which monitored all comings and 
goings, he found it reluctant to give its approval; when he pulled the 
door shut and set off along the street he felt giddily alone, and had to 
remind himself he was doing all this for pleasure. It had taken on the 
mood of a pointless dare. 
 As he hurried down the hill he started focusing again on his 
Interests and Ambitions, the rather surprising topic for the meeting. 
He saw that interests weren't always a sexy thing. A shared passion for 
a subject, large or small, could quickly put two strangers into a special 
state of subdued rapture and rivalry, distantly resembling love; but 
you had to hit on the subject. As for ambitions, he felt it was hard to 
announce them without sounding either self-deluding or feeble, and in 
fact unambitious. Gerald could say, 'I want to be Home Secretary,' and 
have people smiling but conceding the possibility. 
 Whereas Nick's ambition was to be loved by a handsome black 
man in his late twenties with a racing bike and a job in local 
government. This was the one thing he wasn't going to be able to admit 
to Leo himself. 
 He fixed his thoughts for the hundredth time on the little back 
bar of the Chepstow Castle, which he had chosen for its shadowy 
semi-privacy - a space incuriously glanced into by people being served 
in the public bar, but barely used on summer evenings when everyone 
stood outside on the pavement. There was an amber light in there, 
among the old whisky mirrors and photographs of horse-drawn drays. 
He saw himself sitting shoulder to shoulder with Leo, their hands 
joined in secret on the dusty moquette. 
 As he approached the pub he registered a black man at the edge 
of the crowd of drinkers, then knew it was Leo, then pretended he 
hadn't seen him. So he was quite small; and he'd grown a kind of 
beard. Why was he waiting in the street? 
 Nick was already beside him and looked again, very nervously, 
and saw his questioning smile. 'If you don't want to know me…' Leo 
said. 
 Nick staggered and laughed and stuck out his hand. 'I thought 
you'd be inside.' 
 Leo nodded, and looked down the street. 'This way I can see you 
coming.' 
 'Ah…' 
 Nick laughed again. 
 'Besides, I wasn't sure about the bike, in this area.' And there the 
bike was, refined, weightless, priceless, the bike of the future, shackled 
to the nearest lamp-post. 
 'Oh, I'm sure it will be fine.' Nick frowned and gazed. He was 
surprised that Leo thought this a bad area. Of course he thought it 
was ratfier dangerous himself; and three or four corners away there 
were pubs he knew he could never enter, so bad were their names, and 
so intense the mana of their glimpsed interiors. But here… A tall 
Rastafarian strolled by, and his roll of the head was a greeting to Leo, 
who nodded and then looked away with what seemed to Nick a 
guarded admission of kinship. 'We'll have a little chat outside, eh?' 
 Nick went in to get the drinks. He stood at the counter looking 
through to the back bar - where in fact there were several people 
talking, perhaps one of those groups that meet in a pub, and the room 
was brighter than he remembered it or would have wanted it. 
Everything seemed to be a bit different. Leo was only having a Goke, 
but Nick needed courage for the evening and his own identical-looking 
drink had a double rum in it. He had never drunk rum before, and was 
always astonished that anyone liked Coke. His mind held the floating 
image of the man he had longed to meet, whom he had touched for a 
moment and left outside in all his disconcerting reality. He was too 
sexy, he was too much what he wanted, in his falling-down jeans and 
his tight blue shirt. Nick was worried by his obvious intention to 
seduce, or at least to show his capacity for seduction. He took the 
drinks out with a light tremble. 
 There wasn't anywhere to sit down, 10 they stood and leaned 
against a brown-tiled window sill; in die opaque lower half of the 
window the word SPIRITS was etched in fancy Victorian capitals, their 
serifs spiralling out in interlacing tendrils. Leo looked at Nick frankly, 
since that was what he was here for, and Nick grinned and blushed, 
which made Leo smile too, for a moment. 
 Nick said, 'You're growing a beard, I see.' 
 'Yeah - sensitive skin… it's a bloodbath when I shave. Literally,' 
said Leo, with a quick glance that showed Nick that he liked to make 
his point. 'Then if I don't shave, I get these ingrowing hairs, fucking 
murder, have to pick the ends out with a pin.' He stroked his stubbly 
jaw with a small fine hand, and Nick saw that he had those shaving-
bumps he had half-noticed on other black men. 'I tend to leave it for 
four days, say, five days, maybe, then have a good shave: try and avoid 
both problems that way.' 
 'Right…' said Nick, and smiled, partly because he was learning 
something interesting. 
 'Most of them still recognize me, though,' said Leo, and gave a 
wink. 
 'No, it wasn't that,' said Nick, who was too shy to explain his own 
shyness. His glance slipped up and down between Leo's loose crotch 
and the neat shallow cushion of his hair, and tended to avoid his 
handsome face. He was taking Leo's word for it that he was handsome, 
but it didn't quite cover the continuing shock of what was beautiful, 
strange, and even ugly about him. The phrase 'most of them' slowly 
took on meaning in his mind. 'Anyway,' he said, and took a quick sip 
of his drink, which had a reassuring burn to it. 'I suppose you've had 
lots of replies.' Sometimes when he was nervous he asked questions to 
which he would rather not have known the answers. 
 Leo made a little puff of comic exhaustion. 'Yeah… yeah, I'm not 
answering some of them. It's a joke. They don't include a picture, or if 
they do they look horrible. Or they're ninety-nine years old. I even had 
a thing from a woman, a lesbian woman admittedly, with a view to 
would I father her child.' Leo frowned indignantly but there was 
something sly and flattered in his look too. 'And some of the stuff they 
write. Its disgusting! It's not like I'm just looking for a bonk, is it? This 
is something a bit different.' 
 'Quite,' said Nick - though bonk was a troublingly casual way of 
referring to something which preoccupied him so much. 
 'This dog's been round the block a few times,' Leo said, and 
looked off down the street as if he might spot himself coming home. 
'Anyway, you looked nice. You've got nice writing.' 
 'Thanks. So have you.' 
 Leo took in the compliment with a nod. 'And you can spell,' he 
said. 
 Nick laughed. 'Yes, I'm good at that.' He'd been afraid that his 
own little letter sounded pedantic and virginal, but it seemed he'd got 
it about right. He didn't remember it calling for any great virtuosity of 
spelling. 'I always have trouble with "moccasin",' he said. 
 'Ah, there you are…' said Leo, with a wary chuckle, before 
changing the subject. 
 'It's nice where you live,' he said. 
 'Oh… yes…' said Nick, as if he couldn't quite remember where it 
was. 
 'I went by there the other day, on the bike. I nearly rang your 
bell.' 
 'Mm - you should have. I've had the place virtually to myself.' He" 
felt sick at the thought of the missed chance. 'Yeah? I saw this girl 
going in…' 
 'Oh, that was probably only Catherine.' Leo nodded. 'Catherine. 
She's your sister, yeah?' 
 'No, I don't have a sister. She's actually the sister of my friend 
Toby' Nick smiled and stared: 'It's not my house.' 
 'Oh…' said Leo. 'Oh.' 
 'God, I don't come from that sort of background. No, I just live 
there. It belongs to Toby's parents. I've just got a tiny little room up in 
the attic' 
 Nick was rather surprised to hear himself throwing his whole 
fantasy of belonging there out of the window. 
 Leo looked a bit disappointed. He said, 'Right…' and shook his 
head slowly. 
 'I mean they're very good friends, they're a sort of second family 
to me, but I probably won't be there for long. It's just to help me out, 
while I'm getting started at university.' 
 'And I thought I'd got myself a nice little rich boy,' Leo said. And 
perhaps he meant it, Nick couldn't be sure, they were total strangers 
after all, though a minute before he'd imagined them naked together in 
the Feddens' emperor-size bed. Was that why his letter did the trick - 
the address, the Babylonian notepaper? 
 'Sorry,' he said, with a hint of humour. He drank some more of 
the sweet strong rum and Coke, so obviously not his kind of drink. The 
refined blue of the dusk sky was already showing its old lonely reach. 
Leo laughed. 'I'm only kidding you!' 
 'I know,' Nick said, with a little smile, as Leo reached out and 
squeezed his shoulder, just by his shirt collar, and slowly let go. Nick 
reacted with, his own quick pat at Leo's side. He was absurdly relieved. 
A charge passed into him through Leo's fingers, and he saw the two of 
them kissing passionately, in a rush of imagination that was as 
palpable as this awkward pavement rendezvous. 
 'Still, your friends must be rich,' Leo said. 
 Nick was careful not to deny this. 'Oh, they're rolling in money' 
 'Yeah…' Leo crooned, with a fixed smile; he might have been 
savouring the fact or condemning it. Nick saw further questions 
coming, and decided at once he wouldn't tell him about Gerald. The 
evening demanded enough courage as it was. A Tory MP would shadow 
their meeting like an unwelcome chaperon, and Leo would get on his 
bike and leave them to it. He could say something about Rachel's 
family, perhaps, if an explanation was called for. But in fact Leo 
emptied his glass and said, 'Same again?' 
 Nick hastily finished his own drink, and said, 'Thanks. Or maybe 
this time I'll have a shot of rum in it.' After half an hour more Nick had 
slid into a kind of excited trance brought on by his new friend's 
presence and a feeling, as the sky darkened and the street lamps 
brightened from pink to gold, that it was going to work out. He felt 
nervous, slightly breathless, but at the same time buoyant, as if a 
lonely responsibility had been taken off him. A couple of places came 
free at the end of a picnic table with fixed benches, and they sat 
leaning towards each other as though playing, and then half-
forgetting, some invisible game. For Nick the ease and comfort of the 
rum were indistinguishable parts of the intimacy which he felt 
deepening like the dusk. 
 He found himself wondering how they looked and sounded to the 
people around them, the couple beside them at the table. It was all 
getting noisier as the evening went on, with a vague sense of 
heterosexual threat. Nick guessed Leo's other dates would have met 
him in a gay pub, but he had flunked that further challenge. Now he 
regretted the freedom he would have had there. He wanted to stroke 
Leo's cheek and kiss him, with a sigh of surrender. 
 Nothing very personal was said. Nick found it hard to interest Leo 
in his own affairs, and his various modest leads about his family and 
his background were not picked up. There were things he'd prepared 
and phrased and turned into jokes that were not to be heard - or not 
tonight. Once or twice he took Leo with him: into a falsely cheerful 
dismissal of the idea that Toby, though fairly attractive, was of any real 
interest to him (Leo would think him a weirdo to have loved so long 
and pointlessly); into a sketch of Rachel's banking family, which Leo 
interrupted with a sour smile, as if it was all proof of some general 
iniquity. He had a certain caustic preoccupation with money, Nick 
could see; and when he told Leo that his father was an antiques dealer 
the two words, with the patina of old money and the flash of business, 
seemed to combine in a dull glare of privilege. Among his smart Oxford 
friends Nick managed to finesse his elbow-patched old man, with his 
Volvo estate full of blanket-wrapped mirrors and Windsor chairs, into a 
more luminous figure, a scholar and friend of the local aristocracy. 
Now he felt a timid need to humble him. And he was wrong, because 
Leo's long-time boyfriend, Pete, had been an antiques dealer, on the 
Portobello Road. 'Mainly French work,' Leo said. 'Ormolu. Boulle.' It 
was the first clear thing he had said about his private past. And then 
he changed the subject. 
 Leo was certainly quite an egotist - Catherine's graphological 
analysis had been spot on. But he didn't expound his inner feelings. 
He did something Nick couldn't imagine doing himself, which was to 
make statements about the sort of person he was. 'I'm the sort of guy 
who needs a lot of sex,' he said, and, 'I'm like that, I always say what I 
think.' Nick wondered for a moment if he'd inadvertently contradicted 
him. 'I don't bear grudges,' Leo said sternly: 'I'm not that kind of 
person.' 
 'I'm sure you're not,' Nick said, with a quick discountenancing 
shudder. And perhaps this was a useful skill, or tactic, in the blind-
date world, even if Nick's modesty and natural fastidiousness kept him 
from replying in the same style ('I'm the sort of guy who likes Pope 
more than Wordsworth,' 
 'I'm crazy about sex but I haven't had it yet'). It added to the 
excitement of the evening. He wasn't here to share quickly matched 
intuitions with an Oxford friend. He loved the hard self-confidence of 
his date; and at the same time, in his silent, superior way, he thought 
he heard how each little brag was the outward denial of an inner 
doubt. 
 With the third drink Nick grew warm and half-aroused and he 
looked undisguisedly at Leo's lips and neck and imagined unbuttoning 
the shiny blue short-sleeved shirt that cut so tighdy under his arms. 
Leo hooded his eyes for a second, a signal, secret and ironic, and Nick 
wondered if it meant he could see he was drunk. He wasn't sure if he 
should somehow signal back - he grinned and took another quick sip. 
He had the feeling that Leo had drunk Coke since he was a child, and 
that it was one of the nearly unnoticed facts of life to him, beyond 
choice or criticism. Whereas in his family it was one of a thousand 
things that were frowned on - there had never been a can or bottle of it 
in the house. Leo couldn't possibly have imagined it, but the glass of 
Coke in Nick's hand was a secret sign of submission, and afterwards 
die biting sweetness of the drink, like flavouring in a medicine, seemed 
fused with the other experiments of die night in a complex impression 
of darkness and freedom. Leo yawned and Nick glanced into his 
mouth, its bright white teeth uncor-rupted by all the saccharine and 
implying, Nick humbly imagined, an almost racial disdain for his own 
stoppings and slants. He put his hand on Leo's forearm for a moment, 
and then wished he hadn't - it made Leo look at his watch. 'Time's 
getting on,' he said. 'I can't be late getting back.' Nick looked down and 
mumbled, 'Do you have to get back?' He tried to smile but he knew his 
face was stiff with sudden anxiety. He moved his wet glass in circles on 
the rough-sawn table top. When he glanced up again he found Leo was 
gazing at him sceptically, one eyebrow arched. 
 'I meant back to your place, of course,' he said. Nick grinned and 
reddened at the beautiful reversal, like a teased child abruptly 
reprieved, rewarded. But then he had to say, 'I don't think we can Leo 
looked at him levelly. 'Not enough room?' Nick winced and waited - the 
truth was he didn't dare, he just couldn't do that to Rachel and 
Gerald, it was vulgar and unsafe, the consequences unspooled ahead 
of him, their happy routines of chortling agreement would wither for 
ever. 'I don't think we can. I don't mind going up to your place.' Leo 
shrugged. 'It's not practical,' he said. 
 'I can jump on the bus,' said Nick, who had studied the London 
A-Z in absorbed conjecture about Leo's street, neighbourhood, historic 
churches, and access to public transport. 
 'Nah-' Leo looked away with a reluctant smile and Nick saw that 
he was embarrassed. 'My old lady's at home.' This first hint of shyness 
and shame, and the irony that tried to cover it, cockneyfied and West 
Indian too, made Nick want to jump on him and kiss him. 'She's dead 
religious,' Leo said, with a short defeated chuckle. 
 'I know what you mean,' said Nick. So there they were, two men 
on a summer night, with nowhere to call their own. There was a kind 
of romance to that. 
 'I've got an idea,' he said tentatively. 'If you don't mind, um, being 
outside.' 
 'I don't care,' said Leo, and looked lazily over his shoulder. 'I'm 
not dropping my pants in the street.' 
 'No, no…' Tm not that sort of slut.' 
 Nick laughed anxiously. He wasn't sure what people meant when 
they said they'd had sex 'in the street' - even 'on Oxford Street', he'd 
once heard. In six months' time perhaps he would know, he'd have 
sorted out the facts from the figures of speech. He watched Leo twist 
and lift a knee to clamber free of the bench - he looked keen to get on 
with it, and he acted of course as if Nick knew the procedure. Nick 
followed him with a baked smile and a teeming inward sense of 
occasion. He was consenting and powerless in the thrust of the event, 
the rich foregone conclusion of the half-hour that opened ahead of 
them: it made his heart race with its daring and originality, though it 
also seemed, as Leo squatted to unlock his bike, something everyday 
and inevitable. He ought to tell Leo it was his first time; then he 
thought it might bore him or put him off. He gazed down at his strictly 
shaved nape, the back of a stranger's head, which any minute now he 
would be allowed to touch. The label of Leo's skimpy blue shirt was 
turned up at the collar and showed the temp's signature of Miss 
Selfridge. 
 It was a little secret given away, a vanity exposed - Nick was 
light-headed, it was so funny and touching and sexy. He saw the long 
muscles of his back shifting in its sleek grip, and then, as Leo 
hunkered on his heels and his loose jeans stood away from his waist, 
the street lamp shining in on the brown divide of his buttocks and the 
taut low line of his briefs. He unlocked the gate and let Leo go in ahead 
of him. 'Cycling isn't permitted in the gardens, but I dare say you can 
walk your bike.' 
 Leo hadn't learnt his mock-pompous tone yet. 'I dare say 
bumshoving isn't permitted either,' he said. The gate closed behind 
them, an oiled click, and they were together in the near-darkness of 
the shrubbery. Nick wanted to hold Leo and kiss him at once; but he 
wasn't quite certain. Bumshoving was unambiguous, and encouraging, 
but not romantic exactly… They strolled cautiously forward, leaning 
against each other for a step or two as they steered for the path. There 
was the slightest chill in the air now, but Nick shivered wildly in a 
spasm of excitement. His fingers felt oddly stiff, as though he was 
wearing very tight gloves. Even in the deep shadow he wanted to 
conceal his weird smirk of apprehension. He did so hope it would be 
him who got to do the shoving, but didn't know how you arranged that, 
perhaps it all just became clear. Perhaps they both had to have a go. 
He led Leo through on to a wide inner lawn, the bike bouncing out 
beside them, controlled only by a hand on its saddle - it seemed to 
quiver and explore just ahead of them. To the right rose a semicircle of 
old planes and a copper beech whose branches plunged to the ground 
and made a broad bell-tent that was cool and gloomy even at midday. 
Away to the left ran the gravel walk, and beyond it the tall outline of 
the terrace, and the long, intermitted rhythm of glowing windows. As 
they skirted the lawn Nick counted confusedly, searching for the 
Feddens'. He found the first-floor balcony, the proud brightness of the 
room beyond the open French windows. 'Yeah, how far is it?' said Leo. 
 'Oh, just over here…' - Nick giggled because he didn't know if 
Leo's grumpiness was real. He went ahead a bit, anxiously responsible. 
As his eyes adjusted to the semi-darkness nowhere seemed private 
enough - there was more show-through from the street lights, voices 
on the pavement were unnervingly close. And of course on a summer 
night there were keyholders still at large, picnickers charmed into long 
late reminiscence, walkers of white dogs. He stooped under the copper 
beech, but the branches were rough and confusing and the mast 
crackled underfoot. He backed out again, bashing into Leo and 
gripping his waist for a moment to steady himself. 'Sorry…' The feel of 
his warm hard body under the silky shirt was almost worryingly 
beautiful, a promise too lavish to believe in. 
 He prayed that Leo didn't think he was a fool. The other men in 
Leo's life, anonymous partners, answerers of ads, old boyfriends, old 
Pete, massed impatiently behind him - as if a match had flared he saw 
their predatory eyes and moustaches and hardened sex-confidence. He 
led the way quickly to the little compound of the gardeners' hut. 
 All right, this'U do,' said Leo, propping his bike against the larch-
lap screen. 
 For a moment it seemed he was going to chain it up again, then 
he stopped himself and left it there with a regretful laugh. Nick tried 
the door of the hut even though it was padlocked. Beside it there was a 
shadowy area where a flat-bedded barrow was kept, and a broken 
bench; there were laurels, and a yew tree hanging over; the dusty sour 
smell of the yew was mixed with the muted sweetness of a huge 
compost heap, a season's grass cuttings mounded high in a chicken-
wire coop. Leo came up to Nick and hesitated for a second, looking 
away, trailing his fingers over the warm cuttings. 'You know, these 
composts get really hot inside,' he said. 'Yes…' Nick had known this all 
his life. 'Too hot to touch - like a hundred degrees.' 
 'Is that right…?' He reached out like a tired child. 
 'Anyway,' Leo said, letting Nick's hand slide round his waist, 
putting his arm, his elbow, round Nick's neck to pull him close against 
him. 'Anyway…' His face slipped sideways across Nick's as he breathed 
the word, the unguessed softness of his lips touched his cheeks and 
neck, while Nick sighed violently and ran his hand up and down on 
Leo's back. He pushed his mouth towards Leo's, and they met, and 
hurried into a kiss. To Nick it felt simply like a helpless admission of 
need, and the shocking tiling was the proof of Leo's need, in die force 
and thoroughness with which he worked on him. They pushed apart, 
Leo faindy smiling, Nick gasping and tormented just by die hope that 
they would do it again. 
 They kissed for a minute more - two minutes, Nick wasn't 
counting, half-hypnotized by the luscious rhythm, the generous 
softness of Leo's lips and the thick insistence of his tongue. He was 
gasping from die rush of reciprocity, die fact of being made love to. 
Nothing at the pub, in dieir aimless conversation, had even hinted at 
it. He'd never seen it described in a book. He was achingly ready and 
completely unprepared. He felt the coaxing caress of Leo's hand on the 
back of his head, roaming through the curls there, and then lifted his 
other hand to stroke Leo's head, so beautifully alien in its hard stubbly 
angles and the dry dense firmness of his hair. He thought he saw the 
point of kissing but also its limitations - it was an instinct, a means of 
expression, of mouthing a passion but not of satisfying it. So his right 
hand, that was lightly clutching Leo's waist, set off, still doubting its 
freedom, to dawdle over his plump buttocks and then squeeze them 
through the soft old denim. 
 The prodding of Leo's angled' erection against the top of Nick's 
thigh seemed to tell him more and more clearly to do what he wanted, 
and get his hand inside his waistband and inside the stretched little 
briefs. His middle finger pushed into the deep divide, as smooth as a 
boy's, his fingertip even pressed a little way into the dry pucker so that 
Leo let out a happy grunt. 'You're a bad boy,' he said. 
 He moved away from Nick, who clung to him, then let him go 
with a sulky laugh. 
 'I'm coming back,' Leo said, and edged off past the shed. Nick 
stood for a little while, holding himself and sighing, alone again, aware 
of the unending soft roar of London and a night breeze hardly dipping 
the dark leaves of the laurel. What was Leo doing? He was getting 
something from the slim side pannier of his bike. He was amazing with 
his habits, he was fabulous, but then Nick's skin prickled for a 
moment at the thought of himself out here in the dark with a stranger, 
the risk of it, silly little fool, anything could happen. Leo felt his way 
back, shadow among shadows. 'I think we might be needing this,' he 
said, so that the rush of risk flowed beautifully into the mood of 
adventure. 
 Next day Nick wandered for lost half-hours through what he'd 
done, taking the tube of gel, that was folded back neatly, three-
quarters empty, and peering at it in the gloom with relief and 
embarrassment; turning Leo round in his arms and unbuttoning his 
jeans as if they were his own, and prising his broad blunt hard-on 
from his pants as he eased them down, and pushing him forward to 
hold on to the bench as he knelt behind him and paid the kind of 
homage with his tongue and lips that he'd dreamed of paying for years 
to a whole night-catalogue of other men. He loved the scandalous idea 
of what he was doing more perhaps than the actual sensations and the 
dull very private smell. He twisted his own pants down to his knees, 
and smiled at the liberated bounce of his dick in the cool night air, and 
kissed his smile into Leo's sphincter. Then when he fucked Leo, which 
was what he did next, a sensation as interesting as it was delicious, he 
couldn't help laughing quietly. I'm glad you think it's funny,' Leo 
muttered. 
 'No, it's not that,' said Nick; but there was something hilarious in 
the shivers of pleasure that ran up his back and squeezed his neck, 
and ran down his arms to his fingers - he felt he'd been switched on 
for the first time, gently gripping Leo's hips, and then reaching round 
him to help unbutton his shirt and get it off and hold his naked body 
against him. It was all so easy. He'd worried a lot the night before that 
there might be some awful knack to it - 'Mind that shirt,' 
 Leo said: 'it's my sister's.' 
 That made Nick love him much more, he couldn't say why. 'Your 
arse is so smooth,' he whispered, while his hands stroked hungrily 
through the short rough hair on his chest and belly. 
 'Yeah… shave it…' said Leo, between grunted breaths as Nick got 
quicker and bolder, 'get arse-knit… fucking murder… on the bike…' 
Nick kissed the back of his neck. Poor Leo! With his arse-knit and his 
ingrowing beard he was a martyr to his hair. 'Yeah, like that,' he said, 
with a sweet tone of revelation. He was leaning forward on one arm 
now, and masturbating in a pounding hurry. Nick was more and more 
seriously absorbed, but then just before he came he had a brief vision 
of himself, as if the trees and bushes had rolled away and all the lights 
of London shone in on him: little Nick Guest from Barwick, Don and 
Dot Guests boy, fucking a stranger in a Notting Hill garden at night. 
Leo was right, it was so bad, and it was so much the best thing he'd 
ever done. 
 Later Nick sat for a minute on a bench by the gravel walk, while 
Leo took a piss on the lawn. It wasn't clear whether the tall stooping 
figure in white shirtsleeves had seen this. Leo sat down beside Nick 
and there was a sense that some last, more formal part of their date 
was to be enacted. Nick felt abruptly heavy-hearted, and thought 
perhaps he had been silly to let Leo see how happy he was - he 
couldn't stifle his sense of achievement, and his love-starved mind and 
body wanted more and more of Leo. The air seemed to josde with 
nothing but the presence and names of Nick and Leo, which hung in a 
sad sharp chemical tang of knowledge among the sleeping laurels and 
azaleas. The tall man walked past them, hesitated, and turned. 'You do 
know it's keyholders only.' 
 'I'm sorry?' 
 The mingled light from the backs of the houses revealed a 
flushed summer-holiday face, soft and weak-chinned, perched at an 
altitude under thin grey hair. 'Only this is a private garden.' 
 'Oh, yes - we're keyholders,' the phrase subsuming Leo, who 
made a litde grunt, not of lust this time but of indignant confirmation. 
He set his hands on his knees in a proprietary attitude, his knees wide 
apart, sexy and insolent too. 
 'Ah, fine…' The man gave a squinting half-smile. 'I didn't think I'd 
seen you before.' He avoided looking at Leo, who was obviously die 
cause of this edgy exchange - and that for Nick was another of the 
commonplace revelations of the evening, of being out with a black 
man. 
 'I'm often here, actually,' Nick said. He gestured away behind him 
towards the Feddens' garden gate. 'I live at number 48.' 
 'Fine… fine…' - the man walked on a couple of steps, dien looked 
back, doubtful but eager. 'But then you must mean at the Feddens' 
Nick said quietly, 'Yes, that's right.' 
 The news affected the man visibly - in the softly blotted glare, 
which reminded Nick for a moment of plays put on in college gardens, 
he seemed to melt into excited intimacy. 'Goodness… you're living 
there. Well, isn't it all splendid! 
 We couldn't be more delighted. I'm Geoffrey Titchfield, by the 
way, number 52 - tfiough we only have the garden flat, unlike… unlike 
some!' Nick nodded, and smiled noncommittally. 'I'm Nick Guest.' 
Some solidarity with Leo kept him from standing up, shaking hands. 
Of course it was Geoffrey's voice he had heard from the balcony on the 
night he had put Leo off, and Geoffrey's guests whose regular tireless 
laughter had heightened his loneliness, and now here he was in person 
and Nick felt he'd got one past him, he'd fucked Leo in the keyholders' 
garden, it was a secret victory. 'Aah… aah…' went Geoffrey. 'It's such 
good news. We're on the local association, and we couldn't be more 
thrilled. Good old Gerald.' 
 'I'm really just a friend of Toby's,' Nick said. 'We were saying only 
the other night, Gerald Fedden will be in the Cabinet by Christmas. He 
knows me, by the way, you must give him all the very best from both 
of us, from Geoffrey andTrudi.' Nick seemed to shrug in acquiescence. 
'He's just the sort of Tory we need. A splendid neighbour, I should say 
at once, and I fancy a splendid parliamentarian.' This last word was 
played out with a proud, fond rise and fall and almost whimsical 
rubato in its full seven syllables. 
 'He's certainly a very nice man,' Nick said, and added briskly, to 
finish the conversation, 'I'm really more a friend of Toby and 
Catherine.' 
 After Geoffrey had wandered off Leo stood up and took command 
of his bike. Nick didn't know what to say without making matters 
worse, and they walked along the path together in silence. He avoided 
looking up at the Feddens', at his own window high up in the roof, but 
he had a sense of being noticed by the house, and the verdict of 'vulgar 
and unsafe' seemed to creep out like a mist and tarnish the triumph of 
the evening. 
 'Well,' said Leo under his breath, 'two sorts of arse-licking in ten 
minutes' - so that Nick laughed and hit him on the arm and 
immediately felt better. 'Look, I'll see you, my friend,' Leo said, as Nick 
opened the gate. They came out a bit shiftily on to the street, and Nick 
couldn't tell if the sentence really meant its opposite. So he was clear 
about it. 
 'I want to see you,' he said, and the five light words seemed to 
open and deepen the night, with the prickling of his eyes, the starred 
lights of die cars rushing past them and down the long hill 
northwards, towards other boroughs, and neighbourhoods known only 
from their mild skyward glare. 
 Leo stooped to fit on his lamps, front and back. Then he leant the 
bike against the fence. 'Come here,' he said, in that part-time cockney 
voice that shielded little admissions and surrenders. 'Give us a hug.' 
 He stepped up to him and held him tight, but with none of the 
certainty of minutes before, beside the compost heap. He pressed his 
forehead against Leo's, who was so much the right size for him, such a 
good match, and gave him a quick firm kiss with pursed lips - there 
was a jeer and a horn-blast from a passing car. 'Wankers,' murmured 
Leo, though to Nick it felt like a shout of congratulations. 
 Leo sat on the bike, one foot straight down like a dancer's to die 
pavement, the other in the raised stirrup. A kind of envy that Nick had 
felt all evening for the bike and its untouchable place in Leo's heart 
fused with a new resentment of it and of the ease with which it would 
take him away. 'Look, I've got a couple more to see, yeah?' At which 
Nick nodded dumbly. 'But I'm not letting you go.' 
 He settled back on the saddle, the bike wobbled and then he rode 
round in ratcheting circles, so that Nick was always facing the wrong 
way. 'Besides,' said Leo, you're a damn good fuck.' He winked and 
smiled and then darted out across the road and down the hill without 
looking back. - Nick's birthday was eight days after Toby's, and for a 
moment there had been an idea that the party for Toby's twenty-first 
should be a joint celebration. 'Makes obvious sense,' 
 Gerald had said; and Rachel had called it 'a fascinating idea'. 
Since the party was to be held at Hawkeswood, which was the country 
house of Rachel's brother, Lord Kessler, the plan almost frightened 
Nick with its social grandeur, with what it would confer on him and 
demand from him. Thereafter, though, it had never been mentioned 
again. Nick felt he couldn't allude to it himself, and after a while he 
allowed his mother to make arrangements for his own family party at 
Barwick a week later: he looked forward to that with queasy 
resignation. 
 Toby's party was on the last Sunday in August, when the Notting 
Hill Carnival would be pounding to its climax, and when many local 
residents shuttered and locked their houses and left for their second 
homes with their fingers crossed: since the race riots of two summers 
earlier the carnival had been a site of heightened hopes and fears. Nick 
had lain in bed the night before and heard the long-legged beat of 
reggae from down the hill, mixed in, like the pulse of pleasure, with the 
sighing of the garden trees. It was his second night without Leo. He lay 
wide-eyed, dwelling on him in a state beyond mere thought, a kind of 
dazzled grief, in which everything they'd done together was vivid to 
him, and the strain of loss was as keen as the thrill of success. Next 
morning at eleven they gathered in the hall. Nick, seeing Gerald was 
wearing a tie, ran up and put one on too. Rachel wore a white linen 
dress, and her dark hair, with its candid streaks of grey, had the 
acknowledged splendour of a new cut and a new shape. 
 She smiled her readiness at them, and Nick felt their fondness 
and efficiency as a family unit. He and Elena stowed the overnight 
luggage in the Range Rover, and then Gerald drove them out, past 
blocked-off streets, through gathering crowds. 
 Everywhere there were groups of policemen, to whom he nodded 
and raised his hand authoritatively from the wheel. Nick, sitting in the 
back with Elena, felt foolish and conceited at once. He dreaded seeing 
Leo, on his bike, and dreaded being seen by Leo. He imagined him 
cruising the carnival, and yearned to belong there in the way that Leo 
did. He saw him dancing happily with strangers in the street, or biding 
his turn in the dense mutating crowds at the underground urinals. His 
longing jumped out in a little groan, which became a throat-clearing 
and an exclamation: 'Oh I say, look at that amazing float.' 
 In a side street a team of young black men with high yellow wings 
and tails like birds of paradise were preparing for the parade. 'It's 
marvellous what they do,' said Rachel. 
 'Not very nice music,' said Elena, with a cheerful shiver. Nick 
didn't reply - and found himself in fact at one of those unforeseen 
moments of inner transition, when an old prejudice dissolves into a 
new desire. The music shocked him with its clear repetitive statement 
of what he wanted. Then one vast sound system warred happily with 
the next, so that there were different things he wanted, beautiful 
jarring futures for him - all this in forty or fifty seconds as trie car 
slipped out and away into the ordinary activity of the weekend streets. 
 Still, if he couldn't be with Leo it was best to be somewhere quite 
different. 
 Gerald drove them out along the A40, at a somehow 
preferentially high speed, as if led by an invisible police escort. Soon, 
however, they came into massive /IC roadworks, and a long 
unimpressionable tailback, as you did everywhere these days. Here 
they were taking out the last old roundabouts and traffic lights and 
forcing an unimpeded freeway across the scruffy flat semi-country. 
Nick gazed out politely at the desert of digging and concrete, and 
beyond it a field where local boys were roaring round and round on 
dirt-bikes in breakneck contempt for the idea of actually going 
anywhere. They didn't care about the Carnival, they'd never heard of 
Hawkeswood, and they'd chosen to spend the day in this field rather 
than anything else. Beside them perhaps a mile of solid traffic stood 
stationary on the motorway of the future. 
 As always, Nick felt a need to make things all right. He said, 'I 
wonder where we are. Is this Middlesex, I suppose?' 
 'I suppose it's Middlesex,' Gerald said. He hated to be thwarted 
and was already impatient. 'Not very nice,' said Elena. 
 'No…' said Nick, hesitantly, humorously, as if considering a 
defence of it, to pass the time. He knew Elena was anxious about the 
party, and about her role for the evening. She had asked a couple of 
questions already about Fales, who was Lionel Kessler's new butler, 
with whom she was about to find herself pressed into some unspecified 
relation. 
 'If Lionel's giving us lunch,' said Gerald, 'we'd better stop 
somewhere and ring ahead. We'll be late.' 
 'Oh, Lionel won't mind,' said Rachel, 'we're just taking pot luck.' 
 'Hmm,' said Gerald, '«)nr doesn't as a rule find the words Lionel 
and pot link used in the same sentence.' The tone was mocking, but 
su^ested a leiiain anxiety of his own about his brother-in-law. atnl «??• 
uw nl obligation. Rachel settled back contentedly. 
 'Everything, will In IMU h., u.| Ami in Cut the traffic did then 
make a IIIOVI, in. I an njituiiiMii Altitude, which was the only sort 
GeiaU uillhl IM-. II. wa* mutlmitly indulged. Nick thought about the 
old-fashioned name Lionel. Of course it was related to Leo; but Lionel 
was a little heraldic lion, whereas Leo was a big live beast. Five 
minutes later they were at a standstill. 
 'This fucking traffic,' said Gerald; at which Elena looked a bit 
flustered. 
 'As well as everything else,' Nick said, with determined 
brightness, 'I can't wait to see the house.' "Well, you're going to have 
to,' said Gerald. Ah, the house,' said Rachel, with a sighing laugh. 
 Nick said, 'Or perhaps you don't like it. It must be different for 
you, having grown up there.' He felt he was rather fawning on her. 
 'I don't know,' Rachel admitted. 'I hardly know if I like it or not.' 
 'You'd have to say, I think,' said Gerald, 'that it's the contents 
that make Hawkeswood. The house itself is something of a Victorian 
monstrosity' 
 'Mmm…' In Rachel's conversation a murmured 'mmm' or drily 
drawn-out 'I know…' could carry a note of surprising scepticism. Nick 
loved the upper-class economy of her talk, her way of saying nothing 
except by hinted shades of agreement and disagreement; he longed to 
master it himself. It was so different from the bounding effort of 
Gerald's conversation that he sometimes wondered if Gerald himself 
understood her. He said, 'I think I'll like the house as well as the 
contents.' 
 Rachel looked grateful, but remained vague about the whole 
thing, and Nick felt slightly snubbed. Perhaps it was impossible to 
describe a place one had known all one's life. She didn't disparage 
Nick's interest, but she showed she couldn't quite be expected to be 
interested herself. It had been her fortune not to describe but to enjoy. 
She said, 'You know of course there's modern art, as well as the 
Rembrandts,' with a brief smile at having retrieved a notable detail. 
 
 
 
A-7 
 
Hawkeswood had been built in the 1880s for the first Baron Kessler. It 
stood on an artificially flattened hilltop among the Buckinghamshire 
beech woods, which had since grown up to hide all but its topmost 
spirelets from outside view. The approach, after trailing through the 
long linked villages, entering past a lodge and a cattle grid and 
climbing the half-mile of drive among grazing deer, was a complex 
climax for Nick; as the flashing windows of the house came into view 
he found himself smiling widely while his eyes darted critically, 
admiringly - he didn't know what - over the steep slate roofs and stone 
walls the colour of French mustard. He had read the high-minded but 
humorous entry in Pevsner, which described a seventeenth-century 
chateau re-imagined in terms of luxurious modernity, with plate-glass 
windows, under-floor central heating, numerous bathrooms, and 
running hot water; but it had left him unprepared for the sheer staring 
presence of the place. Gerald pulled up in front of the porte cochere 
and they got out and went in, Nick coming last and looking at 
everything, while Fales, a real butler in striped morning trousers, 
materialized to meet them. 
 There they were, already, in the central hall, the great feature of 
the house, two storeys high, with an arcaded gallery on the upper 
level, and a giant cliinineypiece made from bits of a baroque tomb. 
Nick felt he'd. stepped into the strange and seductive fusion of an art 
museum and a luxury hotel. 
 Pot luck turned out to be an exquisite light lunch served at a 
round table in a room lined with rococo koiseries that had been 
removed wholesale from some grand Parisian townhouse, and painted 
pale blue. On the ceiling, in a flowered ellipse, two naked females held: 
i wic. iih ol RMMi Nick saw at once that the landscape over the lirepl. ii 
«• WAS A «IcViinnc. It gave him a hilar ious sense of his own*oi i, il 
displacement. It was one of those moments thai only tlir mli •*»iiltt. 
irjir, and which came for Nick all wrapped up in iu own ilrmnption, so 
that he was already iviouiiniif. M i..?? • 11•???.•..iblr other person - a 
person, that is, as impressionable as himself. He didn't know whether 
he should refer to it, but Lord Kessler said as he sat down, 'You see 
I've moved that Cezanne.' 
 Rachel peered at it briefly and said, 'Oh yes.' Her whole manner 
was comfortable, almost sleepy; she made a charming shrug of 
welcome, of dissolved formality, gesturing Nick to his place. Gerald 
looked at the painting more critically, with a sharp way he had of 
scanning any document which might come in useful later on. 
 Nick thought he could say, 'It's very beautiful.' And Lord Kessler 
said, 'Yes, isn't it a nice one.' 
 Kessler was perhaps sixty, shorter and stouter than Rachel, bald, 
with an alert, not quite symmetrical face. He had on a dark grey three-
piece suit which made no concession to fashion or even to the season; 
he looked warm in it, but seemed to say that this was simply what one 
wore. He ate his salmon and drank his rather sweet hock with an 
indefinable air of relished routine, an admission of lifelong lunching in 
boardrooms and country houses and festival restaurants all over 
Europe. He said, 'So Tobias and Catherine are coming down when?' 
 'I wouldn't want to put too precise a time on it,' said Gerald. 
'Toby is driving down with a girlfriend, Sophie Tipper, who's a daughter 
of Maurice Tipper, incidentally, and a very promising young actress.' 
He looked to Rachel and she said, 'No, she's awfully promising…' - the 
remark hesitating towards something she seemed to see in the middle 
distance but which, as so often, she left amiably unexpressed. Nick 
sometimes felt that being people's children was the only claim that 
some of his friends had on the attention of their preoccupied elders. He 
observed Lord Kessler's snuffle and murmur at the name of Maurice 
Tipper, the incalculable ironies of different kinds of rich people about 
each other. The Sophie Tipper thing had been dragging on pointlessly 
since the second year at Oxford, as if Toby were pliably fulfilling 
expectations by dating the daughter of a tycoon. 
 'As for Catherine,' Gerald went on, 'she's being brought down by 
a so-called boyfriend whose name escapes me and whom I'm bound to 
say I've never met.' He smiled broadly at this. 'But I expect a late 
arrival and burning rubber. 
 Actually Nick probably knows more on this front than we do.' 
 Nick knew almost nothing. He said, 'Russell, you mean? Yes, he's 
terribly nice. 
 He's a very up-and-coming photographer' - in a successful 
imitation of their manner and point of view. Russell had only been 
announced as a boyfriend the day before, in a helpless reaction, Nick 
felt, to his own success with Leo, which of course he'd had the 
pleasure of describing to Catherine, entirely truthfully. He hadn't in 
fact met Russell, but he thought he'd better say again, 'He's awfully 
nice.' 
 Lord Kessler said, 'Well, there are umpteen bedrooms ready here, 
and Fales has made bookings at the Fox and Hounds and the Horse 
and Groom, both perfectly decent, I'm told. As to the precise 
arrangements, I avert my eyes.' Kessler had never married, but there 
was nothing perceptibly homosexual about him. Towards any young 
people in his social orbit he maintained a strategy of enlightened 
avoidance. And we're not getting the PM,' he added. 
 'We're not getting the PM,' Gerald said, as if for a while it had 
really been likely. A relief, I must say.' 
 'It is rather a relief,' said Rachel. 
 Gerald murmured in humorous protest, and retorted that various 
ministers, including the Home Secretary, very much were still 
expected. 
 'Them we can handle,' Lord Kessler said, and shook the little bell 
to call in the servant. After lunch they strolled through several large 
rooms that had the residual hush, the rich refined dry smell of a 
country house on a hot summer day. The sensations were familiar to 
Nick from visits he made with his father to wind the clocks in several 
of the great houses round Barwick - they went back to childhood, 
though in those much older and remoter houses the smells were 
generally mixed up with dogs and damp. Here there was a High 
Victorian wealth of everything, pictures, tapestries, ceramics, furniture 
- it made Kensington Park Gardens look rather bare. The furniture was 
mosdy French, and of astonishing quality. Nick straggled behind to 
gaze at it and found his heart betting with knowledge and suspicion. 
He said, 'That Louis Quinze escritoire… is an amazing thing, sir, 
surely?' His father had taught him to address all lords as sir - 
bumping into one had been a constant thrilling hazard on their clock-
winding visits, and now he took pleasure in the tone of smooth 
submission. 
 Lord Kessler looked round, and came back to him. Ah yes,' he 
said, with a smile. 
 'You couldn't be more right. In fact it was made for Mme de 
Pompadour.' 
 'How amazing!' They stood and admired the bulbous, oddly 
diminutive desk - kingwood, was it? - with fronds of orrrolu. Lord 
Kessler pulled open a drawer, which rattled with ittle china boxes 
stowed away inside it; then pushed it shut. 
 You know about furniture,' he said. A bit,' Nick said. 'My father's 
in the antiques business.' 
 'Yes, that's right, jolly good,' said Gerald, as if he'd confessed to 
being the son of a dustman. 'He's one of my constituent;, so I should 
know.' 
 'Well, you must look around everywhere,' Lord Kessler aid. 'Look 
at anything and everything.' 
 'You really should,' said Gerald. 'You know, the hou; e is never 
open to the public, Nick.' 
 Lord Kessler himself took him off into the library, where the 
books were apparently less important than their bindhgs, which were 
as important as could be. The heavy gilding of the spines, seen 
through the fine gilt grilles of the carved and gilded bookcases, created 
a mood of minatory opulence. They seemed to be books in some quite 
different sense from those that Nick used and handled every day. Lord 
Kessler opened a cage and took down a large volume: Fables Choisies 
de La Fontaine, bound in greeny-brown leather tooled and gilded with 
a riot of rococo fronds and tendrils. It was an imitation of nature that 
had triumphed as pure design and pure expense. They stood side by 
side to admire it, Nick noticing the pleasant smell of Lord Kessler s 
clean suit and discreet cologne. He wasn't allowed to hold the book 
himself, and was given only a glimpse of the equally fantastic plates, 
peopled with elegant birds and animals. 
 Lord Kessler showed die book in a quick dry way that was not in 
itself dismissive but allowed for Nick's ignorance and perhaps merely 
polite interest. 
 In fact Nick loved the book, but didn't want to bore his host by 
asking for a longer look. It wasn't clear if it was die jewel of the 
collection or had been chosen at random. 'It's all rather…' Lord Kessler 
said. After a moment, Nick said, 'I know…' After that they browsed for 
a minute or two in a semidetached fashion. Nick found a set of 
Trollope which had a relatively modest and approachable look among 
the rest, and took down The Way We Live Now, with an armorial 
bookplate, the pages uncut. 'What have you found there?' said Lord 
Kessler, in a genially possessive tone. Ah, you're a Trollope man, are 
you.' 
 'I'm not sure I am, really,' said Nick. 'I always think he wrote too 
fast. What was it Henry James said, about Trollope and his "great 
heavy shovelfuls of testimony to constituted English matters"?' 
 Lord Kessler paid a moment's wry respect to this bit of showing-
off, but said, 'Oh, Trollope's good. He's very good on money.' 
 'Oh… yes…' said Nick, feeling doubly disqualified by his complete 
ignorance of money and by the aesthetic prejudice which had stopped 
him from ever reading Trollope. 'To be honest, there's a lot of him I 
haven't yet read.' 
 'You must know that one, though,' said Lord Kessler. 
 'No, this one is pretty good,' Nick said, gazing at the spine with 
an air of judicious concession. Sometimes his memory of books he 
pretended to have read became almost as vivid as that of books he had 
read and half-forgotten, by some fertile process of auto-suggestion. He 
pressed the volume back into place and closed the gilded cage. He had 
a sense, which was perhaps only his own self-consciousness, of some 
formal bit of business, new to him but deeply familiar to his host, 
being carried out in a sociable disguise. 'You were at school with 
Tobias?' 
 'Oh… no, sir.' Nick found he'd decided not to mention Barwick 
Grammar. 'We were at Oxford together, both at Worcester College… 
Though I read English and Toby of course read PPE.' 
 'Quite…' said Lord Kessler, who perhaps hadn't been sure of this 
fact. 'You were contemporaries.' 
 Yes, we were, exactly,' said Nick, and the word seemed to throw a 
historic light across the mere three years since he had first seen Toby 
in the porter's lodge and felt a sudden obliviousness of everything else. 
And you took a First?' 
 Nick loved the murmured challenging confidence of the question 
because he could answer 'Yes'. If it had been no, if he'd got a Second 
like Toby, he felt everything would have been different, and a lie would 
have been very ill-advised. 
 And how do you rate my nephew's chances?' said Lord Kessler 
with a smile, though it wasn't clear to Nick what contest, what 
eventuality he was alluding to. 'I think he'll do very well,' he said, 
smiling back, and feeling he had struck a very subtle register, of loyal 
affirmation hedged with allowable irony. 
 Lord Kessler weighed this for a moment. 'And for you, what now?' 
 'I'm starting at UCL next month; doing graduate work in English.' 
 'Ah… yes…' Lord Kessler s faint smile and tucked-in chin 
suggested an easily mastered disappointment. And what is your 
chosen field?' 
 'Mm. I want to have a look at style] Nick said. This flashing 
emphasis on something surely ubiquitous had impressed the 
admissions board, though Lord Kessler appeared uncertain. A man 
who owned Mme de Pompadour's escritoire could hardly be indifferent 
to style, Nick felt; but his reply seemed to have in mind some old 
wisdom about style and substance. 'Style tout court? 'Well, style at the 
turn of the century - Conrad, and Meredith, and Henry James, of 
course.' It all sounded perfecdy poindess, or at least a way of wasting 
two years, and Nick blushed because he really was interested in it and 
didn't yet know - not having done the research - what he was going to 
prove. Ah,' said Lord Kessler intelligendy: 'style as an obstacle.' Nick 
smiled. 'Exactly… Or perhaps style that hides things and reveals diings 
at the same time.' For some reason this seemed rather near the 
knuckle, as though he were suggesting Lord Kessler had a secret. 
'James is a great interest of mine, I must say' 
 'Yes, you're a James man, I see now.' 
 'Oh, absolutely!' - and Nick grinned with pleasure and defiance, it 
was a kind of coming out, which revealed belatedly why he wasn't and 
never would be married to Trollope. 'Henry James stayed here, of 
course. I'm afraid he found us rather vulgar,' Lord Kessler said, as if it 
had been only last week. 'How fascinating!' said Nick. 'You might be 
rather fascinated by the old albums. Let me vri_ord Kessler went to 
one of the cupboards beneath the bookcases, turned a scratchy-
sounding key and bent down to lake out a pair of large leather-bound 
albums, which he carried i»vcr to a central table. Again the inspection 
was hurried and tan-uli/. ing. He stopped now and then, as the heavy 
pages fell, to display a Victorian photograph of the gardens, with their 
wide bald views over newly planted woods, or of the interiors, almost 
comically crowded with chairs and tables, vases on stands, paintings 
on easels, and everywhere, in every vista, the arching, drooping leaves 
of potted palms. Now the house seemed settled and seasoned, a 
century old, with its own historic light and odour, but then it was 
ostentatiously new. In the second album tliere were group 
photographs, posed on the steps of the terrace, and annotated in a tiny 
florid script: Nick wanted days to read (hem, countesses, baronets, 
American duchesses, Balfours and Sassoons, Goldsmids and Stuarts, 
numerous Kesslers. The gravel was bizarrely covered with fur rugs for 
the group that centred on Edward VII in a tweed cape and Homburg 
hat. And then, May 1903, a gathering of twenty or so, second row, 
Lady Fairlie, The Hon. Simeon Kessler, Mr Henry James, Mrs Langtry, 
The Earl of Hexham… a cheerful informal picture. The Master, with his 
thumb in his striped waistcoat, eyes shaded by a traveller's wide-
brimmed hat, looked rather crafty. 'So what do you think of the 
house?' said Catherine, coming across the lawn. 
 'Well… obviously, it's amazing…' He was tingling to the point of 
fatigue with the afternoon's impressions, but was cautious as to what 
to say to her. 
 'Yeah, it's fucking amazing, isn't it!' she agreed, with a bright, 
brainless laugh. She didn't normally talk like this, and Nick supposed 
it was part of the persona she was showing to Russell. Russell wasn't 
actually present (he was busy with his camera somewhere) but it 
would have taken an unnecessary effort to get out of role- Other 
elements of the performance were a strange dragging walk and a 
stunned, vaguely cunning, smile. Nick assumed these were meant to 
convey sexual satiation. 'How was your journey?' 
 'Oh, fine - he drives so dangerously.' 
 'Oh… We were held up for ages by the roadworks. Your dad got 
in quite a state about it.' 
 Catherine gave him a pitying glance. 'He obviously went the 
wrong way,' she said. 
 They wandered on among the formal gardens, where rose scents 
were mixed with the cat's-piss smell of low box hedges, and the round 
ponds reflected a summer sky now faintly scrimmed with high white 
cloud. 'God, let's sit down,' said Catherine, as though they'd been 
walking for hours. They went to a stone bench supervised by two 
naked minor deities. Marvellous the great rallies of the undressed that 
rich people summoned to wait on them. Lord Kessler at home must be 
almost constantly in view of a sprawling nymph or unselfcon-scious 
hero. 
 'Russell should be finished soon, then you can meet him. I 
wonder if you'll like him.' 
 'I've already told everyone how charming he is, so I rather feel I've 
got to. 
 'Yeah…?' said Catherine, with a grateful, intrigued smile. She felt 
for cigarettes in her spangled evening bag. 'He's doing lots of stuff for 
The Face ax. the moment. He's a brilliant photographer.' 
 'I told them that too. They all take The Face, of course.' 
 Catherine grunted. 'I suppose Gerald was mouthing off about 
him.' 
 'He was just saying he didn't have an opinion about him because 
he'd never met him.' 
 'Mm… That doesn't normally prevent him. In fact that doesn't 
sound like him at all.' She clicked her lighter and took in a first deep 
dtag of smoke - the breathing out accompanied by a little toss of the 
head and a comforted settling back. 'At all, at all, at all,' she went on, 
meaninglessly assuming an Irish accent. 'Well…' Nick wanted everyone 
to get on, but for once he couldn't be bothered to work at it. He wished 
he was in a position to speak about Leo as freely as she spoke about 
Russell - he thought if he did bring the subject up she would say 
something upsetting and possibly true. She said, 'Did my mother show 
you round the house?' 
 'No, actually, your uncle did. I felt rather honoured.' Catherine 
paused and blew out smoke admiringly. 'What do you make of him, 
then?' 
 'He seems very nice.' 
 'Mm. What do you think, he's not gay, is he?' 
 'No, I didn't feel anything like that,' Nick said, a little solemnly. 
He knew he was supposed to be able to tell; in fact he tended to think 
people were when they weren't, and so lived with a recurrent sense of 
disappointment, at them and at his own inadequate sensors. He didn't 
tell Catherine, but his uncertainty on the house tour had actually been 
the other way round. Had his own gayness somehow put Lord Kessler 
off and made him seem unreliable and lightweight in the old boy's 
eyes? Had Lord Kessler even registered - in his clever, 
unimpressionable way - tJiat Nick was gay? 'He asked me what I was 
going to do. 
 It was a bit like an interview, except I hadn't applied for a job.' 
 'Well, you may want a job one day,' said Catherine. 'And then 
he's bound to remember. He's got a memory like an ostrich.' 
 'Perhaps… I'm not quite sure what he actually does.' She looked 
at him as if he must be joking. 'He's got this bank, darling 'Yes, I 
know-' 
 'It's a big building chock-a-block full of money.' She waved her 
cigarette arm around hilariously. And he goes in and turns it into even 
more money.' 
 Nick let this simple sarcasm pass over him. 'I see, you don't know 
what he actually does either.' 
 She stared at him and then gave another neighing laugh. 'Haven't 
a clue, darling!' 
 There was a shaking in the trimmed beech hedge away to the 
right, and then a tall man came hopping out of it sideways, holding up 
a camera that was strung round his neck. They watched him as he 
strolled towards them, Catherine leaning back on one hand with a 
nervously triumphant expression. 'Yeah, hold that,' he said, and took a 
couple of exposures very quickly, as he was still moving. 
 'Lovely,' he said. 
 So Russell was one of her older boyfriends, thirty perhaps, dark, 
balding, with the casual but combative look of the urban 
photographer, black T-shirt and baseball boots, twenty-pocketed 
waistcoat and bandolier of film. He passed in front of them, clicking 
away, cheerily exploiting this little episode of his arrival, Nick's 
awkwardness and Catherine's hunger for the spontaneous, the 
outrageous. She lolled backwards, and touched her upper lip with her 
tongue. Was it good when her men were older, or not? He could be 
Protector or Abuser - it was a great deep uncertainty, like the ones in 
her graphology book. He pulled her up and gave her a hug and then 
Catherine said, almost reluctantly, 'Oh, this is Nick, by the way.' 
 'Hello, Nick,' said Russell. 'Hello!' 
 'Did you nun anyone:"'. iskeil «ailienne, showing a hint of anxiety. 
 'Yeah, I've just been i. ilkine, to the uierers round the back. 
Apparently Thau IK-I'S IUII iiiming ' 
 'Oh, sorry, Kussell,' ('JIIICIIIIC iaitl Nick said, 'We. tie fieiimp, ihr 
Home. Sri-rctary, though,' in his mock pompon* tniir, win. h Uumrll, 
like l. eo, failed to pick up on. 'I wanted Thatcher doing the twist, or 
pissed. 
 'Yeah, Thatcher pogoing!' said Catherine, and laughed rather 
madly. Russell didn't look especially amused. 'Well, I wouldn't want 
her at my twenty-first,' he said. 
 'I don't think Toby really wanted her,' Nick put in apologetically. 
The touching thing was that Catherine had clearly taken her father's 
fantasy as the truth, and then used it to lure Russell. The dream of the 
leader's presence seeped through to an unexpected depth. 
 'Well, Toby would have been perfectly happy with a party at 
home,' she said. She wasn't quite sure whose side she was on, when it 
came to a difference between her father and her brother; Nick saw that 
she wanted to impress Russell with the right kind of disaffection. 'But 
then Gerald has to get hold of it and invite the ministers for everything. 
It's not a party, darling, it's a party conference!' 
 'Well…' Russell chuckled and dangled his long arms and clapped 
his hands together loosely a few times, as if ready to take them on. 
 'We've got an enormous house of our own,' Catherine said. 'Not 
that Uncle Lionel's isn't fantastic, of course.' They turned and frowned 
at it across the smooth lawn and the formal scrolls of the parterre. The 
steep slate roofs were topped with bronze finials so tall and fanciful 
they looked like drops of liquid sliding down a thread. 'I just don't 
think Uncle Lionel will be all that pleased when Toby's rowing friends 
start throwing up on the whatsits.' 
 'The whatnots,' 
 Nick made a friendly correction. 
 Russell blinked at him. 'He's a fruit, is he, Uncle Lionel?' he said. 
 'No, no,' Catherine said, faltering for a moment at the expression. 
'Nothing like that.' Nick's dinner jacket had belonged to his great-uncle 
Archie; it was double-breasted and wide on die shoulder in a way that 
was once again fashionable. It had glazed, pointed lapels which 
reached almost to the armpits, and shiny silk-covered buttons. As he 
crossed the drawing room he acknowledged himself with a flattered 
smile in a mirror. He was wearing a wing collar, and something 
dandyish in him, some memory of the licence and discipline of being in 
a play, lifted his mood. The only trouble with the jacket, on a long 
summer night of eating and bopping, was that when it warmed up it 
gave off, more and more unig-norably, a sharp stale smell, the re-
awoken ghost of numberless long-ago dinner-dances in Lincolnshire 
hotels. Nick had dabbed himself all over with 'Je Promets' in the hope 
of delaying and complicating the effect. 
 Drinks were being served on the long terrace, and when he came 
out through the French windows there were two or three small groups 
already laughing and glowing. You could tell that everyone had been 
on holiday, and like the roses and begonias they seemed to take and 
hold the richly filtered evening light. 
 Gerald was talking to a somehow familiar man and his blonde-
helmeted wife; Nick knew from his smiles and guffaws that he was 
being recklessly agreeable. None of his particular friends was here yet, 
and Toby was still upstairs with Sophie, interminably getting dressed. 
He took a flute of champagne from a dark-eyed young waiter, and 
strolled off into the knee-high maze of the parterre. He wondered what 
the waiter thought of him, and if he was watching him in his solitary 
meandering over trimmed grass and pea gravel. He had worked as a 
waiter himself, two Christmases ago, and stood about with a tray in a 
similar way at two neighbouring hunt balls. It was not impossible that 
he would do so again. He felt he might look like a person with no 
friends, and that the waiter might know that he didn't really belong to 
this looking-glass world. Could he even tell, any more than Lord 
Kessler could, that he was gay? He felt there had been a flashing hint, 
in their moment of contact, of some more luxurious understanding, of 
a longer gaze, full of humour and curiosity, that they might have 
shared… He thought at the second contact, the refill, he would make it 
all right. The curlicue of the path brought him round to a view of the 
house again, but the waiter had moved off, and instead he saw Paul 
Tompkins ambling towards him. 'My dear!' 
 At Oxford Tompkins was widely known as Polly, but Nick said, 
'Hello, Paul,' because the nickname seemed suddenly too intimate or 
too critical. 'How are you?' He realized that in the romantic retrospect 
of his undergraduate life Paul was a figure he had painted out. 
 'I'm extremely well,' Paul said meaningly. He was large and round 
in the middle and seemed to taper away, in his tight evening suit, 
towards narrow feet and a tall, jowly head. He had been a noise, a 
recurrent clatter of bitchery and ambition, a kind of monster of the 
Union and the MCR, throughout Nick's years in college. He had come 
out just below the top in the Civil Service exams, and had recently 
started in some promising capacity in Whitehall. He looked pop-eyed 
already from the tussle between pompous discretion and a natural love 
of scandal. He raised his glass. 'My compliments to wicked old Lionel 
Kessler. The waiteis here are sheer heaven.' 
 'I know…' 
 'That one with the champagne is from Madeira, which is rather 
funny.' 
 'Oh, really…' 
 'Well, better than the other way round. Now, however, he lives in 
Fulham: really awfully close to me.' 
 'You mean that one there.' 
 'Tristao.' Paul gave Nick a look of concentrated mischief. 'Ask me 
more after our date next week, my dear.' Ah.' Nick's face was tight with 
regret for a second, the pinch of his own incompetence. It was a 
mystery to him that fat old Polly, who was rutted with acne scars and 
completely lacking in ordinary kindness, had such a conspicuous 
success with men. In college he had brought off a number of almost 
impossible seductions, from kitchen boys to the solemnly hetero 
Captain of Boats. Nothing that lasted, but startling triumphs of will, 
opportunism and technique, even so. Nick was slightly frightened of 
him. He walked on a pace or two, round the plinth of a large urn, and 
looked across the roses at the assembling guests. A famous TV 
interviewer was exerting his charm over a group of flattered girls. Nick 
said, 'It's rather a distinguished crowd.' 
 'Mmm.' Paul's murmur had a note of scepticism in it as well as a 
suggestion that here too there were opportunities. He got out, and lit, a 
cigarette. 'That depends very much on your idea of distinction. But 
aren't the wives marvellous, since the last election? It's as if any 
doubts they had the first time round have now been completely 
discounted. The men did something naughty, and got away with it, 
and not only did they get away with it but they've been asked to do it 
again, with a huge majority. That's so much the mood in Whitehall - 
the economy's in ruins, no one's got a job, and they just don't care, it's 
bliss. 
 And the wives, you see, all look like… her - they've all got the 
blue bows, and the hair.' 
 'Well, Rachel hasn't,' said Nick, who rather doubted that Paul 
could sum up the mood in Whitehall when he'd only been there five 
minutes. 
 'No, dear, but Rachel's got a lot more class. Jewish class, but still 
class. And her husband's not called Norman.' 
 Nick had some further objections to what Paul was saying, but 
didn't want to seem humourless. 'No, or Ken,' he said. 
 Paul inhaled tolerantly and blew the smoke out in a long sibilant 
jet. 'I must say Gerald is looking quite delicious this evening.' 
 'Gerald Fedden…?' 
 'Absolutely 'You're pulling my leg.' 
 'Now I've shocked you,' Paul said unapologetically. 
 'Not at all,' said Nick, to whom life was a series of shocks, more 
or less well mastered. 'No, I can see he's…' 
 'Of course now you're living in his house you've probably grown 
accustomed to his sheer splendour.' 
 Nick laughed and together they watched the MP as he wound up 
a story (which was all chortling patter with booming emphases) and 
the blue-dressed women around him rippled and staggered about 
slightly on the fine gravel. 'I wouldn't deny that he's very charming,' 
Nick said. 
 Aha… So who is it at the house, just you and them and the 
Sleeping Beauty?' 
 Nick loved hearing Toby described like that, the praise in the 
mockery. 'I'm afraid the Sleeping Beauty isn't there much any more, 
you know he's been given his own flat. But there's Catherine, of 
course.' 
 'Oh, yes, I love Catherine. I just caught her smoking a joint about 
a yard long with a very dodgy-looking man. She's quite a girl.' 
 'She's certainly a very unhappy one,' Nick said, swelling for a 
moment with his portentous secret knowledge of her. 
 Paul's eyebrow suggested that this was a wrong note. 'Really? 
Every time I see her she's got a new man. She really should be happy, 
she must have everything a girl could want.' 
 'You sound just like her father, I've heard him say exactly the 
same thing.' 
 Ah, there you are!' said Paul. He grinned and stamped out his 
half-smoked cigarette on the path. 'There's Toby now.' He nodded 
towards the door from the drawing room, where Toby was emerging 
with Sophie on his arm, more like a wedding than a birthday party. 
'Christ, the jammy bitcB' Paul murmured, in an oddly sincere 
surrender to the sheer dazzle of the couple. 'I know, I do hate her.' 
 'Oh, she's marvellous. She's good-looking, she's as trtick as a jug 
- and of course she's a highly promising actress.' 
 'Exactly.' 
 Paul smiled at him, as if at a country cousin. 'My dear, don't take 
it so seriously. Anyway, they're all tarts, these boys, tlieyVe all got a 
price. Get Toby at two in the morning, when he's had a bottle of 
brandy, and you'll be able to do what you want with him. I promise 
you.' 
 This idea was so wildly, almost grimly, exciting to Nick that he 
could hardly smile. It was clever of old Polly to tamper so intimately 
with his feelings. 
 Nick said, 'Mm, this is rather a festival of the girlfriend, though, 
I'm afraid.' 
 And it was true that as the crowd quickly doubled and trebled on 
the terrace it took on more and more the air of an efficiently 
reproductive species. The boys, most of them Nick's Oxford 
contemporaries, all in their black and white, glanced across at 
politicians and people on the telly, and caught a glimpse of themselves 
as high- achieving adults too - they had that canny glint of self-
discovery that comes with putting on a disguise. They didn't mingle 
unnecessarily with the girls. It was almost as if the High Victorian 
codes of the house, with its smoking room and bachelors' wing, still 
guided and restrained them. But the girls, in a shimmer of velvet and 
silk, and brilliantly made up, like smaller children who had raided 
their mothers' dressing tables, had new power and authority too. As 
the sunlight lowered it grew more searching and theatrical, and cast 
intriguing shadows. Paul said, 'I should warn you, Wani Ouradi's got 
engaged.' 
 'Oh, no,' said Nick. It was such a snub, an engagement. 'He 
might have thought about it a bit longer.' He could picture a happy 
alternative future for himself and Wani - who was sweet-natured, very 
rich, and beautiful as a John the Baptist painted for a boy-loving pope. 
His father owned the Mira supermarket chain, and whenever Nick 
went into a Mira Mart for a bottle of milk or a bar of chocolate he had a 
vague erotic sense of slipping the money into Wani s pocket. He said, 'I 
think he's coming tonight.' 
 'He is, the old tart, I saw that vulgar motor car of his in the drive.' 
Tart was Paul's word for anyone who had agreed to have wx with him; 
though as far as Nick was aware, he had never got anywhere with 
Wani. Wani, like Toby, remained in the far pure teach of fantasy, 
which grew all the keener and more inventive to meet the challenge of 
his unavailability. He felt the loss of liim as though he had really stood 
a chance with him, he'd gone M far with him in his mind, as he lay 
alone in bed. He saw the great heterosexual express pulling out from 
the platform precisely on time, and all his friends were on it, in the 
first-class carriage - in the wagons-lit! He clung to what he had, as it 
gathered speed: that quarter of an hour with Leo by the compost heap, 
which was his first sharp taste of coupledom. Are you and I the only 
homos here?' he said. 
 'I doubt it,' said Paul, who didn't look keen to become Nick's 
partner for the night on the strength of that chance connection. '()h my 
god, it's the fucking Home Secretary. I must wiggle. I low do I look?' 
 'Fantastic,' said Nick. 
 'Oh, I knew it.' He knuckled his hair, with its oily fringe, like a 
vain schoolboy. 'Gotta go, girl!' he said, silly but focused, an 
outrageous new seduction in view. And off he went, eagerly striding 
and hopping over the little low hedges. Nick saw him reach the group 
where Gerald was introducing his son to the lome Secretary: it was 
almost as if there were two guests of honour, each good-humouredly 
perplexed by the presence of the other. Polly hovered and then pushed 
in shamelessly; Nick caught his look of unironic excitement as the 
group closed round him. 'So what's he like?' said Russell. 'Her old 
man. What's he into?' He glanced at Catherine, across the table, before 
his eyes drifted back down the room to Gerald, who was smiling at the 
blonde woman beside him but had the fine glaze of preoccupation of 
someone about to make a speech. They were in the great hall, at a 
dozen tables. It was the end of dinner, and there was a mood of noisy 
expectancy. 
 'Wine,' said Nick, who was drunk and fluent, but still wary of 
Russell's encouraging tone. He twirled his glass on the rucked 
tablecloth. 'Wine. His wife… um 'Power,' said Catherine sharply. 
 'Power…' - Nick nodded it into the list. 'Wensleydale cheese he's 
also very keen on. Oh, and the music of Richard Strauss - that 
particularly' 
 'Right,' said Russell. 'Yeah, I like a bit of Richard Strauss myself.' 
 'Oh, I'd always prefer a bit of Wensleydale cheese,' said Nick. 
 Russell blinked at him in a way that suggested he didn't 
understand him or was about to punch him in the face. But then he 
smiled reluctantly. 'So he's not into anything kinky at all.' 
 'Power,' said Catherine again. 'And making speeches.' As the 
glass tinkled and the hubbub quickly died a lot of people heard her 
saying, 'He loves making speeches.' 
 Nick pushed his chair back to get a clear view of Gerald, and also 
of Toby, who had coloured up and was looking round with a tight grin 
of apprehension. There were ten minutes of oddly relished ordeal 
ahead of him, being teased and praised by his father and cheered by 
his drunk friends - his contemporaries. Nick grinned back at him, and 
wanted to help him, but was powerless, of course. He was blushing 
himself with the anxiety and forced eagerness of awaiting a speech by 
a friend. 
 Gerald had donned his rarely seen half-moon spectacles, and 
held a small card at arm's length. 'Your Grace, my lords, ladies, and 
gentlemen,' he said, offering the old formula with an ironic negligence 
which had the clever effect of making you think -yes, the Duchess, of 
course, and her son were here, as well as 1-ord Kessler and fat young 
Lord Shepton, a Martyrs' Club pal of Toby's. 
 'Distinguished guests, family and friends. I'm very happy to see 
you all here tonight, in this truly splendid setting, and very grateful 
indeed to Lionel Kessler for giving the Worcester College First XV the 
run of his world-famous porcelain collection. Well, as the sign in 
Selfridge's says, or used to.*ay, "all breakages must be paid for".' This 
drew a few titters, though Nick wasn't sure it struck the right tone. 
'We're honoured by the presence of statesmen, and film stars, and I 
suspect Ibbias is thoroughly flattered that so many members of Her 
Majesty's government were able to be here. My witty daughter, I 
understand, has said that it's "not so much a party as a party 
conference".' Uncertain laughter, through which, with good liming: 'I 
only hope I get to play an equally important role when we meet at 
Blackpool in October.' The MPs chuckled amiably at this, though the 
Home Secretary, who'd taken die epithet of statesman more gravely 
than the rest, smiled inscrutably at the coffee cup in front of him. 
 Russell said 'Good Mil!' quite loudly, and clapped a couple of 
times. 
 'Now, as you may have heard,' Gerald went on, with a delayed 
quick glance in their direction, 'Toby is twenty-one today. I had been 
going to give you Dr Johnson's well-known lines on "long-expected 
one-and-twenty", but when I looked them up again last night I found I 
didn't know them quite as well as I thought, or indeed as well as many 
of you, I'm sure, do.' Here Gerald looked down at the card in a 
marvellously. supercilious way. '"Lavish of your grandsire's guineas," 
says the (ircat Cham, "Bid the slaves of thrift farewell… When the 
bonny blade carouses, Pockets full, and spirits high, What are acres? 
What are houses? Only dirt, or wet and dry." So: far from suitable 
advice to the grandson and nephew of great bankers, or lor any young 
person coming of age in our splendid property- owning democracy. 
And the question of wet versus dry, of course, is one on which 
indecision is no longer acceptable.' 
 Through the generous laughter Nick caught Toby's eye again, 
and held it for two or three long seconds, giving him perhaps a 
transfusion of reassurance. Toby himself would be too nervous to 
listen to his father's speech properly, and was laughing in imitation of 
the others, not at the jokes themselves. It was typical of Gerald not to 
have realized that Dr Johnson's poem was a ruthless little satire. Nick 
surveyed the room, and was reminded of a college hall, with Gerald 
and the more influential guests elected to the high table. Or perhaps of 
some other institution, such as houses like this had often turned into. 
Up in the arcade of the gallery one or two servants were listening 
impassively, waiting only for the next stage of the evening. There was a 
gigantic electrolier, ten feet high, with upward-curling gilt branches 
opening into cloudy glass lilies of light. Catherine had refused to sit 
under it, which was why their whole table had apparently been 
demoted to this corner of the room. If it did fall, Nick realized, it would 
crush Wani Ouradi. He began to feel a little anxious about it himself. 
 Gerald was now giving a facetious review of Toby's life, and again 
it made Nick think of a marriage, and the best man's speech, which 
everyone dreaded, and the huge heterosexual probability that a 
twenty-first would be followed soon enough by a wedding. He could 
only see the back of Sophie Tipper's head, but he attributed similar 
thoughts to it, transposed into a bright, successful key. As a teenager, 
then,' Gerald said, 'Tobias a) believed that Enoch Powell was a 
socialist, b) set fire to a volume of Hobbes, and c) had a large and 
mysterious overdraft. When it came to Oxford, a degree in Politics, 
Philosophy and Economics was the irresistible choice.' There was more 
laughter - and Gerald was leading them along very ably: they were 
drunkish and amenable, even gullible, since making a speech was a 
kind of trick. At the same time there was a bond among the young 
people, who were old enough to know that speeches were allowed, and 
perhaps even supposed, to be embarrassing, and who were rowdy and 
superior at once, in the Oxford way. Nick wondered if the women were 
responding more warmly, if (hey were picking up, as Polly did, on their 
host's 'splendour'; perhaps their laughter would seem to him a kind of 
submission. Nick himself was lazily exploring the margin between his 
affection for Gerald and a humorous suspicion, long resisted, that 
there might be something rather awful about him. 
 He wished lie could see Lord Kessler's reactions. 
 'And now, as you know, Tobias has opted,' Gerald said, 'at least 
for the moment, for a career in journalism. I'm bound to Unit this 
made me anxious at first, but he assures me he has no interest in 
becoming a parliamentary sketch writer. 
 There's been puzzling talk of the Guardian, which we hope will 
blow over, though for the time being I'm thinking hard before 
answering any of his questions, and have decided to strenuously deny 
everything.' 
 Nick glanced round, in a little shrug of amusement, and saw that 
Tristao, the waiter from Madeira, was standing in the doorway behind 
him, following the proceedings with a vacant stare. As a caterers' 
waiter he must have to listen to an abnormal number of speeches, 
each of them built around private jokes and allusions. What was he 
thinking? What was he thinking of all ol them? His hands were huge 
and beautiful, the hands of a virtuoso. His dressy trouser-front curved 
forwards with telling asymmetry. When he saw that Nick was looking 
his way he gave him the vaguest smile and inclined his head, as if 
waiting for a murmured order. Nick thought, he doesn't even realize I 
like him, he thinks I'm just one of these toffs who never look at waiters 
for tlieir own sake. He shook his head and turned back, and his 
disappointment was practised and invisible. He saw that (Catherine 
was stuffing things into her bag and flashing irritable looks at Russell, 
who mouthed, 'What?' at her, and was getting irritable in his turn. 'So, 
Toby,' Gerald said, raising his voice and slowing his words, 'we 
congratulate you, we bless you, we love you: happy birthday! Will you - 
all - please raise your glasses: to Toby!' 
 'Toby!' the overlapping burble went up, followed by a sudden 
release of tension in cheers and whistles and applause - applause for 
Toby, not for the speaker, the heightened, unreal acclaim of a special 
occasion, amongst which Nick lifted his champagne glass with tears in 
his eyes, and kept on sipping from it to hide his emotion. But 
Catherine had jumped her little gilt chair back from the table and 
hurried out, past Tristao, who followed her for a second, to see if he 
could help. Then Nick and Russell stared at each other, but Toby was 
getting to his feet, and Nick was damned if he was chasing after her 
this time, he really did love Toby, more than anyone in this high 
magnificent room, and he was going to be with him as he spoke. 
 'No,' said Toby, 'I'm afraid Pa got that a bit wrong. I tried to get 
him an interview with the Guardian, but they just weren't interested!' 
This wasn't quite a witticism, but it drew a loud laugh from his friends, 
and Gerald, who'd assumed a self-congratulating air, was forced to 
make a quick moue of humility. 
 '"Wait till he does something big," they said.' He turned to his 
father. 'Of course I told them they wouldn't have to wait long.' 
 There was something artless in Toby's delivery; he was working 
in the family tradition of teasing, but he was too relenting and couldn't 
yet match Gerald's heavy archness. When he had stood up he was 
strikingly pale, like someone about to faint, but when he relaxed a 
little the colour suddenly burned in his cheeks, and his grin was a 
nervous acknowledgement of his blush. He said, 'I'm not going to say 
much - ' vague groans of disappointment - 'but above all I want to 
thank my dear sweet generous Uncle Lionel for having us all here 
tonight. I can't imagine anything more wonderful than this party - and 
I have a horrible feeling that after this the rest of my life is going to be 
one long anticlimax.' This brought cheers and applause for Lord 
Kessler, who was surely used to being thanked, but not to such public 
declarations of love. Again the family note was strong and sentimental, 
and a little surprising. Nick was smiling at Toby in an anxious trance 
of lust and encouragement. It was like watching a beautiful actor in a 
play, following him and wanting him. 'I'm also really touched,' Toby 
said, 'that my old friends Josh and Caroline have come all the way 
from South Africa. 
 Oh, and I understand they're also squeezing in a wedding 
ceremony while they're here.' There was good-natured applause, 
though no one really knew who Josh and Caroline were. Nick found 
himself listening almost abstractly to Toby's voice, hearing its 
harmless pretensions, which were the opposite of Gerald's. Gerald was 
a knowing, self-confident speaker, trained at the Oxford Union, 
polished at innumerable board meetings, and his tone combined 
candour and insincerity to oddly charming effect. Toby, like many of 
his friends, spoke in the latest public-school accent, an inefficient blur 
of class denial. Now he was a bit drunk, and under pressure, and older 
vowels were showing through as he said that it was 'awfully good of his 
parents to have tolerated him. He too seemed not to know what the 
point of his speech was; he came over like a cross between a 
bridegroom and the winner of an award, with a list of people to (hank. 
His boyish technique was to deflect attention from himself onto his 
friends, and in this he was also the opposite of his lather. He made 
various jokes such as 'Sam will need two pairs of trousers' and 'No 
more creme de menthe for Mary,' which clearly alluded to old 
disgraces, and began to bore the MPs. Nick sensed a touching 
nostalgia for the Oxford years, on which a door, an oak perhaps, 
seemed gently but firmly to have i losed. He himself was not referred 
to; but he took this as a sign of intimacy. His gaze embraced Toby, and 
from behind his helpless grin and raised applauding hands he saw his 
dream-self run forwards to hold him and kiss his hot face. Up in his 
room Nick slipped out of his jacket, and sniffed at it resignedly: time 
for a further dowsing in 'Je Promets'. He went into his bathroom, and 
opened the little turret dormer; he splashed cold water on his cheeks. 
It was the toasts that had done for him - there was always one glass 
that tipped him over, unfairly and jokingly, into being drunk. And 
there were hours of the party still to come. It was a great ritual of fun, 
a tradition, a convention, which everyone was loving for its lavishness 
and truth to form. Now there was going to be a move to the dance 
floor, and all the couples would be allowed to make love to each other 
with their hips and thighs and sliding hands. Nick gazed in the mirror 
and saw someone teeteringly alone. 
 The love he had felt for Toby ten minutes before migrated into a 
sudden hungry imagining of Leo, his transfiguring kisses, his shaving 
rash, and the wonderful shaved depth between the cheeks of his arse. 
The exactness of memory, the burning fact of what had happened, 
blinded him and held him for a while. When he came back, perhaps 
only seconds later, to the image in the mirror, he saw die flush in his 
cheeks and his mouth gasping in re-enacted surrender. He re-tied his 
tie, very perfectly, and ran a hand through his hair. There was a kind 
of tenderness for himself in the movement of his hand through his 
curls, as if it had been taught a lesson by Leo. The mirror was a chaste 
ellipse in a maplewood frame. The washstand was a real Louis Seize 
commode cut and drilled to hold a basin and a pair of tall hoarse-
throated taps. Well, if you owned a Louis Seize commode, if you owned 
dozens of them, you could be as barbarous with them as you liked; 
and a commode after all was meant for ease. And after all it was 
marvellous to be staying in a house like this, a friend of the family, not 
die son of the man who wound the clocks. As he trotted down the 
stairs he saw Wani Ouradi coming up. Nick sometimes greeted Wani 
with a friendly grope between the legs, or a long breathless snog, and 
he'd once had him tied up naked in his college room for a whole night; 
he had sodomized him tirelessly more often than he could remember. 
Wani himself, glancing back to see if his girlfriend, his intended, was 
following, had no idea of all this, of course; indeed, they hardly knew 
each other. 'Hi, Wani!' said Nick. 
 'Hi!' said Wani warmly, perhaps not able to remember his name. 
'I believe I have to congratulate you…' 
 'Oh… yes…' Wani grinned and looked down. 'Thank you so 
much.' Nick thought, as he had thought before, in the slow hours of 
the seminar room, that a view of the world through such long 
eyelashes must be one extraordinarily shadowed and filtered. They 
both suddenly decided to shake hands. Wani glanced back again with 
a murmur of exasperation so fond and well mannered that it seemed to 
include Nick in some harmless conspiracy. 'You must meet Martine,' 
he said. A provoking thing about him was the way his penis always 
showed, a little jutting bulge to the left, modest, unconscious, but 
unignorable, and i trigger to greedy thoughts in Nick. He checked for it 
now, in i woozy half-second. He was rather like a pop star of the 60s, 
with the penis and the dark curly hair - though the look was quite at 
odds with the bemused courtesy of his manner. 
 'I hope it will be a long engagement,' Nick heard himself saying. 
 'Ah, here she is…' - and they looked down together at the young 
woman who was climbing the shallow red-carpeted stair; towards 
them. She was wearing a pearl-coloured blouse and i long, rather stiff 
black skirt, which she held raised a little with both hands, so that she 
seemed to curtsey to them on each step She created a sober 
impression, well groomed but not fashion- able. 'This is Marine,' Wani 
said. 'This is Nick Guest, we were at Worcester together. 
 Nick took Maftmes co°' hand, smiling at Wani's knowing his 
name, and feeling himself to be briefly the subject of humorous 
suspicion** an unknown friend from her fiance's past. He said, Trf1 
pleased to meet you, congratulations.' All this congratulating was 
giving him a vague masochistic buzz. 
 'Oh - thank yoiiso much. Yes, Antoine has told you.' She had a 
French accent, v/hich in turn suggested to Nick the unknown 
networks of Wani's family and past, Paris perhaps, Beirut… the real 
life of the international rich from which Wani had occasionally 
descended on Oxford to read an essay on Dryden or translate an 
Anglo'Saxon riddle. Antoine was his real name, and Wani, his infantile 
attempt at saying it, his universal nickname. 'You must be vd7 happy.' 
 Martine smiled but said nothing, and Nick looked at her wide 
pale face for signs of the triumph he would have felt himself if he had 
become engaged to Wani. 
 'We're just going to our room,' Wani said, 'and then we'll be down 
for the bopping- 'Well, you will i»e bopping perhaps,' said Martine, 
showing already a mind of her own, but with the same patient 
expression, which registered v/itn Nick, as he went on down the stairs, 
as decidedly adult. It I™51 oe $ amp; face °f a steady happiness, a 
calm possession, that he couldn't imagine, or even exactly hope for. 
 He needed some air» but there was a clatter in the hall as people 
ran back indoors. Outside, from an obscured night sky, a fine rain had 
sfJrtecl falling. 
 Nick watched it drifting and gleaming in the upcast nght of a 
large globed lantern. Out in the circle of the drive a couple of 
chauffeurs were sitting in the front of a Daimler wA the map-light on, 
waiting and chatting. And there was Wafii's soft-top Mercedes, with its 
embarrassing number plate WHO 6. A voice brayed, 'Right! Everyone 
on the dance floor!' And there was a ragged chorus of agreement. 
'Hoorah! Dancing!' said a drunk Sloanish girl, staring into Nick's face 
as though with an effort she might remember him. 
 'Where is the ruddy dance floor?' said the braying boy. They had 
wandered back into the hall, which was being cleared with illusionless 
efficiency by the staff. 
 Nick said, 'It's in the smoking room,' excited by knowing this, and 
by suddenly taking the lead. They all straggled after him, the Sloaney 
girl laughing wildly and shouting, 'Yah, it s in the smoking room!' and 
sending him up, as the funny little man who knew the way. 
 A friend of Toby's had come down from London to do the disco, 
and red and blue spotlights flashed on and off above the paintings of 
the first Baron Kessler's numerous racehorses. Most of the group 
started grooving around at once, a little awkwardly, but with happy, 
determined expressions. Nick lounged along the wall, as if he might 
start dancing any moment, then came back, nodding his head to the 
beat, and walked quickly out of the room. It was that song 'Every 
Breath You Take' that they'd played over and over last term at Oxford. 
It made him abruptly sad. 
 He felt restless and forgotten, peripheral to an event which, he 
remembered, had once been thought of as his party too. His loneliness 
bewildered him for a minute, in the bleak perspective of the bachelors' 
corridor: a sense close to panic that he didn't belong in this house with 
these people. Some of the guests had gone into the library and as he 
approached the open door he took in the scant conversational texture, 
over which one or two voices held forth as if by right. Gerald said 
words Nick couldn't catch the meaning of, and through the general 
laughter another voice, which he half-recognized, put in a quick 
correcting 'Not if I know Margaret!' Nick stood at the doorway of the 
lamplit room and felt for a second like a drunken student, which he 
was, and also, more shadowy and inconsolable, a sleepless child 
peering in at an adult world of bare shoulders, flushed faces, and cigar 
smoke. Rachel caught his eye, and smiled, and he went in - Gerald, 
standing at the empty fireplace in the swaggering stance of someone 
warming himself, called out, 'Ah, Nick!' but there were too many people 
for introductions, a large loose circle who turned momentarily to 
inspect him and turned back as if they'd foiled to see anything at all. 
 Rachel was sitting on a small sofa, apart from the others, with a 
wrinkled old lady dressed in black, who made Rachel in her turn seem 
a beautiful, rather mischievous young woman. She said, 'Judy, have 
you met Nick Guest, Toby's great friend? This is Lady Partridge - 
Gerald's mother.' 
 'Oh no!' said Nick. 'I'm delighted to meet you.' 
 'How do you do,' said the old lady, with a dry jovial look. Toby's 
great friend'- there was a phrase to savour, to analyse for its 
generosity, its innocence, its calculation. 
 Rachel shifted slightly, but there was really no space for him on 
the sofa. In her great spread stiffish dress of lavender silk she was like 
a Sargent portrait of eighty years earlier, of the time when Henry 
James had come to stay. Nick stood before them and smiled. 
 'You do smell nice,' Rachel said, almost flirtingly, as a mother 
sometimes speaks to a child who is dressed up. 'I can't bear the smell 
of cigars, can you?' said Lady Partridge. 
 'Lionel hates it too,' murmured Rachel. As did Nick, to whom the 
dry lavatorial stench of cigars signified the inexplicable confidence of 
other men's tastes and habits, and their readiness to impose them on 
their fellows. But since Gerald himself was smoking one, frowning and 
screwing up his left eye, he said nothing. 
 'I can't think where he picked up the habit,' Lady Partridge said; 
and Rachel sighed and shook her head in humorous acknowledgement 
of their shared disappointments as wife and mother. 'Do Tobias and 
Catherine smoke?' 
 'No, thank heavens, they've never taken to it,' Rachel said. And 
again Nick said nothing. What always held him was the family's 
romance of itself, with its little asperities and collusions that were so 
much more charming and droll than those in his own family, and 
which now took on a further dimension in the person of Gerald's 
mother. Her manner was drawling but vigilant, her face thickly 
powdered, lips a bold red. There was something autocratic in her that 
made Nick want to please her. She sounded grander than Gerald by 
the same factor that Gerald sounded posher than Toby. 
 'Perhaps we could have some air,' she said, barely looking at 
Nick. And he went to the window behind them and pushed up the sash 
and let in the cool damp smell of the grounds. 'There!' he said, feeling 
they were now friends. Are you staying in the house?' Lady Partridge 
said. 'Yes, I've got a tiny little room on the top floor.' 
 'I didn't know there were any tiny rooms at Hawkeswood. But 
then I don't suppose I've ever been on the top floor.' Nick half admired 
the way she had taken his modesty and dug it deeper for him, and 
almost found a slur against herself in it. 
 'I suppose it depends on your standard of tininess,' he said, with 
a determined flattering smile. The faint paranoia that attaches to 
drunkenness had set in, and he wasn't certain if he was being rude or 
charming. He thought perhaps what he'd said was the opposite of what 
he meant. A waiter came up with a tray and offered him a brandy, and 
he watched with marvelling passivity as the liquor was poured. 'Oh 
that's fine… that's fine…!' He was a nice, conspiratorial sort of waiter, 
but he wasn't Tristao, who had crossed a special threshold in Nick's 
mind and was now the object of a crush, vivid in his absence. He 
wondered if he could have a crush on this waiter too - it only needed a 
couple of sightings, the current mood of frustration, and a single half-
conscious decision, and then the boy's shape would be stamped on his 
mind and make his pulse race whenever he appeared. 
 Rachel said, 'Nick's also staying with us in London, where he 
really does have a tiny room in the roof 'I think you said you had 
someone in,' said Lady Partridge, again without looking at Nick. It was 
as if she had scented his fantasy of belonging, of secret fraternity with 
her beautiful grandson, and set to eradicate it with a quick territorial 
instinct. 'Toby's certainly enormously popular,' she said. 
 'He's so handsome, don't you think?' 
 'Yes, I do,' said Nick lightly, and blushed and looked away as if to 
find him. 
 'You'd never think he was Catherine's brother. He had all the 
luck.' 
 'If looks are luck-' Nick was half-saying. 
 'But do tell me, who is that little person in glasses dancing with 
the Home Secretary?' 
 'Mm, I've seen him before,' said Nick, and laughed out loud. 'It's 
the Mordant Analyst,' said Rachel. 'Morton Danvers,' Lady Partridge 
noted it. 
 Rachel raised her voice. 'The children call him the Mordant 
Analyst. Peter Crowther - he's a journalist.' 
 'Seen his things in the Mail,' Lady Partridge said. 
 'Oh, of course…' said Nick. And it was true he did seem to be 
dancing with the Home Secretary, wooing him, capering in front of 
him, bending to him with new questions and springing back with 
startled enlightenment at the answers - a procedure which the Home 
Secretary, who was heavy-footed and had no neck, couldn't help but 
replicate in a clumsy but courteous way. 
 'I don't think I'd be quite so excited,' said Lady Partridge. 'He 
talked a lot of rot at dinner on… the coloured question. I wasn't next to 
him, but I kept hearing it. Racism, you know' -as if the very word were 
as disagreeable as the thing it connoted was generally held to be. 
 A lot of rot certainly is talked on that subject,' Nick said, with 
generous ambiguity. The old lady looked at him ponderingly. They 
turned and watched Gerald come forward to rescue the Home 
Secretary, with a solicitous smile on his lips and a flicker of jealousy in 
his eyes. He led him away, stooping confidentially over him, almost 
embracing him, but looking quickly round like someone who has 
organized a surprise: and there was a flash and a whirr and another 
flash. 
 Ah! The Tatler,' exclaimed Lady Partridge, 'at long last.' She 
patted her hair and assumed an expression of… coquetry… 
command… welcome… ancient wisdom… It was hard to say for sure 
what effect she was after. Catherine was hurrying Nick and Pat 
Grayson along the bachelors' corridor towards the thump of the dance 
music. 
 Are you all right, darling?' Nick said. 
 'Sorry, darling. It was that ghastly speech - one just couldn't take 
any more!' 
 She was lively, but her reactions were slow and playful, and he 
decided she must be stoned. 'I suppose it was a bit self-centred.' 
 She smiled, with a condescension worthy of her grandmother. 'It 
would have been a marvellous speech for his own birthday, wouldn't it. 
Poor Fedden!' 
 Pat, who must have been the person described in the speech as a 
film star, said, 'Ooh, I didn't think it was all that bad, considering'; 
though considering what, he didn't specify. Nick had seen him as the 
smooth eponymous rogue in Sedley on TV, and was struck by how 
much smaller, older and camper he was in real life. 
 Sedley was his mother's favourite series, though it wasn't clear if 
she knew that Pat was a whatnot. 'Ooh, I don't know about this, love…' 
he said as they came into the room. But Catherine pulled him into the 
crowd and he started rather nimbly circling round her, flicking his 
fingers and frowning sex-ily at her. She seemed to love everything that 
was uncool about this, but to Nick Pat was an unwelcome future, a 
famous man who was a fool, a silly old queen. He slipped away across 
the room, and found he was being shouted and smiled at by people 
and roughly hugged as if he was very popular. The brandy was having 
its way. But for a minute he was ashamed of snubbing Pat Grayson, 
and pretending to be part of this hetero mob. He felt pretty good, and 
grinned at Tim Carswell, who came across the floor and seized him 
and whirled him round till they were both stumbling and Tim's damp 
breath was burning his cheek, and Tim shouted 'Whoa!' and slowly 
pulled away, still slamming from side to side and then backing into the 
crowd with a Jaggerish raised arm. 'How's the bonny blade?' said Nick, 
and Sophie Tipper looked at him over her shoulder with faint 
recognition as she danced annoyingly with Toby - Nick kissed them 
both on the cheek before they could stop him, and shouted 'How are 
you?' again, beaming and heartbroken, and Toby put out a fist with a 
raised thumb, and shortly after that they moved away. Nick danced 
on, his collar was tight and he was sweating, he undid his jacket and 
then did it up again - ah, a window was open at the far end of the 
room and he jigged around in front of it for a while, turning his face to 
that rainy garden smell. Martine was sitting on the raised banquette 
that ran along the wall, and in the beam of green light that flashed on 
every few seconds her patient profile looked haggard and lost. 'Hi-i!' 
Nick called, stopping and half-kneeling beside her. 'Isn't Wani with 
you?' She looked round with a shrug: 'Oh, he's somewhere…' And Nick 
really wanted to see him, suddenly certain of a welcome like the ones 
he gave him in his fantasies, and there was a twist of calculation too - 
he could press himself, heavy and semi-incapable, into Wani's arms. 
Three girls were doing disco routines in a line, turning round and 
touching their elbows. Nick couldn't do that. The girls danced better 
than the boys, as if it was really their element, where their rowdy 
partners were making twits of themselves. Nick didn't like it near the 
door, where some of the older couples had wandered in and were 
trotting to and fro as if quite at home with Spandau Ballet. The 
ultraviolet light made Nat Hanmer's dress shirt glow and the whites of 
his eyes were thrillingly strange. They held hands for a few moments 
and Nat goggled at him for the freaky effect, then he shouted 'You old 
poof!' and slapped his back and gave him a barging kiss on the ear 
before he moved off. 
 'Your eyes!' Mary Sutton gasped at Nick, and he goggled too. It 
was easy to trip over the raised edge of the hearthstone if you were 
bopping near the fireplace, and Nick fell against Graham Strong and 
said, 'It's so great to see you!' because he'd sometimes hungered for 
Graham too, he hardly knew him, and he said, 'We must have a dance 
together later,' but Graham had already turned his back, and Nick 
fetched up with Catherine and Russell and Pat Grayson, where he was 
very welcome since they were an awkward threesome. 
 He opened a door from the hall into a small drawing room where 
a man in shirtsleeves got up and said, 'I'm sorry, sir,' and came 
towards him unsmilingly. 
 'I'm so sorry,' Nick said, 'I'm on the wrong side,' and he went out 
again and pulled the door closed with a boom. 
 He could hear the music in the distance, and the burble and 
laughter from the library, and a high ringing in his own ears. Up 
above, the hundred lilies of the electrolier glowed and twitched - there 
was a hesitant animation to things, all beating to his own pulse. He 
went sidling and parading through a suite of lit rooms, abandoned, 
amusing, a bolster or pulled-back curtain like a glimpse of a person in 
hiding. Stopped and stooped now and then to appreciate a throbbing 
little bronze or table that revolved as you looked away from it. Leant 
caressingly, a little heavily, on the escritoire of the dear old Marquise 
de Pompadour, which creaked - he was a lover of that sort of thing, if 
anyone was watching… He went into the dining room where they'd had 
lunch, found the light switches and looked very closely at the 
landscape by Cezanne, which pulsed as well, with secret geometries. 
Why did he talk to himself about it? The imaginary friend was at his 
shoulder, the only child's devoted companion, needing his guidance. 
The composition, he said… the different greens… He had a keen idea, 
which he was cloaking and avoiding, and then licensing step by step 
as he opened a side door into a brown passageway, that turned a 
corner, and had other doors off it, and then came in a quickening cool 
draught to an open back door with the service yard beyond, glittering 
in drizzle. The glare was bright and unsentimental here. No enriching 
glow of candles or picture lights. Men in jeans were stacking and 
crashing things, and carried on shouting to each other as they passed 
Nick, so that he felt like a ghost whose 'Thanks!' and 'Sorry!' were 
inaudible. Tristao was washing glasses in a pantry and he walked in 
behind him with his heart suddenly thumping, smiling as if they were 
more than friends, and aware none the less that Tristao was working, 
it was one in the morning, and he himself was just a bow-tied drunk, a 
walking wrong note of hope and need. 'Hi there!' 
 Tristao looked round and sighed, then turned back to his work. 
'You come to help?' The glasses came in on metal trays, half full, 
lipstick smeared, fag ends in claret, jagged edges on stems. 
 'Um… I'm sure I'd break everything,' Nick said, and gazed at him 
from behind with wonder and a sense of luck and again the suspicion 
of a rebuff. 
 'Oof…! I'm tired,' Tristao said, and came across the room so that 
Nick felt in the way. 'I been up on my feet nine hours now.' 
 'You must be,' said Nick, leaning towards him with a friendly 
stroke or pat, which fell short and was ignored. He wondered if he 
might be going to fall over. 
 'So… When do you finish?' 
 'Oh, we go on till you go off, baby.' He dried his hands on a tea 
towel, and lit himself a cigarette, half offering one to Nick as an 
afterthought. Nick hated tobacco, but he accepted at once. The first 
sharp drag made his head fizz. 'You enjoying the party, anyway?' 
Tristao said. 
 'Yeah…' said Nick, and gave a shrug and a large ironical laugh. 
He wanted to impress Tristao as a Hawkeswood guest, and to mock at 
the guests as well. He wanted to suggest that he was having a perfectly 
good time, that the staff, certainly, could not have done more, but that 
he could take it or leave it; and besides (here he half closed his eyes, 
suavely and daringly) he had a better idea about how to have fun. 
Tristao perhaps didn't get all that at once. He looked at Nick moodily, 
as at a kind of problem. And Nick looked back at him, with a 
simmering drunk smile, as if he knew what he was doing. 
 Tristao had lost his bow tie, and the top two buttons of his shirt 
were open over a white singlet. His sleeves were rolled up, there were 
streaked black hairs on his forearms, but from his heart to his knees 
he wore a white apron tied round tight, which made a secret of what 
had been such a heavy hint before. 
 The pantry was lit by a single fluorescent tube, so that his tired 
sallow face was shown without flattery. He looked quite different from 
what Nick had remembered, and it took a little effort of lustful will to 
find him attractive - there seemed almost to be an excuse for giving up 
on him and going back to the party. 'A lot of people here, yeah?' said 
Tristao. He glanced sourly at the trays of glasses and debris, and blew 
out smoke in that same critical sibilant way that Polly had, like a sign 
of some shared expertise. And then Nick found himself bitterly jealous 
at the idea of Polly getting Tristao, and knew that he had to stay. 
'Yeah, he got a lot of friends, this Mr Toby… I like him. He's like a 
hactor, no?' - and Tristao made a gesture, long fingers spread like a 
fan beside his face to indicate the general eclat of Toby's features, bone 
structure, complexion. 
 'Yes, he is,' said Nick, with a chuckle and a puff of smoke. Toby's 
face seemed to hover for a moment in front of the waiter's, which was 
less beautiful in each respect… But wasn't the fact that he didn't 
admire Tristao so much a part of the lesson, what he thought of as the 
homosexual second-best solution? This backstairs visit was all about 
sex, not nonsensical longings: he wasn't going to get what he wanted 
elsewhere. There was a challenge in the boy's deep-set eyes and 
something coded in his foreignness - were Madeirans in fact 
susceptible to casual sex? Nick couldn't see why they shouldn't be… 
'So how much you had to drink?' Tristao said. 'Oh, masses,' said Nick. 
'Yeah?' said Tristao. 
 'Well, not as much as some people,' said Nick. He smoked, and 
held his cigarette by his lapel, and felt that his smoking was 
unpractised and revealing. Of course the wonderful thing about his 
date with Leo had been that it was a date - they both knew what they 
were there for. Whereas the Tristao thing might well be all in his own 
head. He wasn't sure if the thinness of their conversation showed how 
futile it was, or if it was a sign of its authenticity He suspected chat-
ups should be more colourful and provocative. He said, 'So you're from 
Madeira, I gather,' with the flicker of an eyebrow. 
 Tristao narrowed his eyes and gave his first little smile. 'How you 
know that?' he said. Nick took the moment to hold his gaze. 'Oh, I 
know, the big guy tell you.' 
 'Huge,' said Nick - 'well, round the middle anyway!' 
 Tristao looked inside his packet of cigarettes, where he'd stowed 
Polly's card. 
 'That him?' he said. Nick glanced dismis-sively at the card but 
felt he'd been taught a lesson by it. Dr Paul Tompkins, 23 Lovelock 
Mansions… so established already, like a consulting room, with the 
boys coming through. He turned the card over, where Polly had 
scribbled Sep 4, 8pm sharp!"Why he say sharp?' said TristSo. 
 'Oh, he's a very busy man,' said Nick, and feeling it was the 
moment he made a sudden movement forwards, two steps, his arms 
out, and a smirk of ineffable irony about Polly on his lips. 'Sorry, mate-
': a red-faced man looked in at the door, then tucked in his chin and 
gave a confident dry laugh. 'Wondered what was going on there for a 
moment!' Nick reddened and Tristao had the proper provoking 
presence of mind to snort quietly and say, 'Bob, how's things?' 
 Bob gave him some instructions about the different rooms, 'his 
lordship' was referred to a couple of times, with servants' irony as well 
as pitying respect, and Nick swayed from side to side with a tolerant 
smile, to convey to the men that he knew Lord Kessler personally, 
they'd had lunch together and he'd shown him the Moroni. When Bob 
had gone, Tristao said, "What am I going to do with you?' without 
much warmth or sense of teasing. 
 'I don't know,' said Nick, chirpily, half numbed by drink to the 
looming new failure. 
 'I got to go.' Tristao tugged his bow tie out of his pocket, and 
fiddled with the elastic and the clip. Nick waited for him to take his 
apron off. 'Look, OK, I see you, by the main stairs, three o'clock.' 
 'Oh… OK, great!' said Nick, and found a happy relief in both the 
arrangement and the delay. 'Three o'clock 'Sharp,' said Tristao, with a 
scowl. He looked in at the door of Toby's bedroom. A group of his 
friends had come up here when the music stopped at two, and they 
seemed lazily to assess him. 'Come in and close the door, for god's 
sake,' said Toby, beckoning from the vast bed where he was propped 
up among sprawling friends. He had been given the King's Room, 
where Edward VII had slept - the swags of blue silk above the bedhead 
were gathered into a vaguely comic gilded crown. On the opposite wall 
hung a comfortable Renoir nude. Nick picked his way between groups 
sitting on the floor in front of an enormous sofa where fat Lord 
Shepton was lying with his tie undone and his head on the thigh of an 
attractive drunk girl. The curtains were parted and a window open to 
carry the reek of marijuana far away from the nose of the Home 
Secretary. Somehow they had recreated the mood of a colleg«room late 
at night, girls' stockinged feet stretched out across boyfriends' knees, 
smoke in the air, two or three voices domi nating. Nick felt the charm 
as well as the threat of the group Gareth Lane was holding forth about 
Hitler and Goebbels, and his lecturing drone and yapping laughs at his 
own puns brought back something dreary from the Oxford days. He 
was said to be the 'ablest historian of his year', but he had failed to get 
a first, and seemed now to be acting out some endless redemptive viva. 
The talk went on, but there felt to Nick's tingling drunk ears to be a 
residual silence in the room, on which his own movements and words 
were an intrusion… and yet left no trace. Several o(his other pals were 
here, but the two months since term had distanced them more than he 
could explain. Some simple but strong and long-prepared change had 
occurred, they had taken up their real lives, and left him alone in his. 
He came back and perched on the edge of the bed and Toby leaned 
forward and passed him the joint. 
 'Thanks…' Nick smiled at him, and at last some old sweetness of 
reassurance glowed between them, what he'd been waiting for all 
night. 
 'God, darling, you smell like a tart's parlour,' Toby said. Nick 
carried on gazing at him, paralysed for the moment by the need to hold 
in the smoke, a tickle in his throat, blushing with shame and pleasure. 
He was holding in the unprecedented 'darling' and it was making him 
as warm and giddy as the pot. Then he let out the smoke and saw the 
baldly hetero claims of the rest of the remark. 
 
 
 
He said, 
 
'And how would you know?' - wondering primly if Toby really had been 
to a tart's parlour. It was an image of him lurching up a narrow 
staircase. Toby winked. 
 'Having a good time?' 
 'Yes, fantastic' Nick looked around appreciatively, glossing over 
his inner vision of the night as a long stumbling journey, hall chase, 
half flight, like one of his country-house dreams, his staircase dreams. 
 'What's happened to Sophie, by the way?' 
 'She had to go back to London. Yeah. She's got an audition on 
Monday.' 
 'Ah… right…' This was good news to Nick, and Toby himself, 
drunk, stoned, eyes glistening, seemed happy about it he liked the 
adult note of responsibility in sending her home, and he liked being 
free of her too. He raised his voice and said, 'Oh, do shut up about 
fucking Goebbels!' But after a brief incredulous whirr Gareth's shock-
proof mechanism rattled on. 
 Toby was king tonight, on his great big bed, and his friends (or 
once were his subjects. He was acting the role with high spirits, in a 
childishly approximate way. Nick found it very touching and exciting. 
As the pot took its delayed effect, squeezing and freeing like some 
psychic massage, he reached back and took Toby's hand, and they 
lolled there like that for thirty or forty seconds of heaven. It was as if 
the room had been steeped in a mood of amorous hilarity as sweetly 
unignorable as '|e Promets'. He recalled what Polly had said in the 
garden long before, and thought that maybe, at last, for once, Toby 
would actually be his. 
 There was a surrounding murmur of stoned gossip, heads 
nodding over rolling papers, the figures blurred but glowing in the 
lamplight. 'But did the Fiihrer license the Final Solution?' Gareth 
asked himself; and it was clear rhat the arguments on this famous 
question were about to be passed in detailed review. 
 There was a giggling protest from Sam Zeman, curly-headed 
genius who'd gone straight into Kesslers on twenty thousand a year. 
'You're in a house full of Jews here, can you shut up about the fucking 
Final Solution, it's a party…' - and he reached for his drink with the 
frown and snuffle of a subtle person obliged to be brusque. 'I can go on 
to Stalin -? •' said Gareth facetiously. 
 After a minute's reflection Roddy Shepton said robustly, 'Well, I'm 
not bloody Jewish.' 
 'Tobias is,' said his girlfriend, 'aren't you, darling?' 
 'For god's sake, Claire? • •' said Roddy. 
 Claire gazed at Toby with eyes of deepening conviction. 'Wasn't 
someone saying the Home Sectary's Jewish too…?' she said. 
 'Calm down, Claire!' said Roddy furiously. It was his own 
conviction that his large placid girlfriend, who had never been known 
to raise her voice, was dangerously excitable. Perhaps it was his way of 
implying he had tamed a sexual volcano; which in turn perhaps helped 
him to explain why he was going out with a strictly middle-class girl, 
the daughter of his father's estate manager. 
 Claire looked round in pursuit of her new idea. 'You're Jewish, 
aren't you, Nat?' 
 'I am, darling,' said Nat, 'or half Jewish, anyway' 
 'And the other half's a bloody Welshman,' said Roddy. He turned 
his head on her knee and squinted up at her. 'God, you're drunk,' he 
said. 
 This was the kind of insult that passed for wit at the Martyrs' 
Club, and was in fact one of the things most often said there. Toby had 
once taken Nick to the club's poky panelled dining room, where Christ 
Church toffs and Union hacks conformed deafeningly to type and 
boozed and plotted and howled unacceptable remarks at each other 
and at the harried staff. It was another world, defiantly impervious, in 
which it was a shock to find that Toby had a place. 
 'You are so fucking drunk, Shepton,' Toby said. He had pulled off 
his socks and rolled them into a ball and he threw them very hard and 
accurately at the fat peer's head. 'Fucking Christ, Fedden,' Roddy 
muttered, but left it at that. Nick was explaining about the sea in 
Conrad's novels being a metaphor for both escape from the self and 
discovery of the self - a point which took on more and more revelatory 
force as he repeated it. He laughed at the beauty of it. He wasn't a 
strong smoker, and a second frowning toke, taken in the belief that the 
first one had had no effect, could leave him swimming and gabbling for 
hours. Nat Hanmer was sitting on the floor beside him, and his warm 
thigh was pressed against his own. There was something charmingly 
faggy about Nat tonight. He nodded and smiled into Nick's eyes as he 
was talking. Nick thought the pressure of the dope on his temples was 
as if his skull was being gently squeezed by Nat's big hands. Sam 
Zeman was nodding and smiling too and corrected, as if it really didn't 
matter, a plot detail in Victory that Nick had got wrong. Nick loved 
Sam because he was an economist but he'd read everything and 
played the viola and took a flattering interest in people less sublimely 
omniscient than himself. 
 He wanted to lie back and listen and perhaps have a long deep 
snog with Nat Hanmer, whose lips were not so full and soft as Leo's, 
but who was (Nick hadn't seen it before) almost beautiful, as well of 
course as being a marquess. The two of them in their shirtsleeves. Nat 
said he was having a go at writing a novel himself. He'd bought a 
computer, which he said was 'a really sexy machine'. In the warm 
explanatory light of the pot Nick saw what he meant. 'I'd love to read 
it,' he said. Across the room Garetli had switched wars and was 
describing the Battle of Jutland to a paralysed circle of young women. 
His big velvet bow tie was all donnish conceit. He was going to go on 
like this for forty-five years. 
 Nick heard himself saying how he missed his boyfriend, and then 
his heart speeded up. Sam smiled - he was purely and maturely 
straight, but he was cool with everything. Nat said broad-mindedly, 
'Oh, you've got a… you've got a bloke?' and Nick said, 'Yeah…' and 
already he'd told them all about answering the advertisement, and 
their meeting and having sex in the garden and the funny episode with 
Geoffrey from two doors down. And how they were now going out 
together on a regular basis. Pot was a kind of truth drug for him - with 
a twist. He had an urge to tell, and show himself to them as a 
functioning sexual being, but as he did so he seemed to hear how odd 
and unseen his life was, and added easy touches to it, that made it 
more shapely and normal. 
 'I didn't know about all this,' said Toby, who was going round in 
his bare feet with a bottle of brandy. He was grinning, slightly 
scandalized, even hurt perhaps that Nick hadn't told him he was 
having an affair. 
 'Oh, yes…' said Nick, 'sorry… He's this really attractive black guy, 
called Leo.' 
 'You should have brought him tonight,' Toby said. 'Why didn't 
you say?' 
 'I know,' said Nick; but he could only imagine Leo here in his 
falling-down jeans and his sister's shirt, and the jarring of his irony 
against the loaded assumptions of the Oxford lot. 
 'May one ask why?' said Lord Shepton, who had lately been 
snoring but had now been tickled awake and had a blearily vengeful 
look. Nobody knew what he was talking about. 'We've already got 
bloody… Woggoo here,' and he struggled upright, with a grimace of 
pretended guilt, to see if Charlie Mwegu, the Worcester loose-head 
prop and the only black person at the party, was in the room. 'I mean, 
fucking hell,' he said. Shepton was a licensed buffoon, an indulged 
self-parody, and Nick merely raised his eyebrows and sighed; for a 
moment the old dreariness and wariness surfaced again through the 
newer romance of the pot. Claire was looking tenderly at Nick, and 
said, 'I think black men can be so attractive… they have sweet little 
ears, don't they… sometimes… I don't know… It must be nice-' 
 ' Calm down, Claire! barked Roddy Shepton, as if his very worst 
fears had been confirmed. He struggled towards his glass on the floor. 
 'No, I'm quite jealous actually,' said Claire, and gave Lord 
Shepton a playful poke in the stomach. 
 'Oh, you cow!' said Lord Shepton; his attention refocusing, slowly 
but greedily, on Wani Ouradi, who had just come into the room. 'Ah, 
Ouradi, there you are. I hope you're going to give me some of that 
white powder, you bloody Arab.' 
 'Oh, really!' said Claire, appealing hopelessly to the others. 
 But Wani ignored Shepton and stepped through the group 
towards the bed and Toby. 
 He had changed into a green velvet smoking jacket. Nick had a 
moment of selfless but intensely curious immersion in his beauty. The 
forceful chin with its slight saving roundness, the deep-set eyes with 
their confounding softness, the cheekbones and the long nose, the 
little ears and springy curls, the cruel charming curve of his lips, made 
everything else in the house seem stale, over-artful, or beside the 
point. Nick longed to abandon handsome Nat and climb back on to the 
King's bed. He rolled his eyes in apology for Shepton, but Wani gave no 
answering sign of special recognition. And the group soon started 
talking about something else. Wani lay back on his elbow beside Toby 
for a minute, and took in the room through the filters of his lashes. 
Toby had picked up one of the girls' pink chiffon scarves, and was 
winding it into a turban with drunk perseverance. Wani said nothing 
about the I urban, as if they were almost too familiar with each other 
to comment, as if they were figures of some other time and culture. 
Nick heard him say, 'Si tu veux…' before getting up and going into the 
bathroom. Tobp sat a while longer, laughing artificially at the 
conversation, and then went off with a yawn and a stumble after him. 
Nick sat sunk in himself, jealous of both of them, shocked almost to 
the point of panic by what they were doing. When they came back, he 
watched them like a child curious for evidence of its parents' vices. He 
could see their tiny effort to muffle their excitement, the little mock 
solemnity that made them seem oddly less happy and smashed than 
the rest of the party. They had a gleam of secret knowledge about 
them. 
 A joint came round again, and Nick took a serious pull on it. 
Then he got up and went to the open window, to look out at the damp 
still night. The great beeches beyond the lawn showed in grey 
silhouette against the first vague paling of the sky. It was a beautiful 
effect, so much bigger than the party: the world turning, the bright 
practical phrases of the first birds. Though there were hours still, 
surely, before sunrise… He stiffened, grabbed at his wrist, and held his 
watch steady in front of him. It was 4.07. He turned and looked at the 
others in the room, in their stupor and animation, and his main heavy 
thought was just how little any of them cared - they could never begin 
to imagine a date with a waiter, or the disaster of missing one. He 
made the first steps towards the door, and slowed and stopped as the 
pot took his sense of direction away. 
 Where, after all, was he going? Everything seemed to have 
petered into a silence, as if by agreement. Nick felt conspicuous 
standing there, smiling cautiously, like someone not on to a joke; but 
when he looked at the others they seemed equally stilled and bemused. 
It must be some amazingly strong stuff. Nick thought his way towards 
moving his left leg forward, he could coax his thought down through 
the knee to the foot, but it died there with no chance of becoming an 
action. It was slightly trying if he had to stand here for a long time. He 
looked more boldly round the others, not easy to name at the moment, 
some of them. Slow blinks, little twitches of smiles. 'Yah…' said Nat 
Hanmer, very measuredly, nodding his head, agreeing with some 
statement that only he had heard. 'I suppose…' said Nick, but stopped 
and looked around, because that was part of a conversation about 
Gerald and the BBC. No one had noticed, though. 
 'But you're thinking, wasn't that Bismarck's whole point?' Gareth 
said. r Nick wasn't sure how it started. Sam Zeman was laughing so 
much he lay back on the floor, but then choked and had to sit up. One 
of the girls pointed at him mockingly, but it wasn't mockery, she was 
laughing uncontrollably herself. Nat was red in the face, pinching the 
tears out of his eyes and pulling down the corners of his mouth to try 
to stop it. Nick could only stop giggling by glaring at the floor, and as 
soon as he looked up he was giggling again convulsively, it was like 
hiccups, it was hiccups, all mixed up together with the whooping, 
inexplicable r'unniness of the brandy bottle, the Renoir lady, the gilded 
plaster crown above the bed, all of them with theit ideas and bow ties 
and plans and objections. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
' "That's not a Hero's Life," said a critic of the first performance, "but 
rather a Dogs Life." Or rather a dog's breakfast, you may well feel, after 
hearing that rendition of the battle music by Rudolf Kothner and the 
Tallahassee Symphony.' It was Saturday morning, in the kitchen at 
Kensington Park Gardens, and a sharp young man was comparing 
recordings of Ein Heldenleben on 'Building a Library'. 
 'Ha, ha,' said Gerald sourly, who had been slouching up and 
down, conducting first with a biro, now with a tennis racquet. He loved 
these domestic mornings, deferring to Rachel, making lists, carrying 
out small invented duties in die kitchen and the cellar. Today was even 
better, with his favourite composer on the radio; he lingered and got in 
the way, swinging his head from side to side, and not at all minding 
having a passage repeated again and again in ever louder rival 
interpretations. He took great interest in the breakdown of the Hero's 
adversaries into carpers (flutes), vituperators (oboe), and whiners (cor 
anglais), and drove them all into the pantry with a vigorous forehand 
when the Hero won. 
 'But let's move on to "The Hero's Works of Peace",' said the 
reviewer, where Strauss self-glorifyingly recalls material from his own 
earlier symphonic poems and songs.' 
 'I don't like this chap's tone,' said Gerald. 'Ah, now…! Nick… ' as 
the music revelled and swelled enormously. 'You must admit!' Nick sat 
at the table, quick-witted after a mug of coffee, and ready to say all 
kinds of things. Today especially he was maddened by Strauss's 
bumptious self-confidence, which took no account of his own 
frustrations, the two tense weeks in which die dream of Leo as a 
possible future had faded on the air. But he contented himself with 
making a ghastly face. In their ongoing Strauss feud he was always 
cheerfully combative and found himself leaping to more and more dizzy 
positions -after which he had to take a few moments to reason his way 
to them over solid ground. Simply having opposition brought latent 
feelings to the surface and polarized views he might otherwise hardly 
have bothered to formulate. It became urgent for him to revile Richard 
Strauss, and he did it happily but a little hysterically, as if far more 
than questions of taste were involved. He could measure the strange 
zeal of the process by the degree to which he found himself denying his 
own ingenuous pleasure in some of Strauss's material and the magical 
things he did with it - this massive tune now, for instance, which 
would be running through his mind for days to come. He watched 
Gerald revelling and swelling too, and a vague embarrassment at the 
sight made it easier for him to say, 'No… no… it just won't do,' as the 
music was quickly faded out. 
 'Herbert von Karajan there, with the strings of the Berlin 
Philharmonic in superlative form.' 
 'Exacdy, that's the one we've got, isn't it?' Gerald said. 'The 
Karajan, Nick?' 
 - since it was Nick, over the summer months, who had been 
through the record cupboard and put all the discs in alphabetical 
order. 'Um - I think so…' 
 'But it's possible, isn't it,' the clever young man went on, 'to 
wonder if the sheer opulence of the sound and those very broad tempi 
don't push this reading over the edge, losing that essential drop of self-
irony without which the piece can all too easily become an orgy of 
vulgarity. Let's hear Bernard Haitink and the Concertgebouw in the 
same passage.' 
 Gerald had the stern, pinched look of someone wounded in 
debate and measuring his response with awkward dignity. The 
orchestra rampaged all over again. 'I don't think I care for this one 
quite so much,' he said. And then a little later, 'I don't see what's 
vulgar about being glorious.' 
 Nick said, 'Oh, if you were worried about vulgarity then you'd 
never listen to Strauss at all.' 
 'Ooh…!' protested Gerald, suddenly cheerful again. 'Perhaps the 
early Symphony in F,' Nick said. 'But even that…' 
 'I'm going over to Russell's,' said Catherine, walking through the 
room with a hat on and her fingers in her ears -whether to block out 
the Hero's Deeds or her father's objections wasn't clear. In fact Gerald 
said, 'OK, Puss,' and stamped his foot exultantly at a blasting entry for 
the horns. 
 It was a clear case of God-dammery, her word for all heavily 
scored Romantic music. She went out into the hall and they heard the 
slam of the front door. 
 What the problem was was this colossal redundancy, the 
squandering of brilliant technique on cheap material, the sense that 
the moral nerves had been cut, leaving the great bloated body to a life 
of valueless excess. And then there was the sheer bad taste of applying 
the high metaphysical language of Wagner to the banalities of 
bourgeois life, an absurdity Strauss seemed only intermittently aware 
of! But he couldn't say that, he would sound priggish, he would seem' 
to care too much. Gerald would say it was only music. Nick tried to 
read the paper for a couple of minutes, but was oddly too excited to 
concentrate. 
 And then the cor anglais, changed at last from whining adversary 
to pastoral pipe, introduces die poignant melody which announces the 
Hero's impending departure from the world. For how not to do it, let's 
go back to that mid-price disc from the Caracas Radio Orchestra, 
whose soloist seems not to have been told of this important 
transformation in character 'Gerald, did you manage to get hold of 
Norman?' Rachel asked, with an insistent tone, as if herself not quite 
sure of getting through. But a question or command from her had 
automatic priority, and he said, 'I did, my darling, yes' - going towards 
her to help her with a trug of long-stemmed yellow roses that she had 
brought in from the garden. She didn't need help, and the gallant little 
pantomime passed off almost unnoticed, as their common idiom. 
'Penny's going to come over for a chat. Norman says she's far too high-
minded to work for the Tories.' 
 'She'll be very glad of a job,' said Rachel. Norman Kent, whose 
temperamental portraits of Toby and Catherine hung in the drawing 
room and the second-floor landing respectively, was one of Rachel's 
'left-wing' friends from her student days, whom she'd stayed 
stubbornly loyal to; Penny was his blushing blonde daughter, also just 
down from Oxford. There was a notion she might come and work for 
Gerald. 'Is Catherine up yet? Or down?' Rachel asked. 
 'Mm…? No - she's neither up nor down, in fact she's out. She's 
gone to see the man with the Face.' 
 Ah.' Rachel clipped expressively at the rose stems. 'Well, I hope 
she'll be back for lunch with your mother.' 
 'I'm not sure…' said Gerald, who doubtless thought lunch would 
be a good deal easier without her, especially since Toby and Sophie 
were coming. He listened through to the final recommendation on Ein 
Heldenleben, and pensively turned off the radio. He said, 'He's all right, 
this fellow, isn't he, Nick?' 
 'Who… Russell? I think he's all right.' Having given him a fervent 
testimonial two weeks ago, when he hadn't even met him, he was 
obliged to remain vaguely positive now that he had met him and knew 
that he couldn't stand him. 'Oh, good,' said Gerald, glad to have got 
that cleared up. 'I thought he was rather sinister,' Rachel said. 'I know 
what you mean,' said Nick. 
 'One thing we have learnt, Nick,' said Gerald, 'is that all her 
boyfriends are marvellous. Criticism from us is the last betrayal. The 
more" unprepossessing the individual the more strenuously we admire 
him.' 
 'We love Russell,' said Rachel. / 'He's not much to look at,' Nick 
quickly conceded, knowing that that was part of his glamour for 
Catherine, who described him as 'a blinding fuck'. 
 'Oh, come on, hes a thug,' said Rachel, with an unsparing smile. 
'The photographs he took at Hawkeswood were purely malicious, 
making everyone look like fools.' 
 'An easy target,' said Gerald, clearly meaning something different. 
 Catherine had passed round a selection of the pictures at dinner 
the week before. They were grainy, black and white, taken without a 
flash on long exposures which dragged people's features into leering 
masks. The photograph of Gerald and the Home Secretary being 
photographed for Tatler was a minor masterpiece. Not shown were 
those of guests fornicating, mooning, pissing in the fountain, and 
snorting cocaine. 'Is that what The Face is like?' said Gerald. 
 'Sort of satire…' 
 'Not really,' said Nick. 'It's more pop - and fashion.' 
 'I wouldn't mind seeing a copy,' said Rachel warily. And Nick 
found himself climbing up the four flights of stairs to search for one in 
Catherine's room. A sense of criminal intru-siveness, a nagging 
memory of what had almost happened there three weeks before, made 
him hurry back down. He glanced through the magazine as he passed 
by the door of his hosts' bedroom, just to make sure it wasn't too 
outrageous. He quite liked The Face, but there was a lot of it he didn't 
understand. The picture of a blanched and ringleted Boy (leorge on the 
cover had been taken by Russell. As he came back into the kitchen 
Nick felt suddenly embarrassed, as if he'd brought down one of his 
four porn mags by mistake. He handed it over and they placed it on 
the table and looked (lirough it together. 'Mm… perfectly harmless,' 
murmured Gerald. 
 'Yah - it's just a kids' thing,' said Nick, hovering to interpret and 
deflect. 
 He wasn't much use as a guide to his own youth culture, but he 
knew it wasn't just a kids' thing. They paused at a fashion spread that 
showed some sexy half-naked models in a camp pretence of a pillow 
fight. Gerald frowned faintly, to deny any interest in the women, and 
Nick realized his paradigm for this inspection was some difficult 
encounter with his own parents, who would have blushed at the 
sexualized style of the whole magazine, and called it 'daft' or 'rubbish' 
because they couldn't mention the sex thing itself. Nick looked at the 
sprawling beautiful men and blushed appallingly too. He said, 'I 
always think the typography's rather a nightmare.' 
 'Isn't it a nightmare?' said Rachel gratefully. 'One feels quite lost.' 
They all started reading an article which began, '"Get that 
motherfucker out of here!" says Daddy Mambo of (Collision.' 
 'OK,' said Gerald, with a dismissive drawl, flicking through pages 
of advertisements for clubs and albums. He seemed vaguely distressed, 
not at the magazine itself, but that Rachel should have seen it. 'This 
doesn't have the young genius's work in it…?' 
 'Um - yes, he did the cover on this one.' 
 'Ah…' Gerald peered at it in an affectedly donnish way. 'Oh yes, 
"photo Russell Swinburne-Stevenson".' 
 'I didn't know he had a surname,' said Rachel. 
 'Much less two,' said Gerald - as if perhaps he might not be such 
a bad sort. 
 They looked at Boy Georges carmine smile and unusual hat. He 
wasn't at all sexy to Nick, but he carried a large sexual implication. 
'Boy George is a man, isn't he?' said Rachel. 'Yes, he is,' said Nick. 'Not 
like George Eliot.' 
 'No, not at all.' 
 'Very fair question,' said Gerald. 
 The doorbell rang - it was a quick brassy rattle as much as a 
ping. 'Is that Judy already?' said Rachel, fairly crossly. Gerald went 
into the hall and they heard him pluck open the front door and boom 
'Hello' in a peremptory and discouraging way he had. And then, in 
another timbre that made Nick's heart thump and the still air in the 
house shiver and gleam, Leo saying, 'Good morning, Mr Fedden, sir. I 
was wondering if young Nicholas was at home.' 
 'Um, yes, yes he is… Nick!' he called back - but Nick was already 
coming through, with a strange stilted walk, it seemed to himself, of 
embarrassment and pride. It was abrupt and confusing but he couldn't 
stop smiling. It was the first time in his life he'd had a lover call for 
him, and the fact had a scandalous dazzle to it. Gerald didn't ask Leo 
in, but stood back a little to let Nick pass and to see if there was going 
to be any kind of trouble. 'Hello, Nick,' said Leo. 'Leo!' Nick shook his 
hand and kept holding it as he stepped out onto the shallow porch, 
between the gleaming Tuscan pillars. 'How's it going?' said Leo, giving 
his cynical litde smile, but his eyes almost caressing, passing Nick a 
secret message, and then nodding him a sign that Gerald had 
withdrawn; though he must have been able to hear him saying, '… 
some pal of Nick's…' and a few moments later, 'No, black chappie.' 
 'I'm so pleased to see you,' Nick said, with a certain caution 
because he didn't want to look mad with excitement. And then, 'I've 
been thinking of you. And wondering what you were up to,' sounding a 
bit like his mother when she was fondly suppressing a critical note. He 
looked at Leo's head as if he had never seen anything like it before, his 
nose, his stubble, the slow sheepish smile that admitted his own 
vulnerability. 
 'Yeah, got your message,' Leo said. He gazed down the wide white 
street, and Nick remembered his authentic but mysterious phrase 
about how he'd been round the block a few limes. 'Sorry I didn't get 
back to you.' 
 'Oh, that's all right,' said Nick, and he found the weeks of waiting 
and failure were already half forgotten. 'Yeah, I've been a bit off colour,' 
Leo said. 
 'Oh, no.' Nick poured himself into believing this, and felt the 
lovely new scope it gave him for sympathy and interference. 'I'm so 
sorry…' 
 'Chesty thing,' said Leo: 'couldn't seem to shake it off.' 
 'But you're better now…' 
 'Ooh, yeah!' said Leo, with a wink and a squirm; which made 
Nick think he could say, 'Too much outdoor sex, I expect.' Really he 
didn't know what was allowed, what was funny and what was inept. 
He Icared his innocence showed. 
 'You're bad, you are,' said Leo appreciatively. 'You're a very bad 
boy.' He was wearing the same old jeans of their first date, which for 
Nick now had a touching anecdotal quality, he knew them and loved 
them; and a zipped-up tracksuit top which made him look ready for 
action, or for inaction, the rigours and hanging about of training. 'I 
haven't forgotten our little tangle in the bushes.' 
 'Nor have I,' said Nick, with giddy understatement, glancing over 
his shoulder. 
 'I drought, he's a shy one, a bit stuck-up, but there's something 
going on inside drose corduroy trousers, I'll give him a go. And how 
right I was, Henry!' 
 Nick blushed with pleasure and wished there was a way to 
distinguish shy from stuck-up - the muddle had dogged him for years. 
He wanted pure compliments, just as he wanted unconditional love. 
 'Anyway, I was in the area, so I thought I'd try my luck.' Leo 
looked him up and down meaningfully, but then said, 'I've just got to 
drop in on old Pete, down the Portobello - I don't know if you want to 
come.' 
 'Sure!' said Nick, thinking that a visit to Leo's ex was hardly his 
ideal scenario for their second date. 'Just for a minute. He's not been 
well, old Pete.' 
 'Oh, I'm sorry… ' said Nick, though this time without the rush of 
possessive sympathy. He watched a black cab crawling towards diem, 
a figure peering impatiendy in the back; it stopped just in front of 
them, and the driver clawed round through his open window to release 
the rear door. When the passenger (who Nick knew was Lady Partridge) 
didn't emerge, a very rare thing happened and the cabbie got out of the 
cab and yanked the door open himself, standing aside with a flourish 
which she acknowledged drily as she stepped out. 
 'Now who's this old batdeaxe?' said Leo. And there was certainly 
something combative in her sharp glance at the two figures on the 
front steps, and in her sharp blue dress and jacket, as if she'd come 
for dinner rather than a family lunch. Nick smiled broadly at her and 
called out, 'Hello, Lady Partridge!' 
 'Hullo,' said Lady Partridge, with the minimal warmth, the 
hurrying good grace, of a famous person hailed by an unknown fan. 
Nick couldn't believe that she'd forgotten him, and went on with almost 
satirical courtesy, 'May I introduce my friend Leo Charles? Lady 
Partridge.' Up close the old woman's jacket, heavily embroidered with 
glinting black and silver thread, had a scaly texture, on which finer 
fabrics might have snagged and laddered. She smiled and said, 'How 
do you do?' in an extraordinarily cordial tone, in which none the less 
something final was conveyed - the certainty that they would never 
speak again. 
 Leo was saying hello and offering his hand but she had already 
drifted past him and in through the open front door. 'Gerald, Rachel 
darling!' she called, edgy with the need for reassurance. 
 The Portobello Road was only two minutes' stroll from the 
Feddens' green front door, and there was no time for a love scene. Leo 
was walking his bike with one hand, and Nick ambled beside him, 
possibly looking quite normal but feeling giddily attentive, as if 
hovering above himself. It was that experience of walking on air, 
perhaps, that people spoke of, and which, like roller skating, you could 
master with practice, but which on this first try had him teetering and 
lurching. He had such an important question to ask that he found 
himself saying something else instead. 'I see you know about Gerald, 
then,' he said. 
 'Your splendid Mr Fedden,' said Leo, in his deadpan way, almost 
as if he knew that splendid was one of Gerald's top words. 'Well, I 
could tell there was something you didn't want me to know, and diat 
always gets me - I'm like that. 
 And then your friend Geoffrey in the garden was going on 
something about parliament - I thought, I'll look into all this at work. 
Electoral roll, Who's Who, we know all about you 'I see,' said Nick, 
flattered but taken aback by this first glimpse of the professional Leo. 
Of course he'd done similar researches himself when he'd fallen for 
Toby. There had been a proxy thrill to it, Gerald's date of birth, 
pastimes, and various directorships standing in somehow for the 
intimate details, the kisses and more he had wanted from his son. He 
thought it probably wasn't like that for Leo. 'He's quite nice-looking for 
a Tory,' Leo said. 'Yes, everyone seems to fancy him except me,' said 
Nick. 
 Leo gave him a shrewd litde smile. 'I don't say I fancy him 
exacdy,' he said. 
 'He's like someone on die telly.' 
 'Well, soon I'm sure he will be someone on the telly. Actually of 
course there are monsters on both sides - looks-wise.' 
 'True enough.' 
 Nick hesitated. 'There is a sort of aesthetic poverty about 
conservatism, though, isn't there.' 
 'Yeah?' 
 'That blue's an impossible colour.' 
 Leo nodded dioughtfully. 'I wouldn't say that was their main 
problem,' he said. 
 The weekend crowds were pressing steadily along the lane from 
die station and down the steep hill into the market. Pete's 
establishment was in the curving row of shops on the left: PETER 
MAWSON in gold on black, like an old jeweller's, the windows covered 
in mesh though today the shop was open. Leo shouldered the door and 
the wired doormat, as he stood there manoeuvring the bike in, kept 
sounding a warning chime. Nick had peered into the shop before, on 
one of the dead weekdays, when it was all locked up, and the mail lay 
unattended across the floor. There was a pair of marble-topped Empire 
tables in the windows flanking the door, and beyond that a space that 
looked more like a half-empty warehouse than a shop. 
 Pete could be heard on the phone in a back room. Leo propped 
up his bike in a familiar way and wandered through, and Nick was left 
alone, blinking longingly at that last image of him, the slight bounce or 
dance in his step. He heard Pete ringing off, a murmur of kissing and 
hugging. 'Ooh, you know… ' said Pete. 'No, I'm a bit better.' 
 'I've brought my nice new friend Nick round to see you,' said Leo, 
in a silly cheerful voice which made Nick realize this might be an 
awkward half-hour for all of them. He was very sensitive to anything 
that might be said. 
 As so often he felt he had the wrong kind of irony, the wrong 
knowledge, for gay life. He was still faintly shocked, among other 
emotions of interest and excitement, at the idea of a male couple. He 
and Leo had come together, in their odd transitory way, but the truth 
was they weren't yet a couple themselves. 
 'So what's all this?' Pete asked, following Leo back into the room. 
 'This is Pete, this is Nick,' said Leo, with a large smile and a 
mime of urging them together. The effort to charm and reassure was a 
side of him that Nick hadn't seen before; it seemed to make all sorts of 
other things possible, in the longer view. 'Pete's my best old friend,' he 
said, in his cockney voice of concessions. Aren't you, darlin'?' They 
shook hands, and Pete winced, as at the grip of something not quite 
welcome, and said, 'I see you've been hanging around the school gates 
again, you terrible old man.' 
 Leo raised an eyebrow and said, 'Well, I won't remind you how 
old I was when you snatched me from my pram.' 
 Nick laughed eagerly, though it was a kind of camp slapstick he 
didn't naturally find funny, and it was surprisingly painful to be given 
a glimpse of their past together. He found himself picturing and half 
believing the story of Leo in his pram. Being small and fresh-faced was 
usually an advantage, but he was anxious not to be thought a child. 
Actually, I'm twenty-one,' he said, in a mock-gruff tone. 'Hark at him!' 
Pete said. 
 'Nick lives just round the corner,' said Leo. 'Kensington Park 
Gardens.' 
 'Oh. 
 Very nice.' 
 'Well, I'm just staying there for a while, with an old college friend.' 
 Leo tactfully didn't elaborate; he said, 'He knows about furniture. 
His old man's in trie trade.' 
 Pete made a shrugging gesture that took in die sparse contents of 
die shop. 
 'Feel free…' he said; so Nick had politely to do that, while die old 
lovers fell back into quiet scoffing chatter, which he deliberately 
blocked out widi tunes in his head, not wanting to learn anything, 
good or bad. He examined some knocked-about Louis Seize chairs, a 
marble head of a boy, a suspiciously brilliant ormolu-mounted cabinet, 
and the pair of tables in the window, which made him think of the 
ones turned into washstands at Hawkeswood. One wall was covered 
widi a huge dreary tapestry showing a bacchanalian scene, with 
figures dancing and embracing under red and brown trees; it was too 
high for the space, and on its loosely rolled bottom edge a satyr with a 
grin seemed to slide forwards like a limbo dancer on to the floor. 
 The only real object of interest, the thing to acknowledge and be 
equal to, was Pete himself. He was perhaps in his mid-forties, with a 
bald patch in his sandy hair and a bit of grey in his thin beard. He was 
lean, an inch or two taller than Nick and Leo, but already slightly 
stooped. He wore tight old jeans and a denim shirt, and something 
else, which was an attitude, a wearily aggressive challenge - he seemed 
to come forward from an era of sexual defiance and fighting alliances 
and to cast a dismissive eye over a litde chit like Nick, who had never 
fought for anything. Or so Nick explained his own sense of discomfort, 
the recurrent vague snobbery and timidity with which he peered into 
the world of actually existing gayness. Nick had pictured Pete as die 
fruity kind of antique-dealer, or even as a sexless figure like his own 
father, with a bow tie and a trim white beard. That Pete should be as 
he was threw such a novel light over Leo. He glanced at Leo now, widi 
his sub- lime little bottom perched on the corner of Pete's desk, and 
saw him totally at home with a far from attractive middle-aged man - 
he had been his lover and done a hundred things with him that Nick 
still only dreamed of, time and time again. Nick didn't know how it had 
ended, or when; they seemed to share the steadiness of something 
both long established and over, and he envied them, although it wasn't 
quite what he wanted himself. It was part of Leo's game, or maybe just 
his style, to have told Nick almost nothing; but if Pete was Leo's kind of 
man it looked suddenly unlikely that Nick would be chosen to replace 
him. 
 'Have a look at that, Nick,' Pete called out, as if amiably trying to 
keep him occupied. 'You know what that is.' 
 'That's a nice litde piece,' said Leo. 'It's a very nice little piece,' 
said Pete. 'Louis Quinze.' 
 Nick ran his eye over the slightly cockled boulle inlay. 'Well, it's 
an encoignurel he said, and with a chance at charm: 'n'est-ce pas?' 
 'It's what we call a corner cupboard,' Pete said. 'Where did you 
get this one, babe?' 
 'Ooh… I just found him on the street,' said Leo, gazing quite 
sweetly at Nick and then giving him a wink. 'He looked a bit lost.' 
 'Hardly a mark on him,' said Pete. 'Not yet,' said Leo. 'So where's 
your father's shop, Nick?' said Pete. 
 'Oh, it's in Barwick - in Northamptonshire?' 
 'Don't they pronounce that Barrick?' 
 'Only frightfully grand people.' 
 Pete lit a cigarette, drew on it deeply, and then coughed and 
looked almost sick. 'Ah, that's better,' he said. 'Yes, Bar-wick. I know 
Barwick. It's what you'd call a funny old place, isn't it.' 
 'It has a very fine eighteenth-century market hall,' Nick said, to 
help him to remember it. 
 'I picked up a little Directoire bureau there once, bombe it was, 
you'll know what that means.' 
 'That probably wasn't from us. It was probably Gaston's. My 
father sells mainly English things.' 
 'Yeah? What's trade like up there these days?' 
 'Pretty slow, actually,' Nick said. 
 'It's at a fucking standstill here. It's going backwards. Another 
four years of Madam and we'll all be on the street.' Pete coughed again 
and flapped away Leo's attempt to take the cigarette off him. 'So how 
long have you been in London, Nick?' 
 'About… six weeks?' 
 'Six weeks… I see. You'll still be doing the rounds, then. Or are 
you just shopping local? You've done the Volunteer.' 
 Leo saw Nick hesitating, and said, 'I wouldn't want him going to 
that old flea-box. At least not till he's sixty, like everyone else in there.' 
 'I'm exploring a bit,' said Nick. 'I don't know, where do the young 
things go these days?' 
 'Well, there's the Shaftesbury,' Nick said, naming a pub that Polly 
Tompkins had described as the scene of frequent conquests. You're not 
so much of a pubber, though, are you?' Leo said. 'He wants to get 
down the Lift,' said Pete, 'if he's a bit of a chocoholic' Nick blushed and 
shook his head dumbly. 'I don't know really.' He was very 
embarrassed, in front of Leo, but undeniably fascinated to have his 
taste guessed at and defined. He felt he had only just guessed at it 
himself. 'When did you meet Miss Leontyne?' That he knew exactly, 
but said, About three weeks ago,' feeling more foolish with his quick 
straight answers to chaffing questions. He didn't flinch at the girl's 
name for Leo, and he had sometimes laboured through whole 
conversations calling Polly Tompkins 'she', but he'd never found it as 
necessary or hilarious as some people did. 
 'That's what I call her,' said Pete, 'Leontyne Price-tag. I hope 
you've got your chequebook ready.' 
 There was nothing to say to this, but Leo muttered dutifully, 
'There's not much you don't know about price tags, is there, Pete.' 
 Nick tittered and watched the affronted look fade from Pete's 
drawn features as he smoked and gazed at the dreary tapestry. It 
could have been one of those items which never sell, which the dealer 
ends up almost giving away because they seem to bring bad luck on 
the whole shop. He remembered that Pete had been ill, though he 
didn't know in what way. 'I've got this fucking great bed,' Pete said. 
 'I can't shift it.' The phone rang, and he went off into the back 
room. 'Have a look at it.' 
 The bed had been taken apart and the fluted poles, the ornate 
square frame of the canopy and the head- and footboards inset with 
painted rococo scenes were leaning up against the wall. 'Let's have a 
look at this, then,' Leo said, wandering over and briefly stroking Nick's 
arm as he passed; he was being sweet to both of them, he surely didn't 
really want to look at the bed. They didn't want to move anything in 
case it all fell over. Nick peered at the faded gilt and the unpolished 
inner edges that would normally be hidden. All his life he'd looked at 
furniture from odd angles, and he still had his childhood sense of 
tables and sideboards as elaborate little wooden buildings that you 
could crawl into, their bosses and capitals and lion-heads at face 
height, their rough under-surfaces retaining a dim odour of the actual 
wood. This was a very grand bed, but there was worm in the frame and 
apparendy it had no hangings with it. 
 He felt the old impulse to put it together and get into it. Leo 
squatted down to look at the picture on the footboard. 'This is nice,' he 
said. 'What do you think?' 
 Nick, standing behind him, gazed down on him as he had on 
their first date, when he was fiddling with the bike. Then he looked 
away, almost guiltily, at the wide-skirted ladies and their lovers in 
doublets, plucking at lutes; the trees that were blue and silver. Then 
he looked down again, at where Leo's beltless jeans stood away from 
his waist. He had lived and lingered through that glimpse a hundred 
times since their first meeting, it was almost more powerful and 
emblematic than the sex that had followed: the swell of Leo's hardened 
buttocks, the provoking blue horizontal of his briefs. So to be offered a 
second look had a double force, like the confirmation of a promise, and 
Nick's hesitation was only the twitch of wariness he felt at any 
prospect of happiness. 'It's very nice,' he said. Leo shifted slighdy on 
his heels. 'Can you see?' he said. 
 Nick was grinning and sighing at the same time. 'Yes, I can see,' 
he said, in a murmur that shrank the conversation away from Pete 
into heady subterfuge. 'And what do you think?' asked Leo brighdy. 
 'Oh… it's beautiful,' Nick whispered. He checked the open door to 
the back room before he stooped and slid his hand in and verified that 
this time there was no blue horizontal, there was only smooth, shaved, 
curving Leo. A second or two, and then Nick straightened up and put 
his hands gendy round Leo's neck - who tipped back against his legs 
for support, and rolled his shoulder a couple of times against Nick's 
hard-on. 'Mm, you do like it,' he said. 'I love it,' said Nick. 
 When Pete came back in they were loafing round die room with 
their hands in their pockets. 'You won't believe this,' he said. 'I think 
I've sold the bed.' 
 'Oh yes?' said Leo. 'Nick was just saying what a nice piece it was. 
But he says it'll take quite a bit of work, don't you, Nick?' Their final 
few minutes in the shop had an atmosphere of ridiculous oddity. It 
was hard to take in what the other two were saying - Nick felt radiantly 
selfish and inattentive, and left it to Leo to wind things up. The 
furniture and objects took on a richer lustre and at the same time 
seemed madly irrelevant. It must have been obvious to Pete that 
something was up, that the air was gleaming and trembling; and it 
wouldn't have been beyond him to make some tart comment about it. 
But he didn't. It struck Nick that perhaps Pete was really over Leo, 
realistic and resigned, and he noticed he regretted this slighdy, 
because he wanted Pete to be jealous. 
 'Well, we must get our lunch,' Leo said. 'I'm hungry, aren't you, 
Nick?' 
 'Starving,' said Nick, in a kind of happy shout. 
 They all laughed and shook hands, and when Pete had hugged 
Leo he pushed him away with a quick pat. So there they were, out in 
the street, being nudged and flooded round by the crowds, and 
heedlessly obstructive in their own slow walk, which unfurled down 
the hill to the faint silky ticking of Leo's bicycle wheels. 
 It was all new to Nick, this being with another man, carried along 
on the smooth swelling current of mutual feeling - with its eddies 
sometimes into shop doorways or under the awnings of the bric-a-brac 
stalls. There was no more talk of lunch, which was a good sign. In fact 
they didn't say anything much, but now and then they shared glances 
which flowered into wonderful smirks. Lust prickled Nick's thighs and 
squeezed his stomach and throat, and made him almost groan 
between his smiles, as if it just wasn't fair to be promised so much. He 
fell behind a step or two and walked along shaking his head. He 
wanted to be Leo's jeans, in their casual rhythmical caress of his 
strolling legs, their momentary grip and letting go. His hands flickered 
against Leo time and again, to draw attention to things, a chair, a 
plate, a passing punk's head of blue spikes. He must have come first, 
out of all the men Leo had auditioned. He kept touching Leo on the 
bottom, in the simple pleasure of permission. Leo didn't reciprocate 
exactly, he had his own canny eye for the street, he even raised a sly 
eyebrow at the sexy shock of other boys going past, but it didn't matter 
because they were a kind of superfluity, the glancing overspill of his 
brimming desire for Nick. As they dawdled through the crowd Nick saw 
himself rushing ahead through neglected years of his moral education. 
This was what it was like! 
 Under the fringed canopy of a stall he saw the down-turned 
profile of Sophie Tipper, studying a lot of old rings and bracelets 
pinned on a ramp of black velvet. His first thought was to ignore her or 
avoid her. He felt his old envy of her. But then Toby rolled into view 
behind her, leaning forward with a little pursed smile of vacant interest 
- very like a husband. He rested his chin on her shoulder for a 
moment, and she murmured something to him, so that Nick had the 
uncomfortable feeling of peering at their own heedless self-content. 
They made a necessarily beautiful couple, somehow luminous against 
the dark jumble of the market, like models in a subtle but artificial 
glare. Nick turned away and looked for something he could buy for 
Leo; he longed to do that. He saw all the reasons the impending social 
encounter might not be a success. 'Hey, Guest!' said Toby, loping 
round the stall, grabbing him and giving him a firm kiss on the cheek. 
 'Hi - Toby…' Their kissing was a new thing, since the party, 
somehow made possible and indemnified by the presence of Sophie. 
And it seemed almost a relief to Toby, as if it erased some old low-level 
embarrassment about their not kissing. To Nick himself it was lovely, 
all the warmth of Toby for a moment against him, but unignorably sad 
too, since it was clearly the limit of concessions, granted in the 
certainty that nothing more intimate would ever follow. 'Hello, Nick!' 
said Sophie, coming round and kissing him on both cheeks with 
beaming goodwill, which he put down to her being such an up-and-
coming actress. He wanted to introduce Leo, but he thought something 
wrong might be said, based on his excited gabble at Hawkeswood, 
when he was stoned. It was one of those inevitable but still surprising 
moments when mere wishful thinking was held to account by the 
truth. He said, 'You're going to be late for lunch,' and thought he 
sounded rather rude. 
 'I know,' said Toby. 'Gran wants one of her sessions with Sophie. 
So we're keeping it as short as possible.' 
 'Well, I love your grandmother,' Sophie said, with mock 
petulance. 
 'No, she's a marvellous old girl,' said Toby; and it reminded Nick 
of second-hand things he used to say at Oxford, sagacious remarks 
about his parents' famous friends. He smiled vaguely at Leo. If Sophie 
hadn't been there, Nick thought, men he could have shown Toby off to 
Leo as a glamorous accessory to his own past, perhaps something 
more… But like this Toby was hopelessly claimed and placed. 
 Nick said, 'Sophie Tipper, Toby Fedden: Leo Charles,' and Leo 
said 'Leo' both times as he shook hands. 
 'Right,' said Toby, 'fantastic… We know all about you,' and he 
gave an encouraging grin. 
 'Oh, do you,' said Leo, drily doubtful at the return of his own 
phrase. 
 'Leo's Nick's new boyfriend,' Toby said to Sophie. 'Yah, it's really 
great.' 
 Nick only took a quick agonized peep at Leo, whose expression 
was scarify blank, as if to dramatize his unrelinquished power of 
choice. The welling confidence of a few minutes before looked a foolish 
tiling. Nick said, 'Well, we don't want to jump the gun.' 
 'But that's wonderful,' said Sophie, as though Nicks welfare, his 
unhappy heart, had long been her concern. He saw her reaching wide 
to bless the double triumph of boyfriend and black. 
 'He's been keeping you very much to himself,' said Toby. 'But 
now we've caught you at it. So to speak!' And he blushed. 'We're just 
going for a little toddle,' said Leo. 
 'That's marvellous.' Toby seemed as thrilled as Sophie by what 
they imagined was happening, and Nick had a sad clear sighting of his 
deeper, perhaps even unconscious reason: that an obscure pressure, a 
sense of unvoiced expectations, might be lifted from him by the 
transference of Nick's adoration to another man. 
 As Gerald might have said of something quite different, it was 
hugely to be encouraged. And maybe Sophie sensed that too. They'd 
probably even talked about it, before sleep, as a vague problem - just 
for a moment, before it shrank into irrelevance like shoes kicked off at 
the end of the bed… 'So you're not joining us for lunch?' Toby went on. 
 'Not invited,' said Leo, but with a cheerful shake of the head. Nick 
raced away from the mere idea of it, as a nexus of every snobbery and 
worry, scene of tortured intercessions between different departments of 
his own life: Leo - Gerald -Toby - Sophie - Lady Partridge… 'Well, 
another time,' said Toby. 'We must be going, Pips. But let's all meet up 
soon?' 
 'I knew we wouldn't find my ring,' said Sophie, with the crossness 
that hides a sweetness that hides a toughness. 
 'We'll come back after lunch. The girl's got to have a ring,' Toby 
explained, which Nick didn't like the sound of. 
 Leo had kept up an attitude of steady ironic contemplation of the 
young couple, but then he said, 'I know I've seen you,' and looked 
faindy embarrassed by his own gambit. Sophie's face was a lesson in 
hesitant delight. 'Oh…' 
 'I may be completely wrong,' said Leo. 'Weren't you in English 
Rose? 
 Disappointed, she seemed to struggle to remember. 'Oh, no… 
Clever you, but no, I wasn't in that one.' 
 'That was Betsy Tilden,' said Nick. 'Right, oh yeah, Betsy… No, I 
know I've seen you…' 
 Nick wanted to say that she'd only been in two things, an episode 
of Bergerac and a student-made film of The White Devil, bankrolled by 
her father, which had had a single late-night screening at the Gate. 
 'I was in a film that was called The White Devil,' said Sophie, as 
though speaking to a child. 
 'That was it!' said Leo. 'Yes! That was a fantastic film. I love that 
film.' 
 'I'm so glad,' said Sophie. 'You are kind!' 
 Leo was smiling and staring, as if the scenes were spooling 
through his head again, miraculously matched by the woman in front 
of him. 'Yeah, when he poisons him, and… Did you see this film, Nick, 
White Devil..?' 
 'Stupidly, I missed it,' Nick said; though he had a clear 
recollection of undergraduates acting at being film-makers, bouncing 
round in jeeps wearing dark glasses at night; the Flamineo, Jamie 
Stallard, a drawling Martyrs' Club twit, was one of his favourite betes 
noires. 'I've got to tell you, that guy - Jamie, is it? - ooh-ooh…' 
 'I know,' said Sophie. 'I thought you'd like him.' 
 'You're not wrong, girl,' laughed Leo, so lit up with sassy 
excitement that Nick thought he might be teasing Sophie. 'But he's 
not, though - you'd better tell me - he's not… is he…?' 
 'Oh…! I'm afraid he isn't, no. A lot of people ask that,' Sophie 
admitted. 
 Leo took it philosophically. 'Well, when it comes on again I'm 
definitely taking him,' he said, tutting as if they both thought 
cultivated, first-class Nick, still heavy-headed with exam knowledge, 
steeped to the chaps in revenge tragedy, was a bit of a slob. 
 'All right,' said Nick, seeing it at least as a couple of hours in the 
warm dark together, rather than behind a bush. 'And I can tell you all 
about Jamie Stallard,' he added. 
 But Leo's real interest was in Sophie. 'So what are you doing 
next?' he said. 
 Nick raised his eyebrows apologetically to Toby, who shook his 
head kindly, as if to say that going out with a promising actress he was 
bound to find himself in an attendant role. Sophie herself looked 
slightly overexcited, pardy at the praise but partly because she wasn't 
used to talking to anyone like Leo, and it seemed to be going really 
well. 'I'll let you know,' she was saying. 'I can get your number off 
Nick!' 
 Nick wished he could match Toby's confidence. He felt snubbed 
by Leo's attentions to Sophie, but perhaps it was only because he felt 
foolish, childish at having put it about that they were boyfriends. Toby 
said, 'Really, we must go, Pips,' and there was something so silly about 
this nickname that it helped Nick not to care. 
 But then, alone again in the street with Leo, neither of them 
saying anything, he had a sense of what an affair might actually be 
like, and the endless miraculous permission was only a part of it. His 
limbs were oddly stiff, his hands tingling as if he'd just come in from 
snowballing to stand by a blazing fire. He felt the moment echoing 
other occasions when he had just missed success through a failure of 
nerve, or a stupidly happy anticipation. All Leo's effusiveness with Pete 
and then with Sophie had ebbed away, and left just the two of them, in 
this horrible noise and crush. Nick glanced at him with a tight smile; 
at which Leo stretched his neck with a moody, uninvolved air. 'Well,' 
said Nick finally, 'where do you want to go?' 
 'I don't know, boyfriend,' Leo said. Nick laughed ruefully, and 
something kept him back from a further lie. A caff?' he said. 'Indian? A 
sandwich?' - which was the most he could imagine managing. 
 'Well, I need something,' said Leo, in his tone of flat goading 
irony, looking at him sharply. And it isn't a sandwich.' 
 Nick didn't take a risk on what this might mean. Ah…' he said. 
Leo turned his head and scowled at a stall of cloudy green and brown 
glassware, which was taking its place in their crisis, and seemed to 
gleam with hints of a settled domestic life. Leo said, At least with old 
Pete we had his place, but where are me and you ever going to go?' 
 Could this be his only objection, the only obstacle…? 'I know, 
we're homeless,' 
 Nick said. 
 'Homeless love,' said Leo, shrugging and then cautiously 
nodding, as if weighing up a tide for a song. 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
Nick chose a moment before dinner to pay the rent. It was always 
awkward. 'Oh… my dear…' said Rachel, as if the two ten-pound notes 
were a form of mild extravagance, like a box of chocolates, or like 
flowers brought by a dinner guest, which were also a bit of a nuisance. 
She looked for somewhere to put down her bowl of steeping apricots. 'If 
you're sure…' 
 Nick shrugged and snuffled. 'Heavens,' he said. He had just 
spent five pounds on a taxi, he was doing all sorts of incautious 
things, and would have loved not to pay. 
 "Well, thank you!' Rachel took the money, and stood folding it 
appreciatively, not sure where to put it. Then Gerald and Badger 
Brogan came in from tennis - there was the flat chime of their feet on 
the iron stair from the garden, and then they were in the kitchen like 
two big hot boys. Just for a second Gerald noted the transaction that 
was taking place. The next second he said, 'Thrashed him!' and threw 
down his racquet on the bench. 
 'God, Fedden, you're a liar,' said Badger. 'It was 6-4, Rache, in 
the third set.' 
 Gerald shook his head in the savour of triumph. 'I let him have it 
hot.' 
 'I'm sure you were very well matched,' said Rachel prudendy. 
 This wasn't quite acceptable to either player. 'I chose not to 
question some frankly fantastic line calls,' said Badger. He roamed 
round by the table, picking up a spoon and putting it down, and then 
a garlic press, without noticing. Nick smiled as if amused by die drama 
of their game, though in fact he felt challenged by Badger's free and 
easy way here, by the mood of competition he stirred up in Gerald, and 
perhaps by its counterpart, his longer and deeper claim on Gerald's 
affection. 'Hello, Nick!' said Badger, in his probing, sarcastic tone. 
 'Hello, Badger,' said Nick, still self-conscious at teasing a virtual 
stranger about the yellow-grey stripe in his dark hair, at having to 
enrol in the family cult of Badger as a character, but finding it easier 
after all than the sober, the critical, the almost hostile-sounding 
'Derek'. 
 Badger in turn was clearly puzzled by Nick's presence in his old 
friend's house and made facetious attempts at understanding him. It 
was a part of his general mischief - he lurched about all day, asked 
leading questions, rubbed up old scandals and scratched beadily for 
new ones. He said, 'So what have you been up to today, Nick?' 
 'Oh, just the usual,' said Nick. 'You know, morning in the library, 
waiting for books to come up from the stacks; bibliography class in the 
afternoon, "How to describe textual variants".' He made himself as dull 
as he could for Badger, like a brown old binding, though to his own eye 
'textual variants' glinted with hints at what he'd actually done, which 
was to cut the class and have two hours of sex with Leo on Hampstead 
Heath. That would have been more scandal than Badger could 
manage. On the first night of his stay he had described an Oxford 
friend of theirs as the most ghastly shirdifter. • 'LBW, Badge?' said 
Gerald. 
 'Thanks, Banger,' said Badger, using an interesting old nickname 
diat Nick couldn't see himself making free with, and which Gerald was 
wise enough not to object to. The two men stood there, in their tennis 
whites, drinking their tall glasses of lemon barley water, gasping and 
grinning between swigs. Geralds legs were still brown, and his 
confusingly firm buttocks were set off by his tight Fred Perry shorts. 
Badger was leaner and seedier, and his Aertex shirt was sweatier and 
pulled askew by being used to mop his face. He was wearing scruffy 
old plimsolls, whereas Gerald seemed to bounce or levitate slightly in 
the new thick-soled 'trainers'. 
 Elena hurried in from the pantry with the joint, or limb, of 
venison, plastered up in a blood-stained paste of flour and water. The 
whole business of the deer, culled at Hawkeswood each September and 
sent to hang for a fortnight in the Feddens' utility room, was an ordeal 
for Elena, and an easy triumph for Gerald, who always fixed a series of 
dinner parties to advertise it and eat it. Elena set the heavy dish on the 
table just as Catherine came down from her room, with her hands held 
up like blinkers to avoid the sight. 'Mm - look at that, Cat!' said 
Badger. 
 'Fortunately I won't even have to look at you eating it,' said 
Catherine; though she did quickly peer at it with a kind of relish of 
revulsion. 
 'Are you going out, then, old Puss?' said Gerald, his eagerness 
damped at once by a wounded frown. 'You'll have a drink with us, 
darling?' said Rachel. 'I might do if there's time,' said Catherine. 'Is it 
all MPs?' 
 'No,' said Gerald. 
 'Your grandmother's not an MR' 
 'Thank Christ, actually,' said Catherine. And nor is Morden 
Lipscomb an MR' 
 'There are two MPs coming,' said Rachel, and it wasn't clear if 
she thought this rather few or quite enough. 
 'Yup, Timms and Groom!' said Gerald, as if they were the jolliest 
company imaginable. 'The man who never says "hello"!' 
 'You're too absurd,' said Gerald. 'I'm sure I have heard him say 
it…' 
 'If Morden Lipscomb's coming I'm going to keep my coat on, he 
makes my blood run cold.' 
 'Morden's an important man,' said Gerald. 'He has the ear of the 
President.' 
 'Will Nick be making up numbers, I suppose,' said Catherine. 
 Nick fluttered his eyelashes and Gerald said, 'Nick doesn't make 
up numbers, child, he's part of the… part of the household.' 
 Catherine looked at Nick, slightly mockingly, across the space 
that separates good and bad children. She said, 'He's the perfect little 
courtier, isn't he?' 
 'Oh, Elena,' said Rachel, 'Catherine's not dining, we'll be one 
fewer for dinner - yes, one less.' Elena went into the dining room to 
adjust the placings, and came back a moment later with an objection. 
'Miz Fed, you know is thirteen.' 
 Ah…' said Rachel, and then gave an apologetic shrug. 
 'Yes, well I don't think any of us are triskaidekaphobes here, are 
we?' said Gerald. They were all very up on the names of phobias, since 
at various times Catherine had suffered from aichmo, dromo, keno, 
and nyctophobia, among a number of more commonplace ones - it was 
a bit of a game with them, but it cut no ice with Elena, who stood there 
biting her lip. 
 'You see, you'll have to stay,' said Badger, reaching out clumsily 
to hold Catherine. 'How can you resist that beautiful venison?' 
 'Hmm,' said Catherine. 'It looks like something out of a field 
hospital.' And she shot a tiny forbidding glance at Nick, who saw that 
it was probably the aichmophobia, the horror of sharp objects, that 
made the serving and carving of a haunch of venison impossible for 
her. The family knew about her trouble in the past, but had happily 
forgotten it when it seemed not to recur. It was only Nick who knew 
about the recent challenge of the carving knives. He said, 'I don't mind 
dropping out too if I'm going to spoil the seating.' He enjoyed the well-
oiled pomp of the dinners here, but he knew he was too much in love 
to do more than smile in the candlelight and dream of Leo. He would 
be quiet and inattentive. And already he felt a tingle in the air, the 
more-than-reality of the memory of being with his boyfriend. 
 'No, no,' murmured Rachel, with an impatient twitch of the head. 
 'Elena, we'll risk it!' Gerald pronounced. 'Si… va bene… Nick, 
you'll just have to be the odd man… um…' Elena went back into the 
dining room with that look of unhappy subjection that no one but Nick 
ever noticed or worried about. 'We're not living in twelfth-century 
Calabria,' said Gerald, as the phone started ringing and he plucked it 
from the wall and grunted, 'Fedden,' in his new no-nonsense style. 
'Yes… Hello… What?… Yes, yes he is… Yes, all right… Mm, and to 
you,' then holding the receiver out towards Nick: 'It's Leo.' Nick 
coloured as though his thoughts of a few moments before had been 
audible to all of them; the kitchen had accidentally fallen silent and 
Gerald gave him a look which Nick felt was stern and disappointed, 
but perhaps was merely abstracted, the frown of a broken train of 
thought. 
 Catherine said, 'If it's Leo, they'll be hours' And Rachel nodded 
sympathetically and said, 'Yes, why don't you take it in the study.' 
Gerald looked at him again as if to say that the brute reality of gay life, 
of actual phone calls between shirt-lifters, was rather more than he 
had ever imagined being asked to deal with; but then nodded and said 
genially, 'By all means, it's the red phone.' 
 Ah, hotline,' said Badger, whose scandal-sensors were warming 
to something awkward in the air. Though as Nick went down the hall 
what struck him was that Rachel knew what was going on, and was 
protecting him. Gerald never really noticed anything about other 
people, they were moving parts in a social process, they agreed with 
him or they thwarted him, his famous hospitality disguised an odd 
lack of particular, personal skills - all this came clear to Nick in a 
liberating rush as he pushed open the study door. After which it was 
beautifully surreal to stand and talk in sexy murmurs beside his desk, 
to hear Leo's voice in the one room in the hi»use which expressed 
Gerald's own taste, which was a vacuum of taste, green leather 
armchairs, upholstered fender, brass lamps, the stage set for his own 
kind of male conspiracy. 
 'Well, that was very jolly,' said Leo, with a half-teasing, halfJ 
aspiring use of a Nick word. 'Very jolly indeed.' 
 'Did you enjoy it, darling?' said Nick. 'I didn't mind it,' said Leo. 
Nick glowed and grinned. 'I thought it was bearable.' 
 'I expect you can bear it,' said Leo. You don't have to ride a bike.' 
 Nick looked around at the half-open door. 'Was it too much for 
you?' he said wonderingly, and with a sense that recurred and 
recurred these weeks - of enormous freedom claimed through tiny 
details, of everything he said being welcome. 'You're a very bad boy,' 
said Leo. 'Mm, so you keep saying.' 
 'So what are you doing?' 
 'Well…' said Nick. It was lovely to be talking to Leo, but he wasn't 
quite sure why he had rung, and as it was the first time he had ever 
done so it made Nick uneasily expectant; until it struck him that 
probably Leo himself was only claiming the simple pleasure of talking 
to his lover, of talking, as he said he loved to fuck, for the sake of it. 
'I'm sitting behind Gerald's desk with a most tremendous hard-on,' 
said Nick. 
 There was a pause and Leo murmured, 'Now don't get me going. 
My old lady's here.' 
 It was shadowy already in the room, and Nick pulled the chain 
that switched on die desk lamp. Gerald, like an uxorious bigamist, had 
photos of both Rachel and the Prime Minister in silver frames. A large 
desk diary was open at the 'Notes' pages at die back, where Gerald had 
written, 'Barwick: Agent (Manning) - wife Veronica NOT Janet (Parker's 
wife).' With his breezily asking Parker how Veronica was and Manning 
how Janet was, he had got some very confused looks. 
 Nick knew Janet Parker, of course, she was a manager at 
Rackhams and sang in the Operatic. 'So what are you doing later?' Leo 
wanted to know. 
 'Oh, we've got a big dinner party,' Nick said. He noticed that he 
hoped to impress Leo with their life at Kensington Park Gardens and at 
the same time was ready to repudiate it. 'It'll probably be very tedious - 
they only really ask me to make up the numbers.' 
 'Oh,' said Leo doubtfully. 
 'It'll be a lot of horrible old Tories,' Nick said, in an attempt at 
Leo's language and point of view, and sniggered. 'Oh, is Grandma 
coming, then?' 
 'She certainly is,' said Nick. 
 'Old bitch,' said Leo; the passing insult of their doorstep meeting, 
unregistered at the time, had risen later like a bruise. 'You ought to 
ask me over, to continue our fascinating conversation,' he said. 
 The theme of Leo's coming over had cropped up several times 
since their first date, and hung and faded. Nick said, 'Look, I'm sure I 
can get out of this.' And really it did seem as if the logic of the evening 
- the numbers, the etiquette, the superstition - was only an expression 
of a deeper natural force, a love logic, pulling him out of the house and 
back into Leo's arms. 'I'm sure I can get out of it,' he said again. 
Though as he did so he felt there was also a Tightness in not seeing 
Leo, a romance in separation, while the fabulous shock of their 
afternoon together sank in. Days like these had their design, their 
upward and downward curves: it would be unshapely to change the 
plan. 
 'No, you enjoy yourself,' said Leo, wise. perhaps with the lame 
instinct. 'Have a glass of wine.' 
 'Yes, I expect I'll do that. Unless you've got a better idea…' Nick 
swivelled in the desk chair with a tensely mischievous smile - the red 
phone cord stretched and bounced. The chair was a high-backed scoop 
of black leather, a spaceship commander's. 'You're insatiable, you are,' 
said Leo. 
 'That's because I love you,' said Nick, singsong with the (ruth. 
 Leo took in this chance for an echoing avowal; it was a brief deep 
silence, as tactical as it was undiscussable. He said, 'That's what you 
tell all the boys' - a phrase of lustreless backchat that Nick could only 
bear as a form of shyness. 
 He turned it inside out in his mind and found what he needed in 
it. He said quietly, 'No, only you.' 
 'Yeah,' said Leo, all relaxed-sounding, and gave a big fake yawn. 
'Yeah, I'll probably pop down to old Pete's a bit later, see how he's 
getting on.' 
 'Right,' said Nick quickly. 'Well - give him my best!' It was a sting 
of worry - hidden, unexpected. 'Will do,' said Leo. 'How is old Pete?' 
said Nick. 
 'Well, he's a bit low. This illness has taken all the life out of him.' 
 'Oh dear,' said Nick, but felt he couldn't enquire any further, out 
of delicacy for his own feelings. He looked about on the desk, to focus 
his thoughts on where he was rather than on imagined intimacies at 
Pete's flat. There was a thick typescript with a printed card, 'From the 
Desk of Morden Lipscomb', on 'National Security in a Nuclear Age', 
which Gerald had marked with ticks and underlinings on the first two 
pages. 'NB: nuclear threat', he had written. 
 'OK, babe,' Leo said quietly. 'Well, I'll see you soon. We'll get it 
together at the weekend, yeah? I've got to go - my mum wants the 
phone.' 
 'I'll ring you tomorrow…' 
 'Yeah, well, lovely to chat.' 
 And in the silence of the room afterwards, shaken, tight-lipped, 
Nick clutched at that cosy but cynical cockney lovely. Of course Leo 
was inhibited by being at home, he wanted to say more. Just think of 
this afternoon. It was terribly sweet that he'd rung at all. The chat was 
a romantic bonus, but nothing was certain when it came to words, 
there were nettles among the poppies. For a minute or two Nick felt 
their separation like a tragedy, a drama of the thickening dusk - he 
saw Leo at large on his bike while he stood in this awful office with its 
filing cabinets, its decanters, and the enlarged photograph, just back 
from the framers, of the hundred and one new Tory MPs. 
 In the kitchen he found that people had dispersed to bath and 
change, and these further unstoppable rhythms made him feel like a 
ghost. Rachel was sitting at the table writing place cards with her italic 
fountain pen. She glanced up at him, and there was a slight tension in 
her manner as well as obvious solicitude, a desire not to offend in a 
moment of kindness. She said, 'All well?' 
 'Yes, thank you - fine…' said Nick, shaking himself into seeing 
that of course life was pretty wonderful, it was just that there was 
more to it than he expected - and less as well. 
 'Now should I put Badger or Derek, do you think? I think I'll put 
Derek, just to put him in his place.' 
 'Well, they are place cards,' said Nick. 'Exacdy!' said Rachel, and 
blew on the ink. She looked up at him again briefly. 'You know, my 
dear, you can always bring friends here if you want to.' 
 'Oh, yes… tliank you…' 
 'I mean we would absolutely hate it if you were to feel you 
couldn't do that. 
 This is your home for however long you are with us.' And it was 
the 'we', the general benevolence, that struck him and upset him; and 
then the practical acknowledgement that he wouldn't be there for ever. 
'I know, you're very kind. I will, of course.' 
 'I don't know… Catherine says you have a… a special new friend,' 
and she was stern for a second, magnanimous but at a disadvantage: 
what should she call such a person? 'I just want you to know he'd be 
very welcome here.' 
 'Thank you,' said Nick again, and smiled through a blush at the 
thing being out. 
 It was confusingly straightforward. He felt relieved and cheated. 
He wasn't sure he could rise to the freedom being offered - he saw 
himself bringing home some nice white graduate from the college 
instead, for a pointless tea, or convivial evening bleak with his own 
cowardice. 
 'We're such broody old things,' Rachel said, 'now that Toby's 
moved out. So do it just for our sake!' This was a charming 
exaggeration, in a woman of forty-seven, with thirteen for dinner, but it 
acknowledged a truth too: it didn't quite say she thought of him as a 
son - it didn't elevate or condescend - but it admitted a habit, a need 
for a young man and his friends about the house. 
 She tapped the cards together and came across the room and 
Nick gave her a kiss, which she seemed to find quite right. 
 In fact Toby and Sophie were there that night. They came early 
and Nick had a gin-and-tonic with them in the drawing room. They 
seemed to bring along their own complacent atmosphere, the mood of 
their life together in the Chelsea flat, and of some larger future when 
they might curl up a leg on the sofa or stand with an elbow on the 
mantelpiece in a room as enormous as this. Toby played the lighdy 
chivvied 'husband' very sweedy, and Sophie claimed him in the 
childish ways of someone experimenting with her power, with little 
exasperations and innuendos. She did a performance about how Toby 
ground his teeth in his sleep. 
 Nick tittered warily at this glimpse of the bedroom, but found her 
lack of subdety oddly reassuring. She'd got Toby, snoring and 
twitching, but the romantic reach of Nick's feelings for him, the web of 
sacrifice and nonsense and scented Oxford nights, survived 
untouched. Toby was very sweet to Nick too. He left his position by the 
fireplace and came and sprawled on the rug by his chair, so that Nick 
could have reached out and stroked the back of his neck. For a 
moment Sophie looked disconcerted, but then she took possession of 
that situation as well. 'Ah - you two should see more of each other,' 
she said. 'It's good to see you together.' A minute later, looking vaguely 
self-conscious, Toby got up and pretended to search for a book. 
 And what about your lovely friend…?' Sophie wanted to know. 
'Oh… Leo, do you mean?' 
 'Leo,' said Sophie. 
 'Oh, he's - lovely!' Here was the subject again - Nick just hadn't 
got used to it yet, to the idea of anything so secret, so steeped in his 
own fears and fantasies, being cheerfully enquired after by other 
people. Toby too looked round from the bookcase with his encouraging 
grin. 
 'Such a… lovely man,' said Sophie, whose conversation tended 
not to develop, but to settle, snugly or naggingly, in one place. 
 Nick was glad of the praise, and mistrusted it at the same time. 
'Well, he loved meeting you,' he said. 
 Aah…' Sophie purred, as if to say that people usually did enjoy 
that. 'He's a great fan of your work, Pips,' said Toby. 
 'I know,' said Sophie, and sat looking down modestly. Her dark-
blonde hair, worn long at Oxford, had been cut and backcombed, 
Diana-style, and quivered when she shook her head. She was wearing 
a red strapless number that didn't really suit her. 'You know she's got 
a part in a play,' said Toby. 'Oh, shoosh…' said Sophie. 
 'No, we've all got to go and see her. Nick - come to the first night, 
we'll go together.' Absolutely,' said Nick. 'What are you doing?' 
 Sophie quivered and said, 'Well, you might as well know,' as if 
being hurried into announcing a different kind of engagement. 'I'm 
doing Lady Windermere…' 
 'Fantastic. I think you'll be very good at that.' It was a 
surprisingly big part, but Nick could see her as the self-righteous 
young wife clipping rose stems in her Westminster drawing room; and 
delivering those awful soliloquies she has- 'I don't know what it will be 
like. It's one of these very way-out directors. 
 He's… he's gay, actually, too. He says it's going to be a 
deconstructionist reading of the play. That doesn't worry me, of course, 
because I've done deconstruction; but Mummy and Daddy may not like 
it.' 
 'You can't go worrying about what your parents will think,' said 
Nick. 
 'That's right,' said Toby. Anyway, your ma's very with-it. She's 
always going to way-out concerts and things.' 
 'No, she'll be fine.' 
 Toby chuckled. 'Of course your father's most famous remark is 
that he wished Shakespeare had never been born.' 
 'I don't know that that's his most famous remark,' said Sophie, 
with a hint of pique. In fact if Maurice Tipper had made a famous 
remark at all it would probably have been something about profit 
margins and good returns for shareholders. 'He only said it after 
getting bitten to death by mosquitoes watching Pericles in Worcester 
College gardens.' 
 'Ah…' murmured Nick, whose own memory was of Toby's bashful 
swagger as a Lord of Tyre, when Sophie had been the Marina. 
 'You're too horrid about my poor papa,' said Sophie in a highly 
affected way, as if in her mind she was already on stage. 
 Catherine came in, dressed for her night out in a tiny spangled 
frock, over which she was wearing an unbuttoned light-grey raincoat. 
She wore high-heeled black shoes and stockings with a whitish sheen 
to them. 'Goodness!' said Toby. 
 'Hello, darling,' said Catherine confidentially to Sophie, stooping 
to give her a kiss. Sophie clearly found Catherine the most challenging 
aspect of an affair with Toby, and Catherine knew this, and treated her 
with the kind of clucking condescension that Sophie would otherwise 
have lavished on her. 'Love your clever frock,' she said. 'Oh… thank 
you,' said Sophie, smiling and blinking. 
 'Are you going out, then, sis?' said Toby. 
 Catherine headed towards the drinks table. 'I'm going out 
tonight,' she said. 
 'Russell's taking me to an opening in Stoke Newington.' And 
where might that be?' said Toby. 
 'It's a well-known area of London,' Catherine said. 'It's very 
fashionable, isn't it, Soph?' 
 'Yes, of course - darling, you've heard of it,' said Sophie. 
 'I was joking,' said Toby; and Nick thought it was true, you never 
expected him to; and when he did you couldn't always be sure that he 
had. And then the idea of a party, not this one, but a noisy party with 
cans of beer and trails of pot smoke, through which he moved with his 
lover, as his lover, came over him like a pang and he envied Catherine. 
It was an image of an Oxford party, but blended with something known 
only from television, a house full of black people. 
 Toby said, 'I'm just going upstairs to see if I can find those 
trousers. Are you going to Nat's bash, Nick?' 
 'What is it?' said Nick, with another dimmer pang at the thought 
of another kind of party, a posh white hetero one, at which his 
presence was not thought necessary. 
 'Oh, he's having this Seventies party…' said Toby hopelessly. 
 'No, I'm not invited,' said Nick, with a superior smile, thinking of 
the loving closeness he had felt with Nat at Hawkeswood, when they 
were both stoned and sitting on the floor. 'Is it in London?' 
 'That's the thing. It's up at the blasted casde,' said Toby. 
 'Yes… It's absurdly soon, isn't it, for a Seventies party?' said 
Nick. 'I mean, the Seventies were so ghastly, why would anyone want 
to go back to them?' He'd been longing for a chance to see the casde - 
a marcher fortress with Wyatt interiors. 
 'Well, public schoolboys love reliving their puberty, don't they 
Soph,' said Catherine, coming back with a very tall drink. 'I know,' said 
Sophie crossly. 
 'Some of them spend their whole lives doing it,' Catherine said. 
She stood in front of the fireplace, with a hand on her hip, and seemed 
already to be moving to the music of a future very remote from any 
such nonsense. 
 Toby shrugged apologetically and said, 'I just hope I've still got 
those disco pants!' 
 Nick almost said, 'Oh… the purple ones…?'- since he knew just 
where they were, having been through everything in Toby's room, read 
his schoolboy diary, sniffed the gauzy lining of his outgrown swimming 
trunks, and even tried on the flared purple trousers (standing foolishly 
on the long legs). But he merely nodded, and knocked back the rest of 
his g-and-t. 
 Gerald came down in a dark suit with characteristic pink shirt, 
white collar, and blue tie. He seemed to recognize, with a forgiving 
smile, that he had set a sartorial standard the others were unlikely to 
match. He kept on smiling as he crossed the room, as a sign of his 
decision that he would not react to Catherine's appearance. The mac 
worn over the micro-frock made her look almost naked. When Badger 
came in he was less circumspect. 'My god, girl!' he said. 
 'No, your god-daughter actually, Uncle Badger,' said Catherine, 
with the forced pertness of a much younger child. 
 Badger frowned and hummed. 'Well, exactly,' he said. 'Didn't I 
promise to safeguard your morals, or something?' He rubbed his 
hands together and had a good look at her. 
 'I'm not sure anyone thinks you'd be the best person for that,' 
Catherine said, sipping her gin and sitting down sideways on a low 
armchair. 
 'You're going easy on that stuff, aren't you, Puss?' said Gerald. 
 'It's my first one, Daddy,' Catherine said; but Nick could see why 
Gerald was anxious, she was high on her own defiance tonight. He 
watched Badger watching her, his grey-striped peak slicked back after 
his shower, something disreputable and unattached about him; in 
parts of Africa, according to Toby, he was known not as Badger but by 
one of a number of words for hyena. Certainly he circled, and was 
hungry for something. His lecherous teasing of his god-daughter was 
allowed because it was of course impossible, a clownish joke. 
Catherine stayed long enough to meet everyone and to test her claim 
that Barry Groom never said hello. Gerald played along and said, 
'Hello, Barry,' and not only seized his hand but covered it confirmingly 
with his other hand, as if he was canvassing: at which Barry, looking 
round the room with a suspicious smile, said, 'Gerald, I'm surprised at 
you' - holding him there long enough to make him uneasy - 'a green 
front door, that's hardly sending the right signal.' He got a laugh, 
which was warmer and more complex than he expected -there was a 
second or two while he grew into it, squared his shoulders. He followed 
Gerald across the room, nodding in a vain, critical way as he was 
introduced, but not saying hello. When Catherine shook his hand, he 
said, 'Aha! Beautiful creature!' with a vaguely menacing presumption 
of charm. Catherine asked him where his wife was and he said she 
was still parking the car. 
 It was good that Catherine should want to be present, to be 
presented, to help entertain the guests, but to the family it was also a 
little sinister. She put everyone on edge by having her coat on indoors, 
and seemed to be playing with her father's hopes that at any moment 
she might leave. He glanced at her distractedly from time to time, as if 
he would have liked to say something but had made the calculation 
that the oddity of the coat was preferable to the naked flesh beneath it. 
He introduced her to Morden Lipscomb with visible reluctance. 
 The grey old American, with his tiny granite-like sparkle of 
charm, shook her hand and smiled mockingly, as if being confronted 
with an ancient indiscretion he meant entirely to deny. Toby and Nick 
were both watching her and Toby said, 'God, my sis looks like, you 
know, one of those girls who try and lure you into striptease parlours.' 
 'She looks like a strippergram,' Sophie said. 
 Lady Partridge came in with that air of social vexation Nick had 
seen in her before: she wanted to appear totally at home here and she 
also wanted her arrival to be an event; her deafness added a querulous 
uncertainty as to which effect she was having. Badger got her a drink 
and flirted with her, and she allowed herself to be flirted with. She 
liked Badger, having known him since he was a boy, and nursed him 
through mumps once, when he was staying in the holidays - an 
episode that was still referred to as a touchstone of their friendship, 
and in a vaguely risque way, since apparently Badger's balls had been 
the size of grapefruit. Nick had heard them joke about it earlier in the 
week, and it had sounded like jokes he had with his own parents, that 
were ribald litde reference points in a past before everything changed 
and became indescribable. 
 All the time Nick was thinking about Leo, so that Leo seemed to 
be the element, the invisible context, in which these daunting 
disparate people were meeting and sparring and congratulating each 
other. They didn't know it, which made it all the funnier and more 
beautiful. He mixed himself a fresh gin-and-tonic, Gerald-style, 
quinine lost in juniper, and drifted round not minding if he wasn't 
spoken to. He looked at the pictures with a new keenness, as though 
explaining them to Leo, his grateful pupil. The other MP and his wife, 
John and Greta Timms, were standing in front of the Guardi with the 
look of people who had come to the wrong party, who wanted more of a 
challenge, he in a grey suit, she in the helpless boldness of a blue 
maternity dress with a white bow at the neck: it was as if the PM 
herself were pregnant. John Timms was a junior minister in the Home 
Office; he must have been several years younger than Gerald, but he 
had precocious gravitas and unflappable self-importance. If Barry 
Groom never said hello, John Timms seemed at first not to blink. His 
gaze was fixed and almost sensual, and his speech had a hypnotic 
steadiness of pace and tone, irrespective of meaning: he was inspired, 
he seemed constantly to admit, but he wasn't in any dubious way 
excitable. They were talking about the Falklands War and the need to 
commemorate it with a monument and to celebrate it with an annual 
public holiday. 'A Trafalgar Day for our times,' said Timms, and his 
wife, in whom his certainty produced a more vibrant kind of urgency, 
said, 'Why not revive Trafalgar Day itself? Trafalgar Day itself must be 
revived! Our children are forgetting the War Against the French…' 
John Timms gazed out into the room as though flattered by his wife's 
zeal and loving her for it, but not himself being ready to go so far. He 
hadn't been introduced to Nick (indeed the Timmses were really 
speaking to each other), and his gaze played on him for a moment, 
seemed to feel him and test him and doubt him. 'You'd like to see a 
permanent Falklands memorial, wouldn't you,' he said. 
 'Mm, I wonder…' said Nick, not disrespectfully, and marvelled at 
just how unavailable his thoughts on the subject were. The 
doubdessness of Timms was a wonder in itself. He imagined Leo being 
here beside him, and having one salient fact or objection to produce, of 
the kind Nick could never remember. Catherine came past, sampling 
each of the little power-centres in the room. 'We were talking about the 
Falklands,' said Nick. 
 'I understand the Prime Minister favours an annual parade,' said 
John Timms, 'as well as a prominent memorial. It was truly her 
triumph.' 
 And the men's,' said Greta Timms, with her rich hormonal flush. 
'The men were staunch.' 
 'They were certainly staunch, my darling,' said John Timms. 
'They were daundess.' 
 'No,' said Catherine, covering her ears and grinning, 'it's no good, 
I just can't bear words with that au sound in. Do you know what I 
mean?' 
 'Oh…' said Greta Timms. 'I think I've always found them rather 
splendid words!' 
 'Right, I'm off!' said Catherine, turning to the room with the big 
smile which perhaps all her life would seem unguarded and 
vulnerable. A rough chorus of 'Bye's, a chuckling 'Oh, is she off?', and 
she was gazed at with relief, the suddenly conjured good humour that 
sends a child up to its early bed. 'Bye, Gran!' she said, specially loudly, 
kissing Lady Partridge in the middle of the room. 'See you in the 
morning, Dad.' And picking up her bag she stalked out on her tall 
heels. Lady Partridge peeped at Morden Lipscomb to gauge his 
surprise; if he seemed amused by this vision of a sex-club door-girl she 
was ready to take some droll credit as her grandmother. But Lipscomb 
was looking disappointedly at Gerald. 
 Lady Partridge was taken in to dinner by Lipscomb. They didn't 
really 'take people in' at the Feddens', but the procession from the 
drawing room, down the stone stairs, and into the candlelight, awoke a 
memory sometimes, or an anxiety, in guests. Lipscomb, with 
ponderous New World formality, presented his elbow to the senior 
lady, and Gerald's mother, who had a hurtling look to her after two 
gin-and-tonics, pressed against him like an old flame. In the dining 
room Lipscomb peered around with guarded curiosity as people found 
their places. 
 'Yes, I always think what a splendid room,' Lady Partridge said, 
trailing away towards her chair. 
 'And are these your forebears, Lady Partridge?' Lipscomb asked. 
 'Yes… yes…' said Lady Partridge, in a daze of gracious-ness. 
 'No, they are not her forebears,' said Rachel, quiedy but firmly. 
'They're my grandfather and my great-aunt.' 
 Nick was placed in the middle of the table, with Penny Kent on 
his right and Jenny Groom on his left - the dullest place of all, but he 
didn't mind because he had company of his own. He tucked into his 
crab cake as if sharing a joke. 
 'How do you fit in?' Jenny Groom wanted to know, with the air of 
someone steeled to unpleasant surprises. 
 'Oddly but snugly,' said Nick; and since she didn't like this, 'No, 
I'm an old friend of Toby's.' 
 'Oh, Gerald's son, you mean… And I hear he's working for the 
Guardian? The scandal of Toby's having a traineeship at the Guardian 
seemed to Nick to eclipse his own dissidence, to be enough scandal for 
one household. 
 'Well, you can ask him. He's sitting just over there,' said Nick, 
loud enough to intrude on Toby as he listened to Greta Timms 
extolling the virtues of the Family: Toby gave a half-secret smile of 
acknowledgement but said, 'Yes, I see,' to Greta to show she still had 
his attention. 
 'Oh, of course. He's got his father's looks,' said Jenny with a 
frown. 'So what do you do?' 
 'I'm doing a doctorate at UCL - on… on Henry James,' said Nick, 
seeing the style question might lose her completely. 
 'Oh…' said Jenny warily, getting a hook on it. Yes. I've never got 
round to Henry James.' 
 'Well…' said Nick, not caring if she had or not. 'Or hang on, did I 
read one? Dr Johnson or something.' 
 'No… I don't think so…' 
 'No, not Dr Johnson, obviously…!' 
 'I mean there's the Boswell.' 
 'It was set in Africa… I know: Mr Johnson.' 
 'Oh, Mister Johnson is a novel by Joyce Cary.' 
 'Exacdy, I knew I'd read something by him.' 
 When the venison came in Gerald yapped, 'Don't touch the 
plates! Don't touch the plates!' so that it sounded as though something 
had gone wrong. 'They have to be white hot for the venison.' The fact 
was that the fat congealed revoltingly if the plates were less than 
scorching. 'Yes, my brother-in-law has a deer park,' he explained to 
Morden Lipscomb. A rare enough amenity these days.' The guests 
looked humbly at their helpings. 'No,' Gerald went on, in his bristling 
way of answering questions he wished someone had asked, 'this is 
buck venison… comes into season before the doe, and very much 
superior.' He went round with the burgundy himself. 'I think you'll like 
this,' he said to Barry Groom, and Barry sniffed at it testily, as if he 
knew he was thought to have more money than taste. 
 Nick shared a brief smile down the table with Rachel. It seemed 
subtly to mock not only Barry but Gerald himself. Nick took his first 
sip of die burgundy with a frisson at their shared understanding, like 
the liberty allowed to a child by a confident mother - the pretended 
conspiracy against the father. He wondered if Gerald and Rachel ever 
rowed. If anything happened, then it was in the white secrecy of the 
bedroom, which, with its litde vestibule, was removed from hearing 
behind two heavy doors; it became somehow sexual. 
 When he thought of Leo after not thinking of him for a minute or 
two he heard a big orchestral sound in his head. He saw Leo lying on 
his coat under a bush, his shirt and jersey pushed up under his 
armpits, his jeans and pants round his knees, small dead leaves 
sticking to his thighs - and he heard the astonishing chord. It was high 
and low at once, an abysmal pizzicato, a pounce of the darkest brass, 
and above it a hair-raising sheen of strings. It seemed to knock him 
down and fling him up all in one unresisted gesture. He couldn't 
repeat it immediately, but after a while he would see Leo rising to kiss 
him, and the love-chord would shiver his skin again. It startled him 
while Penny was describing the enormous interest of working for 
Gerald, and he jumped, and smiled at his invisible friend, so that 
Penny worried that she'd been funny. He wondered if it came from 
something he knew, or if he'd written it himself. It certainly wasn't the 
Tristan chord, with its germ of catastrophe. The horrible thought came 
to him that if it existed, it had probably been written by Richard 
Strauss, to illustrate some axe-murder or beheading, some vulgar 
atrocity. 
 Whereas to Nick, though it was frightening, it was also 
indescribably happy. 'So how are you getting on at UCL?' said Penny 
kindly, as if it must be a sorry comedown after Oxford. Nick and Penny 
had never met as students, the word Oxford meant different things to 
them, but Penny relied on it as a thing they had in common. 
 'Oh, fine…!' said Nick; and went on obligingly, 'It's not at all like 
Oxford, you know. The place itself is fairly grim. I've just found out 
that the English department used to be a mattress factory.' 
 'Really!' said Penny. 
 'It is a bit depressing. I suppose it's no wonder half the staff are 
alcoholics.' Penny laughed, oddly titillated, and Nick felt rather 
treacherous. 
 In fact he revered Professor Ettrick, who had taken to him with 
immediate subtle confidence, and seen possibilities in his thesis topic 
that he himself hadn't dreamt of. But nothing much was being done, 
and through most of Nick's library days his eyes wandered just beyond 
the page in a deep monotonous reverie about Leo: the great unfolding 
sentences of Meredith or James would slow and fade into subliminal 
parentheses, half-hour subordinate clauses of remembered sex. And 
he felt guilty, because he wanted to deserve the professor's trust and 
be as clever and committed as he was meant to be. Penny said, 'Was it 
Henry James you're working on?' 
 'Er… yes,' said Nick. 
 She seemed to setde comfortably on that, but only said, 'My 
father's got tons of Henry James. I think he calls him the Master.' 
 'Some of us do,' said Nick. He blinked with the exalted humility of 
a devotee and sawed off a square of brown meat. 
 'An makes life: wasn't that his motto? My father often quotes 
that.' 
 'It is art that makes life, makes interest, makes importance, for 
our consideration and application of these things, and I know of no 
substitute whatever for the force and beauty of its process,' said Nick. 
 'Something like that,' said Penny. She smiled contentedly into the 
candlelight. 
 'What would Henry James have made of us, I wonder?' she went 
on. 
 'Well…' Nick chewed it over. He thought she was rather like a 
high-minded aunt, proposing questions with virginal firmness and 
ignorance. He wondered condescendingly what her sexual prospects 
were. A certain kind of man might like to raise the colour in-that 
plump white neck. He said, 'He'd have been very kind to us, he'd have 
said how wonderful we were and how beautiful we were, he'd have 
given us incredibly subtle things to say, and we wouldn't have realized 
until just before the end that he'd seen right through us.' 
 'Because he did write about high society, didn't he?' said Penny, 
clearly thinking that was where she was, and also perhaps that it was 
proof against being seen through. 
 'Quite a lot,' said Nick; and remembering his chat with Lord 
Kessler in the summer and really giving a long-pondered answer to 
him, 'People say he didn't understand about money, but he certainly 
knew all about the effects of money, and the ways having money made 
people think.' He looked fondly across at Toby, who out of sheer 
niceness tried now and then not to think like a rich person, but could 
never really get the hang of it. 'He hated vulgarity,' he added. 'But he 
also said that to call something vulgar was to fail to give a proper 
account of it.' 
 Penny seemed to be puzzling this over, but in fact she was 
listening to what Badger was suggesting in her other ear: her sudden 
blush and giggle showed Nick that this was one of Badger's little 
sexual challenges to him - it was almost a way of calling him a lag. 
 Toby was listening to (ireta Timms, but leaning past her to keep 
an eye on Sophie, who was being drily examined by Morden Lipscomb. 
'No,' said Sophie reluctantly, 'I've only been in one sort of major film.' 
 'And what of the stage?' said Lipscomb, with an odd mixture of 
persistence and indifference. 
 'Well, I am abbut to be in something. It's… I'm afraid it's going to 
be rather a trendy production… it's Lady Windermere's Fan.' 
 Jenny Groom started asking something about Catherine, was she 
as mad as they said, and Nick's hesitations as he answered only half 
allowed him to hear the truth that Lipscomb dragged out of Sophie, 
that she wasn't playing Lady Windermere herself, but 'Oh, just a minor 
part… No! Not too much to learn… Oh no, not her, that's a wonderful 
part… Anyway it will probably all be ruined by the director…' and that 
in fact she'd been cast as Lady Agatha, a role which famously 
contained nothing but the two words 'Yes, mamma.' Nick thought this 
was very funny, and then felt almost sorry for her. 
 Rachel said, 'My dear, what fun, we shall all come to your first 
night,' apparently sincerely, so that a further alliance, of efficient, 
almost impersonal solidarity, was seen to be in place between the 
mother and her possible daughter-in-law. 
 Lady Partridge, jealous of Lipscomb's attention, went off on the 
unobvious tangent of her hip replacement. 'Oh, I had it at the Dorset… 
Well, yes, I always go there, I find them marvellous… charming girls… 
The nurses, yes… One or two of the doctors are coloured, but there's 
absolutely no need to have anything to do with them… Not that I'm 
much of a one for hospital!' she reassured him. 'My late husband was 
there a good deal.' 
 'Ah…' said Lipscomb, measuring the distance to a condolence. 
 She lifted her glass, with a worldly sigh. 'Well, I've oudived two 
husbands, and that's probably enough,' she said, as if still leaving a 
tiny loophole for further proposals. She looked at Lipscomb, perhaps 
wondering if he had said something, and went on, 'Actually they were 
both called Jack! They couldn't have been more different, as it 
happens… chalk and cheese… I don't think they'd have got on for a 
moment- had they ever met!' Nick thought she might almost have been 
on the phone, hearing answers and questions from far away. 'Jack 
Fedden, of course, Gerald's father, a funny sort of man, in a way… He 
was in the law, very much a law man… very, very handsome… and 
Jack Partridge, Sir Jack, of course… No, not a law man… Not at all… 
He was a practical man, a builder, he built some of the new 
motorways, as you may know… Yes, some of the Ms… the M, um… He 
did marvellous work…' 
 At the head of the table Gerald was perceptibly distracted by his 
mother's talk. 
 Nick knew that Jack Partridge had gone bust not long after 
getting his knighthood, in one of the funny reversals of these recent 
years; it was a subject which might seem to tarnish his stepson by 
association. Gerald made a firm intervention and said, 'So, Morden, I 
was absolutely gripped by your paper on SDL' 
 'Ah…' said Lipscomb, with a smile that showed he wasn't so 
easily flattered. 'I wasn't sure that you'd agree with my conclusions.' 
 'Oh, absolutely' said Gerald, with a surprising mocking smile 
which confirmed to Nick that he hadn't read beyond those first few 
pages. 'How could one not!' 
 'Well… you'd be surprised,' said Lipscomb. 'Is this the 
telephones?' said Lady Partridge. 'It's missile defence, Ma,' said Gerald 
loudly. 'You know, Gran, Star Wars,' said Toby. 'You're thinking of 
STD, Judy,' said Badger. 
 Ah,' said Lady Partridge, and chuckled, not in embarrassment 
but at the attention she'd won for herself. 'The President announced 
the Strategic Defence Initiative six months ago,' said Morden 
Lipscomb, gravely but a litde impatiently. 'It aims to protect the United 
States from any attack by guided missile systems. In effect a defensive 
shield will be created to repel and destroy nuclear weapons before they 
can reach us.' 
 'Delightful idea,' said Lady Partridge. This sounded satirical, and 
the plan had indeed been greeted with derision as well as dismay; but 
then Nick thought, no, the old lady would take pleasure in weaponry, 
and arms budgets generally. 
 'It is, I believe, an irresistible one,' said Lipscomb, laying his left 
hand commandingly on the table. He wore a signet ring on his litde 
finger, but no wedding ring. Of course that didn't mean much; Nick's 
own father and his father's male friends didn't wear wedding rings, 
they were thought, for all their symbolism, to be vaguely effeminate. He 
thought of the card, 'From the Desk of Morden Lipscomb' - it made one 
wonder where else it might have come from: 'the Back-burner', 'the 
Rest-room', 'From the Closet of Morden Lipscomb'… well, it was an 
idea. He was clearly a man with his own defensive systems. 
 After pudding the ladies withdrew. Nick's thoughts went with 
them as they climbed the stairs; he stood with one knee on his chair, 
hoping he might somehow be allowed to join them. 'Slide along, Nick,' 
said Gerald. The men all closed up together at Gerald's end of the 
table, in a grimly convivial movement, occupying the absent women's 
places. Nick handed Lady Partridge's lipstick-daubed napkin to Elena, 
who had come through to sort them out. There were many all-male 
occasions that he liked, but now he missed the buffer of a female, even 
Jenny Groom, whose general impatience he'd decided was a sad flower 
of her hatred of her husband. Now Barry Groom was sitting down 
opposite him with a scowl, as if familiar to the point of weariness with 
the etiquette of such occasions. Nick looked across to Toby for help, 
but he was laying out a box of cigars and the cigar cutter; Gerald was 
setting the decanters off on their circuit. Nick pictured Leo, as he had 
left him today, walking his bike away, and the love-chord sounded, 
warily now - he didn't want tlie others to hear it. How could he 
describe it, even to himself, Leo's step, his bounce, his beautiful half-
knowing, half-unconscious deployment of his own effects? 'I'll give you 
one piece of advice,' said Barry Groom, choosing imperiously between 
the unmarked port and claret decanters. 
 'Oh, yes,' said Nick, and felt his erection begin to subside. 'Never 
speculate with more than twelve per cent of your capital.' 
 'Oh…' Nick gasped humorously, but seeing Barry Groom was 
almost angrily in earnest he went on, ' Twelve per cent. Right… I'll try 
and remember that. No, that sounds like good advice.' 
 'Twelve per cent,' said Barry Groom: 'it's the best advice I can 
give you.' He slid the decanters over to him, since they formed the 
bridge, furthest from Gerald. Nick took some port and passed it on to 
Morden Lipscomb, with a litde show of promptness and charm. 
Lipscomb was just clipping a cigar, and his thin mouth, turned down 
in concentration, seemed to brood on some disdain, not of the cigar, 
but of the company he found himself in. This was presumably the 
moment when he should be made way for, in the solemn but 
disinhibiting absence of the women, but he was cagey, or sulky. Nick 
felt sorry for Gerald, but didn't see how he could help. His own way of 
getting on terms with people was through the sudden intimacy of talk 
about art and music, a show of sensibility; but he felt Lipscomb would 
rebuff him, as though refusing intimacy of another kind. He wondered 
again what Leo would have said and done: he had such clear, sarcastic 
opinions about things. 'So, Derek,' said Barry Groom, in his cuttingly 
casual tone, 'how long are you staying here?' 
 Badger puffed coaxingly for a second or two, and then let out a 
roguish cloud of smoke. 'As long as the old Banger'U have me,' he said, 
jerking his head towards Gerald. 
 'Ah, that's what you call him, is it?' said Barry, with a rival-rous 
twitch. 
 Badger grunted, took a quick suck on his cigar, and said, 'Oxford 
days…' knowing how easy Barry was to tease. 'No, I'm having a place 
done up at the moment, that's why I'm here.' 
 'Oh, really? Where is it?' said Barry suspiciously. 
 Badger was deaf to this question, so Barry repeated it and he 
said at length, as if conceding a clue to a slow guesser, 'Well, it's quite 
near your place of work, actually.' The secrecy was presumably a 
further tease, though it fitted with something seedily hush-hush about 
Badger. 'It's just a little flat - a little pied-a-terre.' 
 A fuck-flat in other words,' said Barry, sharply, to make sure the 
illusionless phrase, and his offensiveness in using it, struck home. 
Even Badger looked slightly abashed. Gerald gave a disparaging gasp 
and plunged as if confidentially into new talk with John Timms and 
his old mentor about the genius of the Prime Minister. Nick glanced 
across at Toby, who half closed his eyes at him in general if unfocused 
solidarity.._ 
 'I had wondered whether the Prime Minister might be with us 
this evening,' said Lipscomb. 'But I see of course it's not that kind of 
party.' 
 'Oh…' said Gerald, looking slightly guilty. 'I'm so sorry. I'm afraid 
she wasn't free. But if you'd like me to bring you together Lipscomb 
gave a rare smile. 'We're lunching on Tuesday, so it's not at all 
necessary.' 
 'Oh, you are?' said Gerald, and smiled too, in a genial litde mask 
of envy. 
 And so it went on for ten or fifteen minutes, Nick perching at the 
corner of two conversations, the 'odd man', as Gerald had briskly 
predicted. He passed the decanters appreciatively, and sat smiling 
faintly at the reflections of the candelabra in the table top or at a 
disengaged space just above Barry Groom's head. He grunted 
noncommittally at some of Badger's jokes, Badger appearing in the 
candlelight and its mollifications as almost a friend among the other 
guests. He nodded thoughtfully, without following the thread, at one or 
two of Lipscomb's remarks that caused general pauses of respect. The 
cigar stench was the whole atmosphere, but the alcohol was a secret 
security. There was something so irksome about Barry Groom that he 
had a fascination: you longed for him to annoy you again. He was 
incredibly chippy, was that the thing? - all his longings came out as a 
kind of disdain for what he longed for. And yet he got on with Gerald, 
they were business partners, they saw a use for each other; and that 
perhaps was the imponderable truth behind this adult gathering. 
 Barry said, 'The way you Oxford fuckers go on about the Martyrs' 
Club,' and frowned sharply as he swallowed some claret. 'What were 
you martyrs to, that's what I'd like to know.' 
 'Ooh… hangovers,' said Badger. 'Yes, drink,' Toby put in, and 
nodded frankly. 'Overdrafts and class distinctions,' said Nick drolly. 
 Barry stared at him, "What, were you a member?' 
 'No, no…' said Nick. 'I didn't think so!' 
 And then there was a rattle in the hall as the front door was 
opened and the bang of it slamming shut. Then immediately the bell 
rang, in three urgent bursts. There was a shout of vexation, the door 
was jerked open again, and Catherine, it must have been, was talking - 
from the dining room they heard only the hurried shape of her talk. 
Nick's eyes slid round the faces of the others at the table, who looked 
puzzled, displeased, or even lightly titillated. John Timms stared 
unblinking towards the closed door of the room; Badger sat back in a 
curl of smoke. 'All right!' It was Catherine. 
 'That child would try the patience of an oyster,' said Gerald, with 
evident feeling but also a snuffle of amusement, a darting glance to 
judge the effect of his allusion. 
 Then the front door closed again, more thoughtfully, and a man's 
voice was heard - 'You need to be careful, girl…' Nick gave a little 
snigger, trying to commute it into Russell's voice, but Gerald had set 
down his cigar and stood up: 'Sorry…" he murmured, and walked 
towards the door with a dwindling smile. 
 'That's my sis,' said Toby. As I was saying…' said Morden 
Lipscomb. When Gerald opened the door, the man was going on quietly 
but urgendy, You need to calm down, Cathy, I don't like it, I don't like 
seeing you like this at all…' and Nick's heart went out to the Caribbean 
accent, in instant sentimental allegiance - he felt himself float out 
towards it from the cigar-choked huddle at the table, the Oxonian 
burble and Barry's whine. 'Who are you?' said Gerald. 
 'Oh, Christ, Dad!' said Catherine, and it was clear she was 
crying, the last word broke as she raised her voice. c And are you 
Cathy's father, then Nick got up and went into the hall, with the feeling 
he must try to curb Gerald's unhelpful sharpness, and an anxious 
sense of the things Gerald didn't know, that might now have to be 
named and negotiated. He was half in the dark himself. If someone 
told you they were OK, was it wrong to believe them? She was standing 
at the foot of the stairs, gripping the gold chain of her bag in both 
hands and looking both angry and vulnerable: Nick almost laughed, as 
you do for a second at the latest catastrophe of a child, and seem to 
mock it when you mean to reassure it; though he was frightened too. 
There was quite a chance he'd have to do something. He peered at her, 
with the frank curiosity allowed in a crisis - it really was childlike, the 
quick fall; she had only gone out two hours ago. 
 Her mouth quivered, as if with accusation. She was tiny in her 
high heels. Nick knew the man, he was the minicab driver she'd been 
friendly with, the one she'd had back to the house when Gerald and 
Rachel were away, fiftyish, grizzled at the temples, heavy-built, a sweet 
hint of ganja about him: well, all the Orbis drivers sold the stuff. He 
was completely and critically different from everything else in the 
house. Nick said, 'Hi!' under his breath, and rested a hand on his 
shoulder. 'What's happened, darling?' he said. 'Who is this man?' said 
Gerald. 
 'I'm called Brentford, since you're asking,' the man said slowly. 'I 
brought Catliy home.' 
 'That's really kind of you,' said Nick. 'How do you know my 
daughter?' said Gerald. 'She needs taking care of,' said Brentford. 'I 
can't help her tonight, I got a job.' 
 'He's the minicab driver,' said Nick. 'Does he need paying?' said 
Gerald. 
 'I don't charge her,' said Brentford. 'She call me when he dump 
her.' 
 'Is this true?' said Gerald. 'It's really kind of you,' said Nick. 
 Catherine made a little scream of disbelief, and came and took 
Brentford's arm, but he kept a wary dignity with her too and didn't 
hold her: he pushed her gendy towards Nick, and she leaned against 
him, wailing but not holding on to him. She was in her own distress, 
she wasn't seeking solace from Nick, just somewhere to stand; still he 
put a cautious arm round her. 'Is it Russell?' he said. But she couldn't 
begin to answer. 'What is it, darling?' said Rachel, hurrying 
downstairs. 
 Gerald explained, 'That bloody little shit's dumped her,' clearly 
saying, through pretended indignation, what he most hoped had 
happened. 'Poor old Puss.' 
 Rachel looked at the three men, and there was a hint of fear in 
her face, as if Brentford had brought some threat much larger than 
Catherine's tantrum into the house. 'Come upstairs, darling,' she said. 
 Barry Groom had come out into the hall, staring and twitching 
his head, and so drunk suddenly that there were unconscious delays 
to his aggression. 'Look here, you!' he shouted at Brentford. 'I don't 
know who you are. You fucker!' Gerald put a hand on his wrist. 'It's all 
right, Barry' 
 'You keep your hands off her, you 'Oh, shut up… you arsehole!' 
said Nick, without planning to, and shaken by the sound of his own 
raised voice. 
 'Yes, shut up, you wanker!' said Catherine, through her tears. 
 'Now, now!' said Barry, and then something awful, a sly smile, 
slid on to his face. 'God, I'm really sorry…' said Nick to Brentford. 'Why 
are we all standing here?' said Gerald. 'Darling, come up,' said Rachel. 
 'Let's finish our port and cigars,' said Gerald, turning his back on 
Brentford. 
 He had to show, for the sake of the party, that he took scenes 
like this with habitual good humour. 'Will you take her up, darling?' he 
said, as if there were really a chance he might do it himself. 
 Catherine moved away and started up the stairs, and Rachel 
tried to put an arm round her, but she shook it off. Nick took 
Brentford to the door. 'Are you sure we can't pay you?' he said, though 
he doubted he had the price of a fare from Stoke Newington himself. 
He wanted Brentford to know he wasn't guilty of the thing the whole 
house stood accused of. 'He's a bad man,' said Brentford, on the 
doorstep. 
 'Oh…' said Nick, yes…' He wasn't certain which man was being 
referred to, and Brentford's shake of the head and flap of the arm 
seemed to write them all off. 
 Nick stood on die pavement for a while after die Sierra had gone, 
and heard the laughter of the women from an open window above. It 
was good to be out of die house, in the night air. He was trembling a 
litde from having shouted at someone he hated. He thought of Leo, and 
smiled, and hugged his hands under his armpits. 
 He wondered what Leo was doing, the afternoon flared up again 
and warmed him with amazement; then the thought of Pete came over 
it like the chill of a cloud. 
 He went in and slowed as he passed by the half-open door of the 
dining room: '… the beggar stank of pot!' Gerald was saying, to odd 
humourless laughter. Now perhaps he could really go upstairs, and 
taste the freedom of being the odd man. 
 He didn't have a place in either of the two parties. It was bad 
form to go away, it admitted a prior desire to do so; but he couldn't go 
back and sit with Barry Groom. He thought Gerald might be angry 
with him too, but he would surely be glad of his taking an interest in 
Catherine. It couldn't be called a shirking of responsibility. Nick 
started to climb the stone stairs, and had hummed several bright 
anticipatory bars from Schumann's Fourth Symphony before he 
stopped himself.. 
 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
'God, you're a twit,' said Leo. He looked fretfully at different parts of 
Nick, unable to place his dissatisfaction exacdy. In the end he licked 
his thumb and rubbed his cheek, as if Nick was a child. This word 
twit, a tiny sting, had come up before, and signalled some complex of 
minor reproaches, class envy, or pity, the obvious frustrations of 
having a boy like Nick to teach. As always Nick searched for something 
else in it too, which was Leo's tutting indulgence of his pupil; he still 
longed for flawless tenderness, but he forgave Leo, who for once was 
nervous himself. They were on the Willesden pavement, ten yards from 
his front gate. 'You're so fucking preppy,' said Leo. 'I don't know what 
that means.' Leo shook his head. 'What am I going to do with you?' 
 They had met after work, across the road from the Council 
offices, and Leo was wearing a dark grey suit with square shoulders 
and a white shirt and a wide but sober tie. It was the first time Nick 
had seen this beautiful everyday metamorphosis, and he couldn't help 
smiling. He was in love to the point of idolatry, but the smiles, the 
appreciative glances, seemed to strike Leo like a kind of sarcasm. 'You 
look so handsome,' Nick said. 
 'Yeah, and so do you,' said Leo. 'Right, we're going in. Now what 
did I tell you, don't take the name of the Lord in vain. Don't say, "Oh 
my god!" Don't even say, "Good Lord!" ' (Leo fluted tliese phrases in the 
way that was his puzzling imitation of Nick.) 'Don't say, "Jesus fucking 
bollocks." ' 
 'I'll try not.' 
 Nick was always a favourite with mothers, he was known to be a 
nice young man, and he liked the unthreatening company of older 
people. He liked to be charming, and hardly noticed when he drifted 
excitedly into insincerity. But he also knew the state of suspense, the 
faked insouciance, of bringing friends home, the playful vigilance with 
which certain subjects had to be headed off even before they had 
arisen; you took only a distracted, irrelevant part in the conversation 
because you were thirty seconds, a minute, ten minutes ahead of it, 
detecting those magnetic embarrassments towards which it would 
always twitch and bend. 'My sister sort of knows,' said Leo. 'You want 
to watch her.' 
 'Rosemary.' 
 'She's pretty.' 
 Nick followed him up the short concrete path and said in his ear, 
'Not as pretty as you, I bet,' one of his light flirty jokes that he watched 
swoop to earth under its own weight of adoration. 
 Mrs Charles and her son and daughter lived on the ground floor 
of a small red-brick terrace house; there were two front doors side by 
side in the shallow recess of the porch. Leo applied himself to the 
right-hand one, and it was one of those locks that require tender 
probings and tuggings, infinitesimal withdrawals, to get die key to 
turn. Nick reflected briefly on the coloured glass in the inset window 
and the old Palm Sunday cross pinned above the doorbell. He pictured 
Leo going through this routine every day; and he noted his own small 
effort of adjustment, his disguised shock at the sight of the street and 
the house - perhaps he was a twit after all. When he stepped inside he 
had a memory, as sharp as die cooking smell in die hall, of school 
afternoons of community service, going into the homes of the old and 
disabled each charitable visit a lesson in life and also - to Nick at least 
- in the subde snobbery of aesthetics. 
 He took in the tiny kitchen in a photographic glance, the wall 
units with sliding frosted-glass doors, theorange curtains, the church 
calendar with its floating Jesus, the evidence of litde necessary 
systems, heaped papers, scary wiring, bowls stacked within bowls, and 
the stove with piates misted and beaded on the rack above a bubbling 
pan; and at the centre Leo's mother, fiftyish, petite, with hooded eyes 
and straightened hair and a charitable smile of ller own. 'You're very 
welcome,' she said, and her voice had the warm West Indian colour 
that Leo kept only as a special effect or a temporary camouflage. 
 'Thank you,' said Nick. 'It's very good to rreet you.' He was so 
used to living by hints and approximations that there had always been 
something erotic in meeting die family of a man he was in love with, as 
if he could get a further vicarious fix on him by checking genetic 
oddities, the shared curve of the nose or echoing laziness of step. In 
the rich air of Kensington Park Gardens he seemed to live in the 
constant difiiised presence of Toby, among people who were living 
allusions to him and thus a torment as well as a kind of consolation 
.3ut of course he had never done more than hug Toby and siss him on 
the cheek; he had twice had a peep at his penis a(a college urinal. 
Here, in a tiny flat in unknown Willesden he was talking to the mother 
of the man who called him rot only a 'damn good fuck' but also a 'hot 
litde cocksucker' with 'a first-class degree in arse-licking'. Which 
clearly was way beyond hugging and peeping. Nick gazed at her in a 
trance of revelation and gratitude. 
 And then there was Rosemary, coming in from work, home early, 
it seemed, to help her mother out vith this under-explained guest they 
had. She was a doctor's receptionist, and wore a blouse and skirt 
under her belted mac. They had an awkward introduction, edging 
round Leo's bike in the hall. Perhaps it was shyness, but she seemed 
disdainful of Nick. He looked for her prettiness, and thought she was 
like a silky fluffy version of Leo, without the devastating detail of an 
ingrowing beard. Then brother and sister both went off to change. 
 Nick couldn't work out the plan of the house, but there were 
subdivided rooms at the back, and a sense of carrying closeness that 
made die bike entirely necessary; it waited there, shuddered and 
jangled faintly as Nick bumped against it, as if conscious of its own 
trapped velocity. 
 'Ah, that bicycle,' said Mrs Charles, as if it was some profane 
innovation. 'I told him…' 
 They went into die front room, in which a heavy oak dining table 
and chairs, with bulbous Jacobean-style legs, were jammed in beside a 
three-piece suite tiiat was covered in shiny ginger leadier, or something 
like it. There was a gas fire with a beaten copper surround under a 
ledge crowded with religious souvenirs. Mrs Charles's church life 
clearly involved a good deal of paperwork, and half the table was 
stacked with box-files and a substantial print-run of the tract 
'Welcoming Jesus In Today'. Nick sat down at the end of die sofa and 
peered politely at the pictures, a large framed 'mural' of a palm-
fronded beach and a reproduction of Holman Hunt's The Shadow of 
Death. There were also studio photos of Leo and Rosemary as children, 
in which Nick felt himself taking an almost paedophiliac interest. 
 'Now, young sir,' said Mrs Charles, with a clarity of enunciation 
that sounded both anxious and arch, 'he tells me next to nothing, Leo, 
you know, at all. But I think you're the fellow who lives in the big white 
house, belongs to the MP?' 
 'Yes, I am,' Nick said, with a self-deprecating laugh which seemed 
to puzzle her. Leo must have been talking up these facts to impress 
her, though on other occasions they were the object of vague derision. 
'And how do you like it?' Mrs Charles asked. 
 'Well, I'm very lucky,' Nick said. 'I'm only there because I was at 
university with one of their children.' 
 'So, you met herV Nick smiled back with a little pant of 
uncertainty. 'What, Mrs Fedden, you mean 'No…! Mrs Fedden… I 
assume you met Mrs Fedden, if I'm saying her name correcdy.' 
 Nick blushed, and then smiled as he saw the way, simple but 
nimble, religious even, that she'd gone for the big question. 'No - her. 
The lady herself. Mrs T!' 
 'Oh… No. No, I haven't. Not yet…' He felt obliged to go on, rather 
indiscreetly, 'I know they'd love to have her round, he, um, Gerald 
Fedden, has tried to get her at least once. He's very ambitious.' Ah, you 
want to make sure and meet Mrs T' 
 'Well, I'll certainly tell you if I do,' said Nick, looking round 
gratefully as Leo came into the room. He was wearing jeans and a 
sweatshirt and Nick had a vivid image of him ejaculating. Then he saw 
the heavy spit as it loitered and drooled down the taut ginger back of 
the sofa. He felt deliciously brainwashed by sex, when he closed his 
eyes phallus chased phallus like a wallpaper pattern across the dark, 
and at any moment the imagery of anal intercourse, his new triumph 
and skill, could gallop in surreal montage across the street or 
classroom or dining table. 
 And can I be allowed to hope you are a regular church-attender?' 
 Nick crossed his legs to hide his excitement and said, 'I'm not 
really, I'm afraid. At the moment, anyway.' 
 Mrs Charles looked used to such disappointments, and almost 
cheerful, as if taking a very long view. And what about your father and 
mother?' 
 'Oh, they're very religious. My father's a churchwarden, and my 
mother often does the church flowers… for instance.' He hoped this 
compensated, rather than merely highlighting, his own delinquency. 
 'I'm very happy to hear it. And what is your father's occupation?' 
she demanded, pressing on in interview mode, which made Nick 
wonder if she did somehow know, however subconsciously, that he 
was trying to tie his life to her son's. He was a puzzle, Nick, in many 
contexts -he was often being interviewed obliquely, to see how he fitted 
in. 
 He said, 'He's an antiques dealer - old furniture and clocks, 
mostly, and china.' 
 Mrs Charles looked up at Leo. 'Well, isn't that the exact same 
thing as old Pete!' 
 'Yeah,' said Leo, whose whole manner was withdrawn and 
unhelpful. He dragged out one of the dining chairs and sat down at the 
table behind them. 'There's a lot of antique dealers about.' 
 'The exact same thing,' said Mrs Charles. 'You go on, look 
around. We got some good old antiques here. You don't know old Pete?' 
 Yes, I do,' Nick said, glancing round the room and wondering 
what Pete had said about it all before him, and how Pete had been 
explained to her. 'It's a small little world,' she marvelled. 'Well, Leo 
introduced me to him…' 
 'Ah, he's a good man, old Pete. You know we always called him 
"old" Pete, though he can't be not more than fifty.' 
 'He's forty-four,' said Leo. 
 'He was a great help to my son. He helped him with getting 
through college, and with the job on the council. And he didn't stand 
to get nothing from it - leastways not in this world. I always say to Leo 
he's his fairy godfather.' 
 'Something like that,' said Leo, with trie sourness of a child 
subjected to the astounding iterations of a parent's treasured phrases - 
treasured often because they put a bright gloss on some anxious 
denial. The clumsy unconscious joke in this one must have made it 
specially wearing. 
 'A proper decent father Leo didn't have,' said Mrs Charles 
candidly, and again with an almost cunning air of satisfaction that 
they had been so tested. 'But the Lord looks after his own And now, 
don't you reckon he's a good boy?' 
 'Yes, he's… splendid!' said Nick. 'What's for tea?' said Leo. 
 'I'm hoping your sister is bringing it off now,' said MR Charles. 
'We're giving our guest our special spicy chops anc rice. In this 
country,' she observed to Nick, you don't fry ths chops so much, you're 
always grilling them, isn't that right?' 
 'Um… I don't know. I think we do both.' He thought o: his own 
mother, as an embodiment of any such supposec tradition; but went 
on charmingly, 'But if you fry them rathei than grilling them, then 
that's also what we do in this country! 
 'Ha…' said Mrs Charles, 'well that's certainly one way o: looking 
at the matter.' 
 At table the movement of Nick's left arm was limited by 
th«leaning tower of 'Welcoming Jesus In Today'. He came dowr on his 
food in a hesitant but predatory fashion. The meal wa a bold 
combination of bland and garishly spicy, and he won dered if 
Rosemary had mockingly overdone the chillies tc make fun of his good 
manners. He was full of round-eyec appreciation, which was also a 
cover for the surprise of having his evening meal at five forty-five; some 
absurd social reflex the useful shock of class difference, a childish 
worry perhaps a a changed routine, all combined in a mood of 
interesting alienation. At Kensington Park Gardens they ate three hour 
later, and dinner was sauntered towards through a sequence o other 
diversions, chats and decantings, gardening and tennis gramophone 
records, whisky and gin. In the Charles household there was no room 
for diversions, no garden to speak of, and no alcohol. The meal came 
on straight after work, a wide-ranging grace was declaimed, and then 
it was eaten and done with, and the whole long evening lay ahead. 
There were things Nick guessed about them, from the habits of his 
own family, which lay somewhere between the two; but there were 
others he would have to wait for and learn. He had never been in a 
black household before. He saw that first love had come with a bundle 
of other firsts, which he took hold of like a wonderful but worrying 
bouquet. 
 After a longish silence Leo said, 'So how's it going at college?' as if 
they hardly knew each other. 
 'Oh, it's all right,' said Nick, disconcerted but then touched by 
Leo's stiffness. Whenever Leo was cold or rough to him he felt it like a 
child - then he turned it round and found some thwarted love in it. He 
was in awe of Leo, but he saw through him too, and each time he 
followed this little process of indulgence he felt more in love. 'It hasn't 
been very exciting so far. I suppose it's just different from what I've 
been used to.' He always came away from the sunless back court 
where the English department was with two or three newly shaped 
anecdotes, which gave his days there a retrospective sparkle; but he 
found it hard to interest Leo in them and they often went to waste. Or 
they were stored up, with a shadowy sense of resentment. 'He was at 
Oxford University before,' said Leo. 'And now where is he?' Mrs Charles 
wondered. 
 'I'm at University College,' Nick said. 'I'm doing a doctorate now.' 
Leo chewed and frowned. 'Yeah, what is it again?' 
 'Oh…' said Nick, with a disparaging wobble of die head, as if he 
couldn't quite get the words out. 'I'm just doing something on style in 
the - oh, in the English novel!' Aaaah yes,' said Mrs Charles, vith a 
serene nod, as if to say that this was something infinitelr superior but 
also of course fairly foolish. 
 Nick said, 'Umm…' - but tren she broke out, 'He's crazy for 
studying! I'm wandering just how old he is.' Nick chuckled awkwardly. 
Tn twenty-one.' 
 And he doesn't look like no nure than a little boy, does he, 
Rosemary?' 
 Rosemary didn't answer exacth but she raised one eyebrow and 
seemed to cut her food up ini very ironical way. Nick was blushing red 
and it took him a nwnent to notice Leo's embarrassment, die 
mysterious black bush, frowningly denied. His secret was heavy in his 
face, anc Nick suddenly understood that the difference in their ages 
nattered to Leo, and that even an innocent reference to it seemel to lay 
his fantasy bare. Old Pete was licensed by being old, in obscurely 
benign institution; it was much harder to accoint for his friendship 
with a studious little boy of twenty-one. 
 Nick had to go on, though he (ould hear that he was out of tune, 
'Of course one misses one's friends - it takes a while to setde down - I 
expect it will all be marvellous in the end!' There was another rather 
critical pause, so he went on, 'The English department used to be a 
mattress factory. At least half the tutors seem to be alcoholics!' 
 Both these remarks had g»ne down rather well at Kensington 
Park Gardens, and lad left Nick suppressing a smile at his own 
silliness. But all lamilies are silly in their own way, and now he was 
left with a pizzled and possibly offended silence. Leo chewed slowly and 
gtve him a completely neutral look. 'Mattresses, yeah?' he said. 
 Rosemary stared firmly at her plate and said, 'I should tliink they 
ought to get help.' 
 Nick gave an apologetic laugh. 'Oh… of course, they should. 
You're quite right. 
 I wish they would!' 
 After a while Mrs Charles said, 'You know, all die men like that, 
that's got that sort of problems, each and every one of them got a great 
big hole right in the middle of their lives.' 
 Ah…' Nick murmured, flinching widi courteous apprehension. 
 And they can fill that hole, if only they know how, with the Lord 
Jesus. That's what we pray, that's what we always pray. Isn't that so, 
Rosemary?' 
 'That's what we do,' said Rosemary, with a shake of the head to 
show there was no denying it. 
 'So what's your success rate?' said Leo, in a surprisingly 
sarcastic tone; which explained itself when Mrs Charles leant 
confidentially towards Nick. You couldn't stop a mother when she was 
on the track of her 'idea'. 
 'I pray for all those in darkness to find Jesus, and I pray for the 
two children I've brought into this world to get themselves hitched up. 
At the altar, that's to say.' And she laughed fondly, so that Nick 
couldn't tell what she really thought or knew. 
 Leo scratched his head and shivered with frustration, though 
there was a kind of fondness in him too, since he was going to 
disappoint her. Rosemary, who was clearly her mother's right hand, 
found herself linked with Leo, and protested flatly that she was ready, 
just as soon as the perfect man turned up. With her eyes half closed 
she had her mother's devout look. 'There's nothing keeping me from 
the altar except that one thing,' she said, and as the look fell on Leo 
she seemed to play with betrayal, and then once again to let it go. 
 When the fruit and ice cream had been brought in, Mrs Charles 
said to Nick, 'I see you been looking at my picture there, of the Lord 
Jesus in the carpenter's shop.' 
 'Oh… yes,' said Nick, who'd really been trying to avoid looking at 
it, but had none the less found himself gingerly dwelling on it, since it 
hung just above Leo's shoulder, straight in front of him. 'You know, 
that's a very famous old picture.' 
 'Yes, it is. You know, I saw the original of it quite recently -it's in 
Manchester.' 
 • 'Yeah, I knew that's not the original when I saw one just the 
same in the Church House.' 
 Nick smiled and blinked, not sure if he was being teased. 'The 
original's huge, it's life-size,' he said. 'It's by Holman Hunt, of course 
Aha,' Mrs Charles murmured and nodded, as if a vaguely unlikely 
attribution had been shown to her in a newly plausible light. It was 
just the sort of painting, doggedly literal and morbidly symbolic, that 
Nick liked least, and it was even worse life-size, when the literalism so 
cried out to be admired. 'I heard tell he's die same fellow as painted 
The Light of the World, with the Lord Jesus knocking on the door.' 
 'Oh yes, that's right,' said Nick, like a schoolteacher pleased by 
the mere fact of a child's interest, and leaving questions of taste for 
much later. 'Well, for that you only have to go to St Paul's Cathedral.' 
 Mrs Charles took this in. 'You hear that now, Rosemary? You and 
me's going out to St Paul's Cathedral any day now to look at that with 
our own naked eyes.' And Nick saw her, in shiny shoes and the small 
black hat like an air hostess's that was nesting on a chair in the 
corner, making her way there, with waits at a number of bus stops, 
and the nervous patience of a pilgrim - he saw her, as if from the air, 
climbing the steps and going into the stupendous church, which he 
felt he owned, all ironically and art-historically, more than her, a mere 
credulous Christian. 'Or else, of course, you and me can go… eh?' she 
said to Nick, somehow shyly not using his name. 
 'I'd love to do that,' Nick said quickly, taking the chance to be 
kind and likeable that had been denied him earlier on. 
 'We'll go together and have a good look at it,' said Mrs Charles. 
 'Excellent!' said Nick, and caught the hint of mockery in Leo's 
eyes. 
 Mrs Charles said, cocking her head on one side, 'You know, they 
always got something clever about them, these old pictures, don't 
they?' 
 'Often they do,' 
 Nick agreed. 
 'And you know the clever thing about this one now…' She gave 
him the tolerant but crafty look-of someone who holds the answer to a 
trick question. 
 To Nick the clever thing was perhaps the way that the Virgin, 
kneeling by the chest that holds the hoarded gifts of the Magi, and 
seeing the portent of the Crucifixion in her son's shadow cast on the 
rear wall of the room, has her face completely hidden from us, so that 
the painting's centre of consciousness, as Henry James might have 
thought of her, is effectively a blank; and that this was surely an anti-
Catholic gesture. He said, 'Well, the detail is amazing - those wood 
shavings look almost real, everything about it's so accurate…' 
 'No, no…' said Mrs Charles, with amiable scorn. 'You see, the 
way the Lord Jesus is standing there, he's making a shadow on the 
wall that's just the exact same image of himself on the Cross!' 
 'Oh… yes,' said Nick, 'indeed… Isn't it called in fact-' 
 'And of course that all goes to show how the death of the Lord 
Jesus and his Resurrection is foretold in the Bible from ancient times.' 
 Nick said, 'Well, it certainly illustrates that view even if it doesn't 
prove it,' in a perhaps misjudged tone of equable deliberation. Leo shot 
him a wincing glance and created a diversion. 
 'Yeah, I like the way he's got him yawning,' he said; and he 
stretched his own arms out and up and tilted his head with a yawn 
that was just like the Lord Jesus except that he was holding an ice-
cream-smeared dessert spoon in his left hand. It was the kind of camp 
you see sometimes in observant children -and Rosemary watched him 
with the smothered amazement and mocking anticipation of a good girl 
whose brother has been insolent and reckless. But she said, 'Mm, it 
makes me shiver when he does that.' Leo tutted and grinned, as his 
own shadow, in the room's less brilliant evening light, stretched and 
shrugged and faltered across the wall above his chair. When the meal 
finished Leo was checking his bike and they were out in the street 
almost at once. Nick was relieved but ashamed - he made a joke of 
being dragged away in the middle of a sentence, as if Leo was a lively 
dog on the end of a leash. But Mrs Charles seemed hot to mind. Ah, 
you go on now,' she said, as if she might be quite relieved herself. 
 Or perhaps, he thought, as he hurried along in silence beside 
Leo, she had sensed his own relief, and been saddened by it for a 
second, and then had hardened herself against him… Her tone was 
nearly dismissive, and perhaps she thought he was false… Well, he 
was condescending, in a way… These anxieties flared dully through 
him. He began to resent Mrs Charles for thinking he was 
condescending. 
 Leo was walking briskly, as if they'd agreed where they were 
going, but he said nothing. Nick couldn't tell if he was sulky, angry, 
ashamed, defiant… but he knew that all these emotions could rise and 
rush and fizzle and mutate very quickly, and that it was wiser to let 
him settle than to guess his mood and risk the wrong opener. Nick's 
consciousness of being wise was a small refuge when Leo was difficult 
or distant. He took in the after-sunset chill, the upswept trails of dark 
cloud above the rooftops, and the presence of autumn, light but 
penetrating, in the cold cobalt beyond. In their four weeks together 
these evening walks, with the ticking bicycle beside them or between 
them, had taken on a deepening colour of romance. He worried that 
the silence itself was a kind of comment, and as they reached the end 
of the road he pulled Leo against him with a quick chafing hug and 
said, 'Mmm, thank you for that, darling.' Leo snorted softly. 'What are 
you thanking me for?' 
 'Oh, just for taking me home. For introducing me to your family. 
It means a lot to me.' And he found his litde avowal released a 
sentiment he hadn't quite felt before he made it. He was very touched. 
 'So, now you know what they're like,' said Leo, stopping and 
staring, with just his mother's narrowing of the gaze, across the major 
road beyond. The evening traffic was let slip from the lights and 
accelerated down the hill towards them and past them, then thinned, 
and then there was only a waiting emptiness again. 
 'They're wonderful,' Nick said, meaning only to be kind -though 
he heard the word hang, in the silence between the lights, as if in 
inverted commas, and underlined too: the wonderful of gush, of 
connoisseurship, of Kensington Park Gardens. Leo seemed to find it 
absurdly unexpected, and kept blinking, but then smiled and said with 
a dry laugh, 'If you say so… darling' - the darling, longed for by Nick, 
taking on a dubious ironic twang. 
 Nick had a large wild plan of his own for the night, but for now 
he let Leo take charge: they were going to go back to Notting Hill and 
catch the seven fifteen screening of Scarface at the Gate - it had just 
come out and Leo had all the facts on it, including its enormous 
length, 170 minutes, each one of which appeared to Nick like a 
shadowy unit of body heat, of contact and excitement. 
 They would be pressed together in the warm darkness for three 
hours. Leo said what a great actor Al Pacino was, and spoke of him 
almost amorously, which Nick couldn't honestly do - to him Pacino 
wasn't that sort of idol. There was an interview with him in the new 
Time Out, which Leo had probably read, since his ideas on film seemed 
to Nick to be drawn pretty closely from the capsule reviews in that 
magazine. Still, film was Leo's province, rather humourlessly patrolled 
against Nick's pretensions, it was one of the interests he'd originally 
advertised, and Nick conceded, 'No, he's a genius,' which was a word 
he could thrill them both with. They stood at the bus stop with that 
idea in their heads. 
 When the bus came Nick hopped on and sat looking out at the 
back at Leo, who was ages fiddling with his bike and then getting on it, 
dwindling away every second into the night-lit street. Then the bus 
pulled in at a further stop, and the bike came almost floating up, Leo 
rising from his forward crouch to glance in at Nick - he seemed to ride 
the air there for a second, and then he winked and stooped and with a 
click of the gears he slipped past. Nick was glad of the wink this time, 
he raised his hand and grinned, and then was left, in the public 
brightness of the bus, to be eyed by the people opposite with vague 
suspicion. 
 The bus threaded down at last across the Harrow Road and 
began its long descent of Ladbroke Grove. He pictured Leo whizzing 
ahead, and kept losing him in the gleams and shadows of the night 
traffic. Where was he now? Nick was still in the alien high reach of the 
road, with the canal and the council estates, and longing for the other 
end, his own end, the safety and aloofness of white stucco and private 
gardens. He wondered what Leo thought as he made the transition, 
which occurred at the dense middle part by the market and the 
station, under clangorous bridges, where people loitered and 
shouted… After that there was a stretch of uneasy gentility, before the 
Grove climbed, taking palpable advantage of the hill as a social 
metaphor, and touching into life the hint of an orchard or thicket in 
the very name of the street. He didn't fool himself that Leo was 
sensitive to these things - he was a figure of wrenching poetry to Nick, 
but was not himself poetic, and clearly found something daft and even 
creepy in Nick's aesthetic promptings and hesitations. Nick sometimes 
made the mistake of thinking that Leo didn't feel things strongly, and 
then the shock, when his love and need for him leapt out, angry at 
being doubted, took his breath away, and almost frightened him. He 
thought back over the meal, the visit, and saw that of course it had 
meant a lot to Leo as well, but that everything was squashed and 
denied by secrecy: if he had been a woman the occasion would have 
had a ritual meaning, and Leo's mother could have let herself dream of 
the altar steps at last. To Nick the bulging subject of the visit had been 
his love for Leo, which obsessed him just as much as Mrs Charles's 
love of Jesus did her; but she had given herself licence to express her 
fixation, had embraced a duty to do so, whilst his burned through only 
in blushes and secret stares. She had eclipsed him completely. 
 When he got to the cinema he found Leo near the head of the 
queue. 'You made it,' he said, looking round at the people behind and 
nodding - 'Yeah, it's the first night,' as if it was a bore, he was a martyr 
to first nights. And when they reached the window it turned out that 
the cinema was nearly full, and they wouldn't be able to sit together. 
Nick shrugged and said, 'Ah well…' backing into the couple behind 
them, who were trying to overhear. 'We can come at the weekend.' 
 But Leo said, 'Yeah, we'll have them - god, we're here now,' and 
gave him a look of friendly concern. 
 Nick said quietly, 'I just thought, if we can't sit together…' since 
the only reason for sitting through a super-violent three-hour gangster 
movie was to have Leo's weight and warmth against him and his hand 
in his open fly. They had touched each other like that, with cautious 
delirious slowness, in Rumblefish, under the dreamy aegis of Matt 
Dillon, and in Fellini's And the Ship Sails On, which had been Nick's 
hopeless choice of picture and a peculiar backdrop to an orgasm. 
Otherwise, they had only made love in parks, or public lavatories, or 
once in the back of Pete's shop, which Leo had kept a key to, and 
which felt even more furtive than these cinema handjobs. The thing 
about the cinema was that they seemed to share in the long common 
history of happy snog-gers and gropers, and Nick liked that. 
 But now he was alone again, he felt it very keenly, accepting the 
'better' ticket, in the middle of the back row. The ads were already 
showing as he clambered along and in their patchy glare he loomed 
and ducked and apologized, and was a clumsy intruder in a world of 
snuggling coupledom. He squeezed in and even the space of his seat 
seemed half absorbed by the lovers' coats and bags and angled limbs. 
The 170 minutes stretched out ahead like a long-ago detention, some 
monstrous test. They stretched out, in fact, like a film he had no wish 
to see, and for a moment he was gripped by a tearful bolshiness that 
he himself thought astonishing in a grown man. He saw that he could 
get up and go home and come back at the end. But then he was 
frightened of what Leo would say. There was so much at stake. There 
was a Bacardi advertisement, and the brilliance of tropical sea and 
white sand lit up the auditorium. He stared at the left side, near the 
front, to try to spot Leo, but he couldn't find him. Then he did see the 
squared-off silhouette of his head, and for a moment his oddly distant 
and attentive profile, played over by the reflected light. Of course the 
scene of palm trees and surf was much the same as Mrs Charles's 
mural. Now superbly handsome heterosexuals romped across it. 
 Critics had already described Scarf ace as 'operatic', which 
perhaps was only their way of saying it was Latin, noisy and 
bombastic. It was set in a Miami so violent and so opulent, so glittering 
and soulless, that Nick found himself worrying about how people 
survived in it, and then about how he would survive in it. In his 
disaffected mood he kept wandering off from the film itself into 
paranoid doubts and objections. He saw that he was reacting like his 
mother, for whom any film on the telly with a sex scene or the word 
shit in it took on a nearly hostile presence, and was watched thereafter 
with warm mistrust. Scarface was all about cocaine, which alarmed 
him. He remembered tensely how Toby had taken it at Hawkeswood 
with Wani Ouradi. The film confirmed his worst suspicions. Nowhere 
in it was there a hint of the delicious pleasure that Toby had spoken 
of. The drug was money and power and addiction - a young blonde 
actress in the film snorted joyless volumes of it. 
 The couple on Nick's left were slumped in a slowly evolving 
embrace. He was aware of a hand on a thigh left bare by a very short 
skirt - and when it moved his glance twitched guiltily away. He had an 
unusual sense of the cinema as a room - a long narrow space with the 
dusty plaster mouldings of an old theatre. 
 Instead of the proper oblivion of the filmgoer he felt a kind of 
foreboding. 
 When the picture brightened his eyes yearned down across the 
shadowy ranks of heads, but Leo was litde and so was he, and he 
never had that one clear view of him again. Because the film was Leo's 
choice, he imagined him enjoying it, taking it on, adjusting himself, as 
it went along, to its new standards of hardness. A film that was 
shocking quickly lowered the threshold, it made people unshockable. 
Nick felt that if he'd been sitting with Leo he might have tittered and 
groaned at the shootings and blood like everyone else. But now they 
were apart, as they might have been on occasion in this very cinema 
before they even knew of each other's existence, sitting separately in 
the near dark. It was irrational, perhaps, but the glaring unreality of 
the film seemed to throw a suspicion of unreality over everything else, 
and his affair with Leo, which was so odd, so new, so unrecognized, 
felt open to crude but penetrating doubt .11c wondered il lie would 
have noticed Leo ayear ago, in the sliullling semi patience of the exit 
line, or carried his image home to lie awake with. Well, probably not, 
since one of Leo's affectations was to sit through to the very last 
credits, the lenses, the insurers, the thanks to die mayor and police 
department of… oh, somewhere obscurely a solution and a puzzle at 
the same time. 
 And it wasn't in fact until all that was over that Leo came into die 
foyer, blinking and nodding and then genially puzzled at the troubled 
look on Nick's face. All right, babe,' he said quietly, and gripped his 
upper arm to steer him out. 'That's what I call snorting coke,' he went 
on, referring to a scene in the film's final hour where Pacino had torn 
open a huge plastic bag of cocaine on his desk and plunged his nose 
into it, the slave at last to his own instrument of power. It had struck 
Nick as completely ridiculous. 'Did you like that, then?' 
 Nick hummed and cleared his throat like an anxious bringer of 
bad news. 'Not much,' he said, and gave Leo a thin smile. 'It was quite 
a laugh,' said Leo. 
 'The ending was outrageous.' 
 'Yes… yes it was,' Nick agreed, hesitantly but firmly, recalling the 
comprehensive final bloodbath. As so often he had the feeling that an 
artistic disagreement, almost immaterial to the other person, was 
going to be the vehicle of something that mattered to him more than he 
could say. 
 But Leo said, 'Nah, sorry about that, babe, it was pretty crappy. 
And we never got our kiss and cuddle.' 
 'I know,' said Nick with an archness that covered and somehow 
dissolved three hours of regrets - in his relief he couldn't see where he 
was going and grabbed and rattled one of die cinema's already locked 
glass doors. 
 Leo went out and into die blocked-offside street where he'd left 
his bike, and when Nick followed he found him putting his arms round 
his neck and kissing him, chastely but tenderly, on the forehead; then 
he kept looking at him, lighdy frowning and smiling at the same time, 
with humorous reproach. 'Nicholas Guest.' 
 'Mm…' - Nick colouring but holding Leo's gaze submissively. 'You 
worry too much. 
 You know that?' 
 'I know…' 
 'Yeah? You do trust your Uncle Leo, don't you?' 
 'Of course I trust you,' Nick burst out quiedy, as if he'd been 
asked a simpler question. 
 'Well, don't worry so much, then. Will you do that for me?' And 
again he was all cockney softness. 
 'Yes,' said Nick, glancing a little worriedly none the less to left 
and right, since Leo was holding him against the wall like a mugger as 
much as a lover - he worried what people would think. In the wake of 
his relief this short exchange raised a vague dissatisfaction. 'Don't ever 
forget it.' 
 'I won't,' Nick murmured, and Leo stood back. He wasn't sure 
what it was that he mustn't forget, he had a resdess ear for syntax, but 
he smiled at the general drift of the little catechism of reassurance. It 
was lovely that Leo saw at once what was wrong, even if his avuncular 
tone didn't put it completely right. Nick found he was confident 
enough, despite his racing heartbeat, to mention his plan. 'You're sure 
they're not here, yeah?' 
 'Yes, I'm positive. Well, Catherine might be in.' 
 'Catherine, right, that's your sister, yeah?' And then Leo winked. 
 The heavy, sharpedged key to the mortise locks had already cut a 
gash in Nick's trouser pocket, and the whole bunch was tangled in the 
torn threads and hanging against the top of his thigh. As he tugged at 
it a few of the new pound coins dropped ticklingly down his leg and 
rolled across the tiled floor of the porch. 
 Leo jumped on them. 'That's right, throw it away,' he said. 
 A light always burned in the hall, and gave it tonight a somehow 
eerie vigilance. Nick locked the door behind them, and put the keys 
back in his pocket, and this time, after two steps, they had shaken 
their way down his leg and out on to the chequered marble. Leo, 
peeking in the hall mirror, raised an eyebrow but said nothing. On die 
console table were i. pare car keys, opera glasses, one of Gerald's grey 
fedoras, a letter 'By Hand' addressed to the Rt Hon Mr and the Hon 
Mrs Gerald Fedden - and together, as a careless still life, reflected in 
the mirror, they seemed to Nick both wonderful and embarrassing. He 
stood still for a moment and listened. The light, from a brass lantern 
hanging in the well of the stair, threw steep shadows down inside the 
threshold of the dining room, revealing only the black satin bodice of a 
nineteenth-century Kessler. The Hon and the Rt Hon were both in 
Barwick for the night on constituency business, and whilst he 
confirmed this to himself he was also rewording the sentence in which 
he would explain Leo to them if, after all, they came chattering in. He 
had a sense of their possessing the house and everything in it, calmly 
but defiantly, and of its stone staircase and climbing cornices reaching 
rather pitilessly up into the shadows. He gave Leo a passing kiss on 
the cheek, and drew him into the kitchen, where the under-unit 
lighting stammered and blinked into life. 'Do you want a whisky?' 
 And for once Leo said, 'I don't mind if I do! Yeah, that would be 
nice. Thanks very much, Nick.' He strolled round the room as if not 
really noticing it, and stood scanning the wall of photographs. One of 
the Tatler pictures from Toby's twenty-first had now been bought, 
blown up and framed: a wildly smiling family group in which the Home 
Secretary seemed to show some awareness of being an intruder. Just 
above them the student Gerald, in tails, was shaking hands with 
Harold Macmillan at the Oxford Union. Again Leo made no comment, 
but when Nick handed him the cold tumbler he saw in his eyes and in 
his very faint smile that he was noting and storing. Perhaps he was 
calculating the degree of affront represented by all this Toryness and 
money. Nick felt his own kudos as family friend, as keyholder, was a 
very uncertain quantity. 'Let's go upstairs,' he said. 
 He went up two at a time, in too much of a hurry, and when he 
looked back on die turn he saw Leo dawdling by the same factor that 
he was rushing; he went into the drawing room and pressed switches 
that brought on lamps on side tables and over pictures - so that when 
Leo sauntered in he saw the room as Nick had first seen it two years 
before, all shadows and reflections and the gleam of gilt. 
 Nick stood in front of the fireplace, longing for it to be a triumph, 
but taking his cue from the suppressed curiosity in Leo's face. 'I'm not 
used to this,' Leo said. 'Oh…' 
 'I don't drink whisky.' Ah, no, well-' 
 'Who knows what it'll do to me? I might get dangerous.' 
 Nick grinned tightly and said, 'Is that a threat or a promise?' He 
reached out and touched Leo's hip - his hand lay diere for a second or 
two. Normally, together, alone, diey would have been snogging, holding 
each other very tightly; though sometimes, it was true, Leo laughed at 
Nick's urgency and said, 'Don't panic, babe! I'm not going anywhere! 
You've got me!' Leo rested his glass on the mantelpiece, and eyed 
Guardi's Capriccio with S. Giorgio Maggiore, which certainly seemed a 
rather poindess picture after The Shadow of Death. It was hard to 
imagine Rachel haranguing her guests about the clever something in 
it. 
 Underneath it the invitations were propped, overlapping, making 
almost one long curlicued social sentence, Mr and Mrs Geoffrey - amp; 
Countess of Hexham - Lady Carbury At Home' for - Michael and Jean - 
The Secretary of State… and those others, amazingly thick, with 
chamfered edges, The Lord Chamberlain is Commanded by Her 
Majesty to Request… which tended to stay there long after the events 
they referred to, and which gave Nick as well a lingering pompous 
thrill. Though he saw now, very quickly, that such a pleasure required 
willing complicity in Gerald's habit of showing off to himself. He turned 
away, pretending the invitations weren't there, and Leo said, with a 
derisive tut, 'God, the snobs.' 
 Nick laughed. 'They're not really snobs,' he said. 'Well, he is 
perhaps a bit. 
 They're…' It was hard to explain, hard to know, in the dense 
compact of the marriage, who sanctioned what. They were each other's 
alibi. And Nick saw that Leo was using the word in a looser way, to 
mean rich people, who lived in nice places, to mean nobs. It struck 
him that he might be about to take the whole treat of coming to 
Kensington Park Gardens and making love in a bed as an elaborate 
but crushing rebuff. He watched him sip some more, deliberately, and 
then wander towards the front windows. He tried to act on his advice 
of fifteen minutes earlier, tried to trust his Uncle Leo. The room was 
devised and laid out for entertaining, on a generous scale, and for a 
second, as if a thick door had opened, he heard the roar of 
accumulated talk and laughter, the consensual social roar, instead of 
the clock's ticking and the fizz of silence. 
 'That's a nice bit of oyster,' Leo said, pointing at a walnut 
commode. And that's Sevres, if I'm not wrong, with that blue.' 
 'Yes, I think it is,' Nick said, feeling that this nod at a common 
interest also brought old Pete rather critically into the room. Old Pete 
would have had some smart gay backchat to deal with an awkward 
moment like this. 
 'No, they've got some nice pieces,' Leo said, flatly, and a litde 
ponderously, and so perhaps shyly. He turned round, nodding. 'You've 
done well.' 
 'Darling, none of it's mine…' 
 'I know, I know.' Leo sat down at the piano, and after a moment's 
thought stood his glass on a book on the lid. 'What's this, then… 
Mozart, all right, that's not too bad,' checking the cover of the music 
on the stand, but letting it fall back to the eternally open Andante. 'So 
what key's this in?' - as if the key required some special tactics, like a 
golf-shot. 'F major…' 
 'It's a funny old piano,' said Nick. He felt that if Leo played the 
piano, especially if he played it badly, it would waken the unconscious 
demons of the house and bring them in yawning and protesting. 
 'Ah, that's all right,' Leo murmured courteously; and he started 
to play, with a distracted frown at the page. It was the great second 
movement of K533, spare, probing, Bach-like, that Nick had 
discovered, and tried to play, on the night when he'd lost his chance of 
meeting Leo - till Catherine had complained, and he'd apologized and 
doodled off into Waldorf music. To apologize for what you most wanted 
to do, to concede that it was obnoxious, boring, 'vulgar and unsafe' 
 - that was the worst thing. And the music seemed to know this, 
to know the irresistible curve of hope, and its hollow inversion. Leo 
played it pretty steadily, and Nick stood behind him, willing it along, 
nudging it through those quickly corrected wrong notes and tense 
hesitations that are a torture of sight-reading and yet heighten the 
rewards when everything runs clear and good. 
 When Leo suddenly went steeply wrong he gave a disparaging 
shout, struck a few random chords, then reached for his glass. 'Must 
be too pissed to play,' he said, not necessarily joking. 
 Nick sniggered. 'You're good. I can't play that. I didn't know you 
could play.' 
 He felt very touched, and chastened, as if by a glimpse of his own 
unquestioned assumptions. It opened a new perspective, the sight of 
Leo in his jeans and sweatshirt and baseball boots raising Mozart out 
of the sonorous old Bosendorfer. And it seemed to have loosened him 
up, he was like a shy guest who makes a brilliant joke, its lustre 
heightened by delay and distillation, and who suddenly finds he's 
enjoying himself. Nick grabbed him from behind and squashed a kiss 
onto his cheek. Leo chuckled and said, All right, babe…' 
 Nick said, 'I love you,' shaking him in a tight hug, and grunting 
at the hard muscular heat of him. Leo reached up with his free right 
hand and gripped his arm. After a while he said, 'That's a terrible 
picture.' 
 It was Norman Kent's portrait of Toby, aged sixteen, and it was 
the image - beyond the intimidating bronze bust of Liszt - on which the 
eyes of the doodling pianist tended to dwell. While Leo had been 
playing, it had lent its sickly colour to Nick's thoughts. 'I know… Poor 
Toby' 
 'Cos he's quite tasty, in my opinion.' 
 'Oh yes.' 
 'You never told me if you had him, when you were all up at 
Oxford University.' 
 Nick had still not quite let on to Leo that before their tangle in 
the bushes he had never exactly 'had' anyone. He said, 'No, no, he's 
completely straight.' 
 'Yeah?' said Leo, sceptically. 'You must have had a go.' 
 'Not really,' Nick said. He stood back, with his hands still on 
Leo's shoulders, and smiled wanly at the pink-faced blazered boy. The 
old regret could always come alive again, and for a moment even Leo, 
warm under his hands, seemed cheap and provisional compared to the 
unattainable bloom of Toby. 
 'I just thought the way he kissed you and looked at you was a bit 
poofy.' 
 'Don't!' Nick murmured, and then laughed, pulling Leo to get him 
up, and get the real kisses from him, the ones that Toby would never 
give him. 
 But Leo held out a moment longer. 'So they're easy about having 
a bender in the houseware they, their lordships?' 
 'Of course,' said Nick. 'They're absolutely fine with it.' And in his 
mind he heard Catherine saying, 'As long as it's never mentioned.' He 
went on, with a degree of exaggeration, 'They've got lots of gay friends. 
In fact they asked me to bring you here, darling.' 
 'Oh,' said Leo, with a subtlety of register worthy of Rachel herself. 
Nick lay naked on top of the duvet, in quick-pulsed amazement. Leo 
had rung his mother, told her he was staying over: it was a risk, a 
yielding, and therefore a commitment. Nick listened to the hiss of die 
shower in the bathroom across the landing. Then, since he could see 
himself in the wardrobe mirror, he got under the bedclothes. He lay 
there, with one hand behind his head, in an almost painful state of 
happiness and worry. Far down below, the front door was triple-
locked, the lights were all out in the drawing room and kitchen, the 
one lantern cast its cold glare into the hall. Catherine's bedroom door 
was closed, but he was certain she was out. They had the house to 
themselves. The window was open a notch, and he could hear the 
throat-tearing runs and trills of a robin that had taken to singing in 
the garden at night, and which he had eagerly decided was a 
nightingale; an old lady standing listening on the gravel path had put 
him right. He had still, therefore, never heard a nightingale, but he 
couldn't imagine it bettering his robin. The question was what time 
would Gerald and Rachel get back. But actually, probably, not till late, 
it was Gerald's 'surgery' in the morning, then a two-hour drive. Nick 
smiled at their unconscious generosity. 
 The shower-noise had stopped, and the robin skirled on, with 
sulky pauses and implacable resumptions. Nick would have liked it 
even better if Leo had come to bed without showering, he loved the 
faint sourness of his skin, the sharpness of his armpits, the sweet 
staleness deep between his legs. Leo's smells were little lessons 
constandy re-learnt, little shocks of authenticity. But to Leo himself 
they were a source of annoyance and almost of shame. He had a 
terribly keen sense of smell, revealed in a queue or a crowded room by 
a snubbed upper lip and an aristocratic flinching of the nostrils. He 
insisted he liked Nick's smells, and Nick, who had never really thought 
of himself as having smells, was nervously unsure if this was truth or 
chivalry. Perhaps it was a loving mixture of the two. 
 There was a kind of magic in this - to be lying in bed, a single 
bed, with all that it implied, and playing gently with himself, and 
waiting for his lover to appear. It was the posture of a lifelong 
singleness, incessant imagining, the boy's supremacy in a world of 
dreams, where men kept turning up to do his bidding; and now, that 
ratde of the bathroom door, snap of the light cord, squeak of the 
landing floor, were the signals of an actual arrival, and within three 
seconds the door would open and Leo would come in- How black he 
looked, in the white skirt of a bath towel pulled tight round his 
buttocks and over the curbed jut of his dick. He held his folded clothes 
in his hands, like a recruit, stripped and scrubbed and given his slops 
- he looked around, then put them down on the desk, by the blue 
library books. He was a trifle formal, he winked at Nick but he was 
clearly moved by the ordinariness and novelty of the moment. To Nick 
it darkened, it had the feeling of an elopement, of elated action 
haunted by the fears it had defied, of two lovers suddenly strangers to 
each other on their first night in a foreign hotel. But after all they had 
only eloped upstairs, it was absurd. He felt breathless pride at having 
Leo here. He threw back the duvet, and said, 'I'm sorry about the bed' 
 - shifting a bit to make room. 
 'Eh…?' said Leo. 'I don't think you'll get much sleep.' 
 Leo let his towel drop to the floor and stared at Nick without 
smiling. 'I'm not planning on getting any,' he said. 
 Nick accepted the challenge with a little moan. It was the first 
time he had seen Leo naked, and the first time he had seen the 
masking shadow of his face, lazily watchful, easily cynical, clever and 
obtuse by turns, melt into naked feeling. Leo breathed through his 
mouth, and his look was a wince of lust and also, it seemed to Nick, of 
self-accusation - that he had been so slow, so vain, so blind. 'TO 
WHOM DO YOU BEAUTIFULLY BELONG?' (1986) 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
Nick went ahead on the path and held die gate open for Wani, so that 
for several seconds the outside world had a view of naked flesh before 
the gate, with its 'Men Only' sign, swung shut behind them. It was a 
small compound, a concrete yard, with benches round the walls under 
a narrow strip of roof. It was like a courtyard of the classical world 
reduced to pipes and corrugated iron. There was something distantly 
classical, too, in the protracted nakedness, and something English, 
schoollike and comfortless in the concrete and tin and the pond-water 
smell. Nick crossed the open space, past the books and towels of one 
or two sunbathers, and he saw it take account of them, someone 
greeted him, conversations stretched and lulled, and he felt the gaze of 
the little crowd, like idle fingertips, run over him and come to rest, 
more tenderly and curiously, on Wani. Wani, in ice-blue mirror 
shades, was a figure of novel beauty, and only Nick perhaps, sitting 
down and beckoning to him, saw the wariness in his half-smile. 
 'Mm, very primitive,' Wani said, as if the place confirmed a 
suspicion he had about Nick. 
 Nick said, 'I know,' and grinned - it was just what he loved about 
it. 'Where do we put our things?' 
 'Just leave them here, they'll be fine.' 
 But Wani flinched at this. He had the keys to the Mercedes in his 
jeans pocket, and his watch, as he had told Nick more than once, cost 
a thousand pounds. 'Yah, maybe I won't go in.' And maybe Nick, who 
had never owned anything, was guilty of failing to imagine the worries 
of a millionaire. 
 'Really, it'll be fine. Put your stuff in here,' he said, offering him 
the Tesco carrier bag which had held his towel and trunks. 'This watch 
cost a thousand pounds,' said Wani. 'Perhaps don't tell everyone about 
it,' Nick said. 
 There was an old man drying near them, squat and bandy and 
brown all over, and Nick remembered him from last year, an occupant 
of the place, of the compound and the jetty and the pond, and more 
especially of the screened inner yard where on a hot day men 
sunbathed naked, hip to hip. He was lined but handsome, and Nick 
felt that smoothed and uniformed, in vigilant half-profile, his picture 
could well have accompanied the obituary of a general or air vice-
marshal. He nodded amiably at him, as a leathery embodiment of the 
spirit of the place, and the old man said, 'George has gone, then. 
Steve's just told me, went last night.' 
 'Oh,' said Nick, 'I'm sorry. No, I didn't know George,' but 
assuming that by 'gone' the old boy didn't mean gone on holiday. It 
was George who needed the obituary. 
 'You knew George.' He looked at Wani as well, who was 
undressing in a slow, abstracted way, with pauses for thought before 
each sock, each button. 'He was always here. He was only thirty-one.' 
 'I've never been here before,' Wani said, courteous but cold. The 
old man frowned back and nodded, accepting his mistake, but perhaps 
thinking less of them for not knowing George. 
 After a pause Nick said, 'How's the water?' and held his stomach 
in as he took his shirt off because he wanted the man to admire him. 
But he didn't reply, and perhaps he hadn't heard the question. 
 Out on the jetty Nick strode ahead again, in his blue Speedos, 
and opened his arms to meet the embrace of the view, the green and 
silver expanse of the pond, young willows and hawthorns all round it, 
and the Heath behind, glimpsed only as patches of sunlit hillside. Nick 
was pleased with his own body, and he preened in pardonable ways, 
stretching and flicking his feet up against his buttocks as he ran on 
the spot. Across the surface of the water moved the dotted heads of 
swimmers. There was something sociable and inquisitive about them. 
Out in the middle of the pond was the old wooden raft, the site of 
endless easy contacts, and the floating platform of some of Nick's 
steadiest fantasies. Half a dozen men were on it now, and soon he 
would be with them. He turned round and grinned to encourage Wani, 
who was dawdling by the curved downward rail of the ladder, and 
gazing at the distant heads of the swimmers as if wondering how 
they'd ever got diere. It seemed swimming was a rare omission from 
the list of things he did beautifully. There was a mild and interesting 
cruelty in bringing him here, so far out of his element. 'You've got to 
jump in,' he said. 'You'll find it torture going in slowly.' He smiled at 
Wani's tight black trunks, the smoothness and delicacy of his pale 
brown body, and the usual provocation of his penis, now held upright 
over his balls like a bold exclamation mark. Then he jumped in 
himself, to show how easy it was, and felt the shock of the cold water 
just below the thin warmth of the surface. He hung there, kicking back 
and nodding at Wani, who stood stooped like a skier, but with one 
hand pinching his nose; and then flung himself into the pond. When 
he came up he was gasping and sploshing about and for a second he 
had a look of undisguised fear. His black curls were half unwound by 
die water, and hung over his eyes and ears. Nick bobbed beside him 
and felt his grip on his upper arm; he let his legs wander and slide 
consolingly between Wani's, and with his free hand he swept his hair 
back, and that seemed to steady Wani, who swam off in a hasty, 
upright breaststroke, as if nothing had happened. 
 For a few minutes they pushed along in a rough circle, following 
the white cords strung between floating rings which marked the 
boundary of the swimming area. 
 Beyond it, Nick supposed, the water must lie too shallowly over 
the deep soft mud. Wani swam well enough, in fact, with head up and 
the facetious expression of someone forced to be a good sport; he 
stopped at one of the rings and clung to it for a rest, with a heavy-
breathing grin, and a shake of the head that seemed to say 'I can do 
this' as well as Til get you back for it'. Nick pulled up the goggles that 
were bobbing loosely round his throat, and duck-dived. Under the 
yellowish sparkle of the surface the water was muddy green, deepening 
into murky brown, a world of bottle-glass colours. He twisted round, 
deciding what trick to play on Wani. Bubbles, dazzles from the rippling 
surface, stirred-up specks of black leaves swung and fled around 
Wani's legs, which hung there, lazily chasseing, in a princely pretence 
that no underwater attack was expected. 
 And perhaps it was too childish, with Wani all at his mercy -
instead of a grab or a tickle he shot up bursting for breath and 
laughing in his face. He would have kissed him if a watchful old gent 
hadn't been cruising so very close by them. 
 When they set off again, Nick raced ahead and came back, 
triumphing over Wani, decorating his steady course with curlicues, 
and all the while looking out for who else was there. It was hard to tell 
from their sleeked heads in the water; but through the smear of the 
goggles each figure waiting on the jetty or clambering onto the raft had 
the gleam of a new possibility. Nick swam close to the raft once, and 
kicked round it on his back, while he and a couple who were standing 
on it wondered if they knew each other. 
 After an almost complete turn of the pond Wani had done 
enough, and they trod water for a minute and talked while Nick 
glanced to left and right with his naked eyes. He loved it here but he 
was disappointed, it was too early in the season perhaps, he matched 
the calm of today and the chill of the water against the swarming 
heatwave Sundays of last year, the raft mad with clutching and 
jumping, the toilets crowded and intent, the queens on the grass 
outside packed like a city in a dozen rivalrous districts. 
 There were shouts and splashes from the raft, where a new group 
had converged. 
 Nick felt the tug of curiosity and saw the chance to show Wani off 
and to show off to him, which was a lovely double vanity. Wani 
shivered and Nick said, 'You need to keep moving,' and kicked away 
towards the middle of the pond. A couple of dark men in black trunks 
were standing up, clumsily repelling a big blond muscle-queen who 
was trying to climb onto the stiffly lurching deck. Two other men who 
were crouching on the edge fell in, they half threw themselves in, like 
kids, and then scrambled back to join the assault. Thirty seconds of 
struggle followed, which some took more seriously than others, or with 
more thought for how they looked. Nick followed it all with smiling 
intensity, looking for his place in it. 
 Now there was a kind of truce, and everyone got back on board, 
so that when Nick cruised past he had a view of dangling legs, pinched 
dicks at funny angles, streaked hair and glistening skin, a floating 
tableau of men against the sky. 
 Sex made them half conscious, half forgetful of the picture they 
made; they were sportsmen resting in stunned camaraderie, but some 
of them wriggled and held hands and breathed lustfully in each other's 
faces. They kicked their feet in the water, indolent but purposeful. One 
of them who was standing behind leant forward, out of the sky and the 
trees, and Nick reached him a hand and shot up and hopped out 
streaming as two queens plumped apart to make room for him. He 
stood breathing and grinning in a loose but curious embrace with the 
men in the middle. He had a sense of something fleeting and 
harmonic, longed for and repeated - it was the circling trees, perhaps, 
and the silver water, the embrace of a solitary childhood, and the need 
to be pulled up into a waiting circle of men. 
 'Don't I see you at Bang last week?' the man beside him said, 
who had put a steadying hand on Nick's shoulder and left it there. 
 'I think not,' said Nick, who in fact had never been there. But he 
carried some memory-print of this man, some unplaced excitement. It 
took him a moment to realize that he used to see him at the Y, last 
year perhaps, in the showers there; and a moment more to confirm 
that as Nick had grown slowly and unseriously heavier, the Spaniard, 
if that's what he was, black-haired and lean, with large rosy nipples, 
had grown perceptibly thinner, into an eerily beautiful, etched-out 
version of himself. He leant lighdy on Nick now, and seemed almost to 
shrug off this undeniable fact, or perhaps to challenge him to see it, 
but not himself to allude to it in any way, unless by a lingering, fearful 
glance. Nick twisted casually away from him, and what came back 
gleaming out of the blur of memory was his round bottom and the tiny 
black curls just showing when he bent over: an image which also 
reminded him of Wani. He scanned the water blandly, and thought 
that perhaps he had gone in - just then the fun began again, the 
Spaniard abruptly dive-bombed, everyone shouted, and the raft itself 
groaned and creaked. Nick hopped around, laughing and shouting 
something himself into the unavoidable drench after drench as people 
jumped in. And there, in die wallow, was Wani's face, almost tearful 
with concentration as he tried to avoid the reckless arms and legs of 
the other men and find a moment to clamber out. 
 'Hello, darling!' said Nick, and went down on one knee to help 
him heave himself up. Wani didn't answer and didn't smile. 
 A few minutes later it was almost calm again. They were sitting 
there beside a man of fifty with thick grey chest hair and a restlessly 
sociable manner. His much younger friend, a Malaysian perhaps, was 
swimming some way from the raft, cruising other men outrageously, 
and doing clever duck-dives which made his trunks come off. 'Oh, he 
gives me some trouble, that one,' the man said. 'Look at him.' Wani 
smiled politely and turned to Nick; he wasn't used to meeting people 
like this, in the near-naked free-for-all of a public place. 'Don't get me 
wrong, though - it's all good fun.' The man waved cheerfully as if the 
boy was paying him even the faintest attention, and said, 'He's devoted 
to me, you know. I don't know why, but he is.' 
 'What's his name, then?' said a rough-voiced man, who was 
squatting behind them. 
 'He's called Andy.' 
 Andy, yeah?' said the man. 'Here, Andy,' he shouted, getting to 
his feet, 'show us your arse!' 
 'He will!' said his old protector. 'He will!' 
 The raft shook and on the other side of them a sleekly muscly 
man twisted up out of the water and landed with a promising thump 
on the boards. Nick saw Wani glance across at him from under his 
long lashes, as if assessing a new kind of problem or possibility; Nick 
himself had seen him here last year. He was balding and dark eyed, 
round faced, with a nice long nose and the lazy but focused expression 
of a man who thinks of nothing but sex. Nick remembered his idling 
gaze, the huge dark pupils that seemed to fill his eyes, and the curving 
weight of him in his black trunks. His stomach was a smooth curve 
outwards as he sat, and it seemed his destiny to be fat, but for now the 
fat was held in easy balance with the muscle. 
 Wani was sitting with his knees drawn up, his hair swept back in 
shiny waves but bunching and tightening again as it dried. He had got 
back some of his social poise, and with it an oblique deprecating 
manner, as though afraid he might be recognized or fancied. The older 
man talked across him to Nick. 'He's getting so particular,' he said. 
'Aha…' said Nick. 
 'KY not good enough any more, apparendy. We have to have 
some other substance called Melisma. Then Melisma's not good 
enough, apparendy, either. We're moving on to Crest. But you have to 
be careful, don't you, with these awful rubber johnnies. I never 
thought the day would come… What do you use?' 
 'Should keep him nice and clean, anyway,' said the rough-voiced 
man, who was clearly taking quite an interest in Andy. 'Crest's a kind 
of toothpaste, mate,' and shortly afterwards he dived in and swam 
powerfully in his direction. 'I'm Leslie, by the way,' said the older man. 
Wani turned his head and nodded. 'Hi. 
 Antoine.' 
 'Now where would you be from, I wonder?' 
 'I'm Lebanese,' said Wani, with a quick dry smile, in his driest 
English accent. 
 Nick watched his aquiline profile and smiled mischievously. He 
liked to see another man acknowledge Wani's glamour, it gave him a 
quick jealous shot of the passion he had felt for him since Oxford, 
which was lust enlarged and diffused by mystery. Now he was looking 
down again, his extraordinary eyelashes lowered. 
 Nick remembered him sometimes, after a class, or after dinner on 
a rarer night when he was unclaimed by his other worlds, coming back 
to the room of some poor student, with its shelf of paperbacks and a 
Dylan poster, and talking a bit more about Culture and Anarchy or 
North and South, swapping notes over Nescafe, and making a sweedy 
respectful attempt to show that he shared the concerns of these other 
boys, and like visiting royalty was quite unconscious of their 
clumsiness and deference. Wani, who could really only bear fresh 
coffee, with a little jug of hot milk on the side. Some of the snobbier 
people in college, like Polly Tompkins, mocked his fanciness and said 
he was only the son of a grocer, an immigrant orange-and-lemon 
seller, 'a Levantine cockney tart' was Polly's phrase - he was a cute 
litde Lebanese boy who'd been sent to Harrow and turned into a 
drawling English gendeman. Some of them thought he must have been 
turned into a poof as well, on no stronger grounds than his tight 
trousers and his bewildering good looks. 'So what do you do?' said 
Leslie. 'I've got my own film-production company,' Wani said. 
 'Oh…' said Leslie, crushed and intrigued at once. And then, in a 
rather roundabout response, 'Did you see A Room with a ViettP. I 
wonder what you thought of that, if you're in the film world.' 
 'I didn't, I'm afraid,' said Wani, with another tiny but chilling 
smile. 
 'Didn't I see you in the Volunteer last week?' Leslie said after a 
bit - at which Wani looked quite blank, but the question was aimed at 
the dark-eyed man, who all this time had been lying back on his 
elbow, with one knee raised and his tackle slumped unignorably 
towards them. It was difficult to tell if his vague smile was a reaction to 
their conversation, or even if he was looking at them. 
 His eyes seemed to work on some scene of imminent gratification, 
unfolding on a screen that hung between himself and the afternoon. 
There was something confidently patient about him, no lecherous 
effort or rush. But when he was spoken to it was as if they'd already 
been talking, and there was an understanding between them. Nick 
gazed at him, feeling he allowed and absorbed gazes, and at the 
glinting water beyond, with a twinge of sadness that when they 
stopped talking they would have to leave the litde sun-struck oblong of 
the raft and swim back to the solid world. Wani was looking at the 
man again too, but also at the waiting ladder of the jetty, with the 
flicker of someone calculating his escape. When they were getting dried 
and dressed in the compound Wani nodded and said, 'There's our 
friend Ricky again.' Nick looked over his shoulder and saw the sexy 
man emerging round the fence of the nudist yard and pulling 
carelessly at the draw-string of his trunks. 'Oh, yes. I didn't know he 
was called Ricky,' Nick said. 
 'Well, he looks like a Ricky,' said Wani, while getting out of his 
trunks sitting down and wrapped in a towel. 'Have you got an erection 
or something?' said Nick. 
 'Don't be puerile,' Wani said. He gave Nick a look that was part 
challenge and part broody supplication. 'Why don't you ask him if he'd 
like to come home with us?' 
 'What, "Ricky"?' 
 'Isn't that what goes on at this sort of place? I didn't imagine we'd 
come here for the exercise.' 
 Nick sniggered. 'You don't have to go mad,' he said, 'the first time 
I take you out.' 
 Wani coloured a little but he held his gaze. 'It could be a lot of 
fun,' he said. 'I should have thought. He's very common.' 
 Nick glanced round again at Ricky, who was loitering amiably by 
the path to the toilets, and loitered too of course in his memory, as 
unexplored potential. At the same time he felt a litde clutch of warning. 
Wani didn't know what he might be getting them into, and nor did 
Nick. When he looked back Wani was standing up in his underpants 
and tugging on his jeans. 'I'm sure it could be,' Nick said drily. At 
which Wani, with a twitch of his eyebrows and a sour compression of 
his lips, seemed to shrug the thing off. He took his watch from his 
pocket and put it on. 
 'If you don't ask him soon,' he said, 'we won't have time. I'm 
sorry, I thought you liked him.' 
 'Yes, he's hot,' said Nick, and found he was describing himself, in 
his unexpected anxiety. He hated to see Wani's beautiful mouth curl 
like that, and to feel his disdain, so amusing and exciting when applied 
to others, fall on him. He wanted only love, and today perhaps a kind 
of obedience, from Wani, who knew that the local tactics of argument 
and persuasion confused and upset him. 
 'All right, I'll go and get him,' he said, pretending that for him as 
well to ask was naturally to get, and knowing that he could never allow 
Wani to ask him himself. 'I mean I know he's not one of your nig-nogs.' 
 'Oh, fuck off,' Nick said, and marched away, in his jeans, but still 
shirdess, towards the toilet. He felt the disadvantage of the clothed 
among the naked; and the floor of the lavatory, when he entered it, 
was unpleasantly wet under his bare feet. The door of one of the two 
cubicles was shut, and at the raised tin trough of the urinal the man 
was standing, his big sleek back and arse to the room, but turning his 
head, in his odd expressionless way, to see who had come in. And that 
look, and the smell of the place, piss and disinfectant, the atmosphere 
of permission, the rules all changed by keen but furtive consent, 
gripped Nick and melted him. He went over and stood beside the man 
and a few seconds later the spray from the excited fizz of the flush was 
coldly tickling the tips of dieir two erections. 
 Nick slid his foreskin slowly backwards and forwards and gazed 
at the other man's blunt-headed shaft. Then he looked into his eyes, 
and it was like when they had chatted on the raft, totally expected, the 
reason they were here, as commonplace as it was deep. He seemed to 
swim in tJiat dark gaze, with little flickers of conjecture. The man 
tilted his head towards the open cubicle, so that Nick wondered if he 
«raid do that, quickly or partially, before 'getting' him, or trying to get 
him, to come home with them, but there was the IMS of the bolt, the 
other door opened halfway and little Andy, the Malaysian handful, 
slipped out, and crossed the loom to wash his hands. In the mirror 
Nick saw the mischief in his eyes fade into blankness. Then as if by 
magic the flush sounded, the door opened wide, and a grey-haired 
man, who was not his friend Leslie and not his rough-voiced admirer 
either, emerged and made off with a preoccupied look. 
 Now they were alone, and Nick felt there was something almost 
romantic in their patience, and in the man's delayed grab at his penis, 
and his own half embrace of the man's waist, his hand between his 
buttocks. The man was breathing in his face and Nick muttered, 
'Wait… wait… what's your name?' 
 'Ricky,' said the man, and tried to kiss him again. 
 Nick giggled as he pulled back his head. 'I just wondered if you 
wanted to come home with me and my friend? You know, have a bit of 
fun 'Well…' Ricky clearly thought it was a lot of bother when he had 
him here already. 'How far is it?' 
 'Only… Kensington!' 
 'Kensington? Fuck - I don't know, mate.' And he pressed against 
Nick with another impatient nod at the waiting lockup. Nick hugged 
him clumsily, and grunted at how much he would like to have him 
right here; but it would be a scandal with Wani waiting round the 
corner. He said, 'We've got a fantastic car.' - 'Yeah?' said Ricky. 'Which 
is he, anyway, your friend? Sort of dark curly hair?' 
 He gently pinched and twisted Nick's nipple, and Nick gasped as 
he said, 'You saw him Ricky pondered and nodded and let Nick free 
himself. They took a moment to make themselves decent. 'He's a bit 
stuck-up, is he, that one? Butter wouldn't melt in his arse?' 
 'I wouldn't say that… He's a bit shy,' said Nick. 'We'll see about 
that, then,' said Ricky. As they went out Nick said, 'Can you do us a 
favour?' 
 'I bloody well hope so.' 
 Nick winced. 'Can you pretend you're married - or at least you've 
got a girlfriend Ricky shrugged and shook his head. 'I have got a 
girlfriend.' 
 'Have you?' Nick stopped for a second with his chin tucked in, 
while Ricky stared at him and then winked. 'Quick on the uptake, 
aren't I?' 
 Nick tutted and blushed. 'I must say you're fucking quick,' he 
said, almost in Ricky's voice. 
 Outside on the path Wani hurried ahead with the preoccupied 
look of a famous person, while Nick and Ricky followed behind. Ricky 
clearly never hurried, he was his own lazy happening. He kept his eyes 
on the pretty back view of Wani, which made Nick proud and also 
apprehensive. He wondered just what they were going to do, and 
couldn't distinguish the nerves that are a part of excitement from a 
kind of resentment. Wani's nerves showed in his cool dissociating 
manner. 
 They went along beside the wide grass bank, and one of the 
sunbathing men called out something to Ricky, who gave him a nod 
and a dirty smile back - Nick smiled too, as if he knew what was going 
on. 
 In the lane above, Wani, who was playing with the car keys, 
flipping the leather fob about, said, 'You can drive, Nick,' and threw 
them over to him. It was typical of Wani to dress up a command as a 
treat. Nick had often been the passenger in WHO 6, but he had only 
driven it once before, by himself, a short hop from the river back to 
Kensington that became a whole glittering evening of darting about, 
the Brompton Road, Queen's Gate, along by the Park, round and 
round, and with the curious feeling (with the roof down and the 
coldish air blustering in) of passing for Wani, of being WHO, that 
glamorous enigma. All of which rather withered as he slid back into 
the driving seat. The car was parked in close to the rustic fence, under 
the lime trees, and their sticky exudations had already stippled the 
windscreen. He held down the button to retract the roof and watched 
in the mirror as it lifted and folded away behind him and sunlight 
through the leaves fell in glancingly on the dials and knobs and amber 
walnut. 
 The other two stood waiting for him to pull out, but not talking. 
Then Wani gestured Ricky into the back, where he sat with his knees 
wide apart, since there was very little legroom. 'You all right there?' 
said Nick, looking over at the squashed contour of his packet and 
feeling oddly apologetic about both the splendour and the 
inconvenience of the car. 
 'I'm all right,' said Ricky, as if he was driven about like this every 
day. 
 They started on the steep hill towards Highgate and Nick was 
amazed all over again by the power leaping up under the ball of his 
foot. They seemed to wolf up the lane, in four thoughtless growls. He 
caught Ricky's eye in the mirror and said, 'So what time's your 
girlfriend getting back?' 
 Ricky said, 'She won't be back till really late, actually,' more 
clearly than when he told the truth, and then added, 'She's gone round 
to see her Uncle Nigel,' with a tolerant cluck. This bit of business acted 
visibly on Wani, who cleared his throat and half-turned in his seat to 
say, 'That's good.' The absurdity of the situation, something quite 
uncomfortable, tied a sudden knot in Nick, and at the top of the lane, 
instead of turning right down the hill towards town he turned the other 
way and climbed again towards Highgate village. He probably didn't 
need to explain, since as far as Wani was concerned they could have 
been in Lincolnshire, and Ricky would sit there with his half-smile of 
anticipation wherever they went, but he said, 'There's something I 
want to have a quick look at.' At the top he made an abrupt left into 
the long shady row that he knew must be The Grove. He was fairly 
sure he'd never been here before, it was something he'd imagined 
doing, a piece of research, historical, emotional… but as he peered 
through the line of trees at the beautiful old brick houses behind high 
railings, the house where Coleridge had lived and died, and then, as 
they crept along, bigger Georgian houses with flights of steps and 
carriage yards, he had the ghosdy impression that he had been here, 
had been brought here on some unbeatable evening for some 
irrecoverable event. 'This is where Coleridge lived,' he said, with a glow 
of piety intended to stir Wani too, and then protracted to defy his 
evident lack of interest. 'OK,'said Wani. 
 'I just want to see where the Feddens used to live. Some old 
friends of mine,' he explained to Ricky. 'I know it was number thirty-
eight 'This is sixteen,' said Wani. 
 It was one of the Feddens' sentimental routines to refer to their 
'Highgate days', and Gerald would evoke the house where they had 
first lived in a tone of nostalgia and self-ridicule, as if remembering 
student digs. Rachel usually said it was 'a darling house', it was where 
she had raised her children, and a snapshot of Toby and Catherine, 
aged ten and eight, sitting on the front steps, remained in a silver 
frame on her dressing table. To Nick the place had an obscure proxy 
romance, as the first home of his second family. When they got to it 
there was a skip outside piled high with splintered timber, and a blue 
Portaloo in the front garden. 
 'Hm,' said Wani. 'OK…' And he turned and gave Ricky an 
encouraging glance, in case he was getting bored. 'Not much left.' 
 The house was having a restoration so thorough it looked like 
demolition. The roof was like another house, made of scaffolding and 
sheeting. Most of the stucco had been hacked from the walls, and you 
could see the buried arcs of brick over each window. Through the front 
door you saw the garden at the back. 
 On the surviving white-stucco pier by the side gate there was a 
painted black finger and the words TRADESMEN'S KNTRANCE; 
underneath which, in red spray-paint, a wit had written CUNTS 
ENTRANCE, with an arrow pointing the other way. 
 'So much for that,' said Wani. A workman in overalls and a blue 
helmet came out through the aperture of the front door and stared at 
them like a janitor, trying to decide if they mattered. They were one of 
a thousand car-loads of easy wealth that roared and fluttered round 
London, knocking things down and flinging things up. They might be 
due for deference or contempt, or for the sour mixture of the two 
aroused by young money. Nick nodded affably at the man as he pulled 
away. 
 Mixed in with his unease, and the rueful lesson of the skip and 
the scaffolding, was a feeling that the builder knew just what they 
would be getting up to half an hour from now. 
 Though half an hour later they were creeping down Park Lane. 
The decisive plunge from the heights had slowed and stalled in the 
inexhaustible confusion of traffic and roadworks and construction. The 
wolfish bites had turned into thwarted snaps, the squeals of half a 
dozen near-collisions. Shuddering lorries squeezed them and dared 
them and flushed their reeking fumes through the coverless car, as 
four lanes funnelled into one outside the Hilton Hotel. Wani had 
whisked Nick up one night to the top-floor bar of the Hilton, perhaps 
not fully aware of its glassy vulgarity - it was a place his father liked to 
take guests to, and there was something touchingly studied in the 
paying for the cocktails and the lordly gaze out over the parks and the 
palace and the fur and diamonds of the London night. And now here 
they were, trapped, motionless, half asphyxiated on the roadway 
outside. Since Nick was driving he felt guilty and clumsy, as if it were 
his fault, as well as angry and slightly nauseous. Wani's face tightened 
and his lips were pursed with blame. Even Ricky was letting out 
puffing sighs. Wani reached over and put a hand on Ricky's thigh and 
Nick kept an eye on them in the mirror. He tried to make normal 
conversation, but Ricky had no views on any current topic, and was 
marvellously incurious about his new friends. He'd given up his job at 
a warehouse in favour of doing nothing, and now obviously he couldn't 
find a job even if he wanted to, with three and a quarter million out of 
work: he smiled at that. He didn't drink, he didn't smoke, and he never 
read books. 'Perhaps we'll put you in a film,' said Wani archly, and 
Ricky said, 'All right.' He seemed to have forgotten he had a girlfriend, 
until Nick asked another question about her. At last they rushed out 
into Hyde Park Corner, and jostled their way round into Knightsbridge. 
Wani said, 'What's your girlfriend s name?' 
 'Felicity,' said Ricky - which was written on the awning of Felicity 
Prior's flower shop just beside them. 'Yeah…' 
 Wani turned and said, in a painfully roguish tone, 'Felicity's a 
very lucky girl.' 
 'Yeah, she is, isn't she,' said Ricky. 
 When they reached Wani's place there was no one in the office, 
the boys had left, and they went straight upstairs to the flat, Ricky 
following Wani, and Nick coming close behind, unpleasandy jealous of 
the other two. It was like the tension of a first date, but with an extra 
player who was also a competitor and critic. He was squeamish at the 
thought of Wani's little predilections being exposed, and angry because 
he was the one who had been trusted with the secret of them. He 
didn't know if he could go through with that drama in the presence of 
Ricky, whom obviously, elsewhere, he would have loved to fuck. Or 
perhaps it wouldn't be like that, they would just fool about a bit. He 
went across the room and put the car keys down on the side table, and 
when he looked back Ricky and Wani were snogging, nothing had been 
said, there were sighs of consent, a moment's glitter of saliva before a 
shockingly tender second kiss. Nick gave a breathy laugh, and looked 
away, in the grip of a misery unfelt since childhood, and too fierce and 
shaming to be allowed to last. 
 He took down the leather-bound Poems and Plays of Addison and 
got out the hidden gram of coke - all that was left of last week's 
quarter-ounce. He knelt down by the glass coffee table to deal with it, 
polishing a clean spot. The new issue of Harpers was open at 
'Jennifers Diary', and he peered at the picture of Mr Antoine Ouradi 
and Miss Martine Ducros at the Duchess of Flintshire's May ball. 
 The pale inverted reflection of the two men kissing floated on the 
glass beside the photographed couple. If this was one of Wani's films - 
not the ones he wanted to make but the ones he liked to watch - Nick 
would have to join them in a moment. Sometimes there was an 
unaccountably boring scene where one man knelt and sucked the 
dicks of the other two in turn, or even tried to get them both in his 
mouth, and Nick could see Wani needing to do that. He chopped and 
drew out the fine white fuses of pleasure and watched Ricky tug at the 
buckle of his lover's belt. 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
Wani's new centre of operations was an 1830s house in Abingdon 
Road which he had had converted by Parkes Perrett Bozoglu. On die 
ground floor was the glinting open-plan Ogee office, and on the two 
upper floors a flat that was full of eclectic features, lime-wood 
pediments, coloured glass, surprising apertures; the Gothic bedroom 
had an Egyptian bathroom. The high tech of the office, PPB seemed to 
say, was less the logic of the future than another style in their 
postmodern repertoire. The house had been featured in The World of 
Interiors, whose art director had moved the furniture around, hung a 
large abstract painting in the dining room, and introduced a number of 
ceramic lamps like colossal gourds. Wani said this didn't matter at all. 
He himself seemed elegandy and equally at home in the reflecting glass 
and steel of the office and among the random cultural allusions of the 
flat. He knew very little about art and design, and his pleasure in the 
place was above all that of having had something expensive done for 
him. 
 Nick smiled to himself at the flat's pretensions, but inhabited it 
with his old wistful keenness, as he did the Feddens' house, as a 
fantasy of prosperity that he could share, and as the habitat of a man 
he was in love with. He felt he took to it well, the comfort and 
convenience, the discreet glimpsed world of things tfiat the rich had 
done for them. It was a system of minimized stress, of guaranteed 
flattery. Nick loved die huge understanding depth of the sofas and the 
peculiarly gilding light of the lamps that flanked the bathroom basin; 
he had never looked so well as he did when he shaved or cleaned his 
teeth there. Of course the house was vulgar, as almost everything 
postmodern was, but he found himself taking a surprising pleasure in 
it. The hallway, where the grey glass bells of the lampshades cast 
cloudy reflections in the ox-blood-marble walls, was like the lavatory of 
a restaurant, though evidendy of a very smart and fashionable one. 
 He slept there from time to time, in the fantasy of the canopied 
bed, with its coundess pillows. The ogee curve was repeated in the 
mirrors and pelmets and in the wardrobes, which looked like Gothick 
confessionals; but its grandest statement was in the canopy of the bed, 
made of two transecting ogees crowned by a boss like a huge wooden 
cabbage. It was as he lay beneath it, in uneasy post-coital vacancy, 
that the idea of calling Wani's outfit Ogee had come to him: it had a 
rightness to it, being both English and exotic, like so many things he 
loved. The ogee curve was pure expression, decorative not structural; a 
structure could be made from it, but it supported nothing more than a 
boss or the cross that topped an onion dome. Wani was distant after 
sex, as if assessing a slight to his dignity. He turned his head aside in 
thoughtful grievance. Nick looked for reassurance in remembering 
social triumphs he had had, clever things he had said. He expounded 
the ogee to an appreciative friend, who was briefly the Duchess, and 
then Catherine, and then a different lover from Wani. The double curve 
was Hogarth's 'line of beauty', the snakelike flicker of an instinct, of 
two compulsions held in one unfolding movement. He ran his hand 
down Wani's back. He didn't think Hogarth had illustrated this best 
example of it, the dip and swell - he had chosen harps and branches, 
bones rather than flesh. Really it was time for a new Analysis of 
Beauty. On the floor below was the 'library', a homage to Lutyens neo-
Georgian, with one black wall and pilastered bookcases. A glass bowl, 
some framed photos, and a model car took up space between the 
sparse clumps of books. There were big books on gardens and film 
stars, and some popular biographies, and books valued for being by 
people Wani knew, such as Ted Heath's Sailing and Nat Hanmer's 
'really rather good' first novel Pig-Sty. The room had a proper Georgian 
desk, and sofas, a huge staring television and a VCR with high-speed 
rewind. It was here, a few days after the Ricky episode, with its large 
tacit adjustment to Nick's understanding of things, that Wani had sat 
down, plucked the top off his Mont Blanc and made out a cheque to 
Nicholas Guest for &#1032;5,000. 
 Nick had looked at the cheque, drawn on Coutts amp; Co. in the 
Strand, with a mixture of suspicion and glee. He handled it lighdy, 
noncommittally, but he knew in a second or two that he was fiercely 
attached to it, and dreaded its being taken away from him. He said, 
'What on earth's this?' 
 'What…?' said Wani, as if he'd already forgotten it, but with a 
tremor of drama that he couldn't fully suppress. 'I'm just fed up with 
paying for you the whole fucking time.' 
 This was quite a witty remark, Nick could see, and he took the 
roughness of it as a covert tenderness. Still, there was a sense that he 
might have agreed to something, when he was drunk and high - diat 
he'd forgotten his side of a bargain. 'It 1 Iocs n't seem right,' he said, 
already seeing himself doing the paying, taking out Toby, or Nat 
perhaps, to Betty's or La Stupenda; having a credit card, therefore… 
'Yah, just don't tell anyone,' said Wani, pressing a video into die slot of 
the player, and picking up the remote (ontrol, with which he poked 
and chivvied the machine from a frowning distance. 'And don't just 
blue it all in a week on charlie.' 
 'Of course not,' said Nick - though the idea, and the hidden 
calculation he made, brought him up against the limits of 
&#1032;5,000 fairly quickly. If he was going to have to pay for himself, 
it wasn't nearly enough. Seen in that light, it was rather mean of Wani, 
it was a bit of a tease. 'I'll invest it,' he said. 
 'Do that,' said Wani. 'You can pay me back when you've made 
your first five grand profit.' At which Nick sniggered, out of sheer 
ignorance. It was all a bit tougher than he thought, if he was going to 
have to pay it back. But he didn't want to whinge. 
 'Well, thank you, my dear,' he said, folding the cheque 
reflectively, and going towards him to give him a kiss. Wani reached up 
his cheek, like a thanked but busy parent, and as Nick went out of the 
room Wani's favourite scene from Oversize Load was already on the 
screen, and the man in black was performing his painful experiment 
on the excited little blond. 
 'Oh, baby…!' Wani chuckled, but Nick knew he wasn't being 
called back. A couple of nights a week Wani spent uncomplainingly at 
his parents' house in Lowndes Square. Nick had been ironical about 
this at first, and piqued that he seemed to feel no regret at passing up 
a night they could have spent together. The family instinct was weak in 
him - or if it flared it involved some family other than his own. But he 
soon learned that to Wani it was as natural as sex and as irrefutable in 
its demands. On other nights of the week he might be in and out of the 
lavatories of smart restaurants with his wrap of coke, and roar home 
in WHO 6 for a punishing session of sexual make-believe; but on the 
family nights he went off to Knightsbridge in a mood of unquestioning 
compliance, almost of relief, to have dinner with his mother and father, 
any number of travelling relations, and, as a rule, his fiancee. Then 
Nick would go back jealously to Kensington Park Gardens and the 
hospitable Feddens, who all seemed to believe his story that on other 
nights he worked at his thesis on Wani's computer and used a 'put-
me-up' at his flat. He had never been invited to Lowndes Square, and 
in his mind the house, the ruthless figure of Bertrand Ouradi, the 
exotic family protocols, the enormous monosyllable of the very word 
Lowndes, all combined in an impression of forbidding substance. 
 On one of his nights alone, Nick went to Tannhduser and met 
Sam Zeman in the interval. They gossiped competitively about the 
edition being used, an awkward hybrid of the Paris and Dresden 
versions; Sam had the edge in relevant and precisely remembered fact. 
Nick said there was something he wanted to ask him, and they agreed 
to have lunch the following week. 'Come in early,' said Sam, 'and try 
out the new gym.' Kesslers had just rebuilt their City premises, with a 
steel and glass atrium and high-tech dealing-floors fitted in behind the 
old palazzo facade. 
 When the day came Nick turned up early at the bank and waited 
under a palm tree in the atrium. People hurried in, nodding to the 
commissionaire, who still wore a tailcoat and a top hat. On the 
exposed escalators the employees were carried up and down, looking 
both slavish and intensely important. Nick watched the motorbike 
messengers in their sweaty waterproofs and leathers, and heavy boots. 
 He felt abashed and agitated by closeness to so many people at 
work, in costume, in character, in the know. The building itself had 
the glitter of confidence, and made and retained an unending and 
authentic noise out of air vents, the hubbub of voices and the 
impersonal trundling of the escalators. Nick craned upwards for a 
glimpse of the regions where Lord Kessler himself might be conducting 
business, at that level surely a matter of mere blinks and ironies, a 
matter of telepathy. He knew that the old panelled boardroom had 
been retained, and that Lionel had hung some remarkable pictures 
there. In fact he had said that Nick should call in one day and see the 
Kandinsky… Sam took him through and down into a chlorine-smelling 
basement where the gym and lap-pool were. 'It's such a godsend, this 
place,' he said. Nick thought it was very small, and hardly compared 
with the Y; he saw that he came to a gym as a gay place, but that this 
one wasn't gay. An old man in a white jacket handed out towels and 
looked seasoned to the obscenities of the bankers. Nick did a 
perfunctory circuit, really just to oblige Sam, who was pedalling on a 
bike and filling in the Times crossword. He felt he didn't know Sam 
very well, and had a vague sensation of being patronized. Sam's 
friendly Oxford cleverness had hardened, he had a glint to him like the 
building itself, a watchful half-smile of secret knowledge. All around 
them other men were slamming weights up and down. Nick wasn't 
sure if they were working up their aggression or working it off. In the 
showers they shouted esoteric boasts from stall to stall. 
 Nick had seen their lunch taking place in a murmurous old City 
dining room with oak partitions and tailcoated waiters. The restaurant 
Sam took him to was so bright, noisy and enormous that he had to 
shout out the details of his &#1032;5,000. 
 When Sam understood he flinched backwards for a second to 
show he'd thought it was going to be something important. 'Well, what 
fun,' he said. 
 It was nearly all men in the restaurant. Nick was glad he'd worn 
his best suit and almost wished he'd worn a tie. There were sharp-eyed 
older men, looking faindy harassed by the speed and noise, their 
dignity threatened by the ferocious youngsters who already had their 
hands on a new kind of success. Some of the young men were 
beautiful and exciting; a sort of ruthless sex-drive was the way Nick 
imagined their sense ol their own power. Others were the uglies and 
misfits from the school playground who'd made money their best 
friend. It wasn't so much a public-school thing. As everyone had to 
shout there seemed to be one great rough syllable in the air, a sort of 
'wow' or yow'. Sam was somewhat aloof from them but he didn't 
disown them. He said, 'I saw a marvellous Frau ohne Schatten in 
Frankfurt.' 
 Ah yes… well, you know my feelings about Strauss,' said Nick. 
 Sam looked at him disappointedly. 'Oh, Strauss is good,' he said. 
'He's very good on women.' 
 'That wouldn't in itself put me off!' said Nick. 
 Sam chuckled at the point, but went on, 'The orchestral music's 
all about men and the operas are all about women. The only 
interesting male parts he wrote are both trouser-roles, Octavian, of 
course, and the Composer in Ariadne.' 
 'Yes, quite,' said Nick, slightly pressured. 'He's not universal. He's 
not like Wagner, who understood everything.' 
 'He's not like Wagner at all,' said Sam. 'But he's still rather a 
genius.' 
 They didn't get round to Nick's money till the end of lunch. 'It's 
just a little inheritance,' said Nick. 'I thought it might be fun to see 
what could be made of it.' 
 'Mm,' said Sam. 'Well, property's the thing now.' 
 'I wouldn't get much for five thousand,' said Nick. 
 Sam gave a single laugh. 'I'd buy shares in Eastaugh. They're 
developing half the City. Share price like the north wall of the Eiger.' 
 'Going up fast, you mean.' 
 'Or there's Fedray, of course.' 
 'What, Gerald's company?' Amazing performance last quarter, 
actually.' 
 Nick felt stirred but on balance uneasy at this idea. 'How does 
one go about it?' he said, with a gasp at his own silliness, but a certain 
recklessness too, after four glasses of Chablis. 'I wondered if you'd look 
after it for me.' 
 Sam put his napkin on the table and gestured to the waiter. 'OK!' 
he said brightly, to show it was a game, a bit of silliness of his own. 
'We'll go for maximum profits. We'll see how far we can go.' 
 Nick fumbled earnesdy for his wallet but Sam put the lunch on 
expenses. 
 'Important investor from out of town,' he said. He had Kesslers' 
own platinum MasterCard. Nick watched the procedure with a bead of 
anticipation in his eye. 
 Outside on the pavement, Sam said, 'All right, my dear, send me 
a cheque. I'm going this way,' as if Nick had made it clear he was going 
the other. Then diey shook hands, and as they did so Sam said, 'Shall 
we say three per cent commission,' so tliat they seemed to have 
solemnized the arrangement. Nick flushed and grinned because he'd 
never thought of that: he minded terribly. It was only later that it came 
to seem a good, optimistic thing, with die proper stamp of business to 
it. Wani was still 'building up his team' at Ogee, and Nick was silendy 
amazed by both his confidence and his lack of urgency. A woman 
called Melanie, dressed for a Dallas cocktail party, came in to do the 
typing, and artfully protracted her few bits of filing and phoning 
through the afternoon. Whenever her mother rang her she said things 
were 'hectic'. Wani had a wonderful Talkman, which was a portable 
phone he could take with him in the car or even into a restaurant, and 
Melanie was encouraged to call him on it if he was in a meeting and 
give him some figures. Then there were the boys, Howard and Simon, 
not actually a couple, but always referred to together, and acting 
together in the comfortable way of schoolboy best chums. Howard was 
very tall and square-jawed and Simon was short and owlish and 
pretended not to mind being fat. If anyone took them for lovers Simon 
shrieked with laughter and Howard explained tactfully that they were 
merely good friends. Nick liked nattering with them when he dropped 
into the office, and enjoyed their glancing hints that they both rather 
fancied him. 'Well, I swim and I work out a couple of times a week,' 
Nick would say, leaning back in his chair with the glow of shame that 
for him was still the cost of bragging; and Simon would say, 'Oh, I 
suppose I ought to try that.' They all carried on as if they'd never 
noticed Wani's beauty, and as if they took him entirely seriously. If his 
picture appeared in the social pages of Tatler or Harper's and Queen 
Melanie passed the magazine round like a validation of their whole 
enterprise. 
 Nick was confident that none of them knew he was sleeping with 
the boss, and with ten or more years of practice he could head off 
almost any train of talk that might end in a thought-provoking blush. 
Part of him longed for the scandalous acclaim, but Wani exacted total 
secrecy, and Nick enjoyed keeping secrets. He worked up his earlier 
adventures as a cover, and told Howard and Simon a different version 
of die Ricky incident, replacing Wani witJh a Frenchman he'd met at 
the Pond the previous summer. 'So was he handsome, this Ricky?' said 
Simon. 
 Handsomeness was neither here nor there with Ricky, it was his 
look of stupid certainty, the steady heat of him, the way you started in 
deep, as though the first kiss was an old kiss interrupted and picked 
up again at full intensity - Nick said, 'Oh, magnificent. Dark eyes, 
round face, nice big nose-' 
 'Mmm,' said Simon. 
 'Perhaps a trifle too punctually, though not yet quite lamentably, 
bald.' 
 There was a moment's thought before Simon said, 'That's one of 
your things, isn't it?' 
 'What…?' said Nick, with a vaguely wounded look. 'A trifle too… 
how did it go?' 
 'I can't remember what I said… "a trifle too punctually, though 
not yet quite lamentably, bald"?' 
 Howard sat back, with the nod of someone submitting to an easy 
old trick, and said, 'So did he have a. beard?' 
 Tar from it,' said Nick. 'No, no - he spoke, as to cheek and chin, 
of the joy of the matutinal steel.' 
 They all laughed contentedly. It was one of Nick's routines to slip 
these plums of periphrasis from Henry James's late works into 
unsuitable parts of his conversation, and the boys marvelled at them 
and tried feebly to remember them -really they just wanted Nick to say 
them, in his brisk but weighty way. 'So what's that from, then?' 
 'The baldness? It's from The Outcry, it's a novel by Henry James 
that no one's ever heard of This was taken philosophically by the boys, 
who hadn't really heard of any novels by Henry James. Nick felt he was 
prostituting the Master, but then there was an element of self-mockery 
in these turns of phrase - it was something he was looking at in his 
thesis. He was at the height of a youthful affair with his writer, in love 
with his rhythms, his ironies, and his idiosyncrasies, and loving his 
most idiosyncratic moments best of all. 
 'It sounds like Henry James called everyone beautiful and 
marvellous,' said Sam, a little sourly, 'from what you say.' 
 'Oh, beautiful, magnificent… wonderful. I suppose it's really more 
what the characters call each other, especially when they're being 
wicked. In the later books, you know, they do it more and more, when 
actually they're more and more ugly -in a moral sense.' 
 'Right…' said Simon. 'The worse they are the more they see 
beauty in each other.' 
 'Interesting,' said Howard drily. Nick cast a fond glance at his 
little audience. 'There's a mar- vellous bit in his play The High Bid, 
when a man says to the butler in a country house, "I mean, to whom 
do you beautifully belong"' 
 Simon grunted, and looked round to see if Melanie could hear. 
He said, 'So what was his knob like, then?… You know, Ricky?' 
 Well, it was certainly worth describing, and embellishing. Nick 
wondered for a moment how Henry would have got round it. If he had 
fingered so archly at beards and baldness, the fine paired saliences of 
his own appearance, what flirtings and flutterings might he not have 
performed to conjure up Ricky's solid eight inches? Nick said, 'Oh, it 
was… of a dimension,' and watched Simon work what excitement he 
could out of that. 
 So he prattled on, mixing up sex and scholarship, and enjoying 
his wanderings away from the strict truth. In fact that was really the 
fun of it. And it seemed to fit in with the air of fantasy in the Ogee 
office, the distant sense of an avoided issue. Nick couldn't quite have 
defined his own role there, and he only learned what it was when he 
was suddenly invited to Lowndes Square for Sunday lunch. He'd been 
dancing at Heaven till three the night before, and was still struggling 
with the rubber mask, the wobbly legs, the trill and glare of a beer and 
brandy hangover when Bertrand Ouradi grasped his hand very hard 
and said, 'Ah, so you're Antoine's aesthete.' 
 'That's me!' said Nick, returning the handshake as firmly as he 
could, and grinning in the hope that even an aesthete might be a good 
thing to be if it was sanctioned by his beloved son. 
 'Ha ha!' said Bertrand, and turned away along the chequered 
marble floor of the hall. 'Well, we need our aesthetes.' He stretched out 
his arms in a graceful shrug, and seemed to gesture at the shiny 
paintings and Empire torcheres as necessary trappings of his position. 
He had an aesthete of his own, he seemed to say, on a small retainer. 
Nick followed on, wincing at the high polish on everything. He had the 
feeling there was only one thing in the house he would ever want to 
see. 'I'll join you in a moment,' Bertrand said, with a tiny gesture of 
deterrence, as Nick found himself following him into the lavatory. 
 The dark little woman who'd opened the door led him dutifully 
upstairs, and he followed her instead, smiling and doomed. So Wani 
himself must have called him his aesthete, that was how he'd 
explained him to his parents… He was shown into the pink and gold 
confusion of a drawing room. Wani called out, 'Ah, Nick…' like an old 
man remembering, and came across to shake his hand. 
 'Now here's Martine, who's been longing to see you…' (Nick 
stopped by the sofa where she was sitting and shook her hand as well 
with an exaggerated bow) - 'and you haven't met my mother.' Nick was 
aware of himself advancing in the high mirror which hung over the 
fireplace, and at a slight tilt, so that the room seemed to climb into a 
luminous middle distance. He kept up a wide smile, in self-protection, 
and only caught his own eye for an unwise second. It was a dazzled 
smile, perhaps even the smile of someone about to make a sequence of 
witty remarks. Monique Ouradi said she had been to Mass at 
Westminster Cathedral, and smiled back, but seemed not quite ready 
yet for mere social communication. 'And this is my Uncle Emile, and 
my cousin, little Antoine,' said Wani, as two people came in 
unexpectedly behind him. Everything impinged on Nick, but he 
couldn't take it in. He shook hands with Uncle Emile, who said 
'Enchante' in a coughing sort of voice, and Nick said 'Enchante' back. 
Wani rested his hand on his little cousin's head, and the boy looked up 
at him adoringly before also shaking hands with Nick. Nick felt a tear 
rise to his eye at the thought of the child's utter innocence of 
hangovers. Nick had decided in the taxi that he would stick to water, 
but when Bertrand came in saying, 'Now, drinks!' he at once saw the 
point of a bloody Mary. Bertrand moved towards a drinks tray on a far 
table and at just that moment an old man in a black jacket hurried in 
with a salver and took control of the business. Nick gazed at them with 
the patient surmise of the hung-over, a sense of mysterious 
displacement and slow revelation. Bertrand could make a mere gesture 
towards an action which would at once be performed by someone else -
there was a signalled readiness and then a prompt, never-doubted 
relief! It explained everything. 
 Really it was best to prop oneself at a life-like angle in the corner 
of the sofa and let the family talk trail back and forth… At the tall front 
windows white net curtains rippled very gently into the room. Outside 
on the balcony there were two pointed trees in tubs, and beyond them 
the planes in the square, forest-height, filled the entire view. Nick's 
thoughts drifted out and perched there. 
 Litde Antoine had a remote-controlled toy car, which Wani was 
encouraging him to crash into the legs of the repro Louis Quinze tables 
and chairs. It was a bright-red Ferrari with a whiplike antenna. Nick 
crouched forward to watch it haring round, and made histrionic 
groans when it banged into the skirting board or got stuck under the 
bureau. He was pretending to enjoy the game, and trying to attach 
himself to it, but the two boys seemed oblivious of him, Wani almost 
snatching the controls now and then to cause a top-speed collision. 
Bertrand was standing talking to Uncle Emile, and shuffled obligingly 
out of the way a couple of times, with a certain hardening of 
expression. In the tilting mirror Nick saw them all, as if from a 
privileged angle, like actors on a set. 
 The parents were fascinating, Bertrand short and handsome as 
an old-fashioned film star, and Monique too, very smart and austere, 
with a black bob and a diamond brooch, evincing foreignness like a 
time-shift, into the chic of twenty years before. There was a subdued 
shine to Bertrand's dark suit, which was double-breasted, square-
shouldered, and worn with a crimson breast-pocket handkerchief; he 
seemed to resolve into a pattern of squares and lozenges, with his 
square jaw, tougher than Wani's, and the same long hawkish nose, all 
parts of the pattern. Along his full upper lip he wore a thin black 
moustache. The light, low-cut patent slippers he had on seemed to 
Nick an eastern note. Wani had several pairs himself, with ridged 
rubber soles, 'for walking on marble' as he explained. Bertrand's voice, 
strongly accented, casual but coercive, dominated the room. 
 Martine was sitting at the other end of Nick's sofa, in what felt 
like her place', adjacent to Wani's mother. They were speaking quiedy 
in French, in a kind of lisdess female conspiracy, while the men 
boomed and frowned and crashed cars. Nick smiled at them 
undemandingly. Martine in her long engagement must have become a 
fixture, a passive poor relation, who was waiting and waiting to turn 
into a millionairess. She seemed shy of speaking to Nick, for reasons 
he could only guess at. Wani's claim that she was longing to see him 
had been wishful social prompting - he had a habit of languidly 
implanting his wishes. 
 But Martine, in her mild unexpectant way, had always seemed to 
have her own mind. So it was a minute or two before she slid a dish of 
olives towards him on the low glass table and said, 'And how are you 
getting on?' 
 'Oh, fine!' said Nick, blinking and smirking. 'I'm feeling a bit 
delicate, actually' - and he waggled his glass. 'This is helping. It's a 
miracle how it does.' He thought what extraordinary things one said. 
 She was too delicate herself to take on the subject of his 
hangover. 'Work is all fine?' she said. 
 'Oh - yes… thank you. Well - I'm trying to finish my thesis this 
summer, and of course I'm very behind,' he said, as if she must be 
familiar with his weaknesses, they seemed to grin out of him as he sat 
there. 'I'm so terribly lazy and disorganized.' 
 'I hope not,' she said, as if he could only be joking. And what is it 
concerning, this thesis?' 
 'Oh… it's concerning - Henry James…' He'd developed a 
reluctance that was Jamesian in itself to say exacdy what its subject 
was. There was a lot to do with hidden sexuality, which struck him as 
better avoided. 
 'But Antoine says you are working with him too, at the Ogee?' 
 'Oh, I don't really do very much.' 
 'You are not writing a film? That is what he says.' 
 'Well, I'd like to. In a way, yes… We have a few ideas.' He smiled 
politely beyond her to take Wani's mother as well into the 
conversation. Since it was all he had, he said, Actually, I've always 
rather wanted to make a film of The Spoils ofPoynton…' Monique 
settled back with an appreciative nod at this, and Nick felt encouraged 
to go on, 'I think it Could be rather marvellous, don't you. You know 
Ezra Pound said it was just a novel about furniture, meaning to 
dismiss it of course, but that was really what made me like the sound 
of it!' 
 Monique sipped at her gin-and-tonic and looked at him with 
vague concern, and then, as if searching for the point, glanced about 
at the tables and chairs. Of course she had no idea what he was 
talking about. Martine said, 'So you want to make a. film about 
furniture?' 
 Monique said, raising her voice as the Ferrari tore past her 
ankles, 'We saw the latest film, which was so nice, of The Room with 
the View.' Ah yes,' said Nick. 
 'Mainly it took place in Italy, which we love so much, it was 
delightful.' 
 Martine slighdy surprised him by saying, 'I think it's so boring 
now, everything takes place in the past.' 
 'Oh… I see. You mean, all these costume dramas 'Costume 
dramas. All of this period stuff. Don't the English actors get fed up 
with it - they are all the time in evening dress.' 
 'It's true,' said Nick. 'Though actually everyone is in evening 
dress all the time these days, aren't they.' He was thinking really of 
Wani, who owned three dinner jackets and had gone to the Duchess's 
charity ball in white tie and tails. He saw he was under attack, since 
die Poynton project would naturally involve a lot of dressing up. 
 Monique Ouradi said, 'I'm sure my son will make a beautiful film, 
with your help' - so that Nick felt she was encouraging him in some 
larger sense, in the inscrutable way that mothers sometimes do. 
 'Yes, perhaps you don't know him all that well,' Martine agreed. 
'You will need to push and shove him.' 
 'I'll remember that,' said Nick with a laugh, and amazing 
arousing images of Wani in bed glowed in front of him, so that Martine 
was like a person in the beam of a slide projector, half exposed, half 
coloured over, and a little ridiculous. 
 The Ferrari smacked into Bertrand's slipper once again, and little 
Antoine made it rev and whine as it tried to climb over it, until 
Bertrand bent down and picked the toy up and held it like a furious 
insect in the air. Antoine came round from behind the sofa, dawdling 
as he caught the moment of pure fury on his uncle's face and then 
gasping with laughter as the glare curled into a pantomime snarl. 
'Enough Ferrari for today,' Bertrand said, and gave it back to the child 
with no fear of being disobeyed. Nick felt abruptly nervous at the 
thought of crossing Bertrand, and those same naked images of his son 
melted queasily away. 
 Wani said, 'You must be longing to see round the house.' 
 'Oh, yes,' said Nick, getting up with a flattered smile. He felt that 
Wani had almost overdone the coolness and dissimulation, he'd barely 
spoken to him, and even now, as he lifted Nick on a wave of secret 
intentions, his expression gave nothing away, not even the warmth 
that the family might have expected between two old college friends. 
 'Yes, take him round,' said Bertrand. 'Show him all the bloody 
pictures and bloody things we've got.' 
 'I'd love that,' said Nick, seeing the hidden advantage of the 
aesthete persona, even in a house where the good things had (he glare 
of reproductions. 
 'Will I go too?' said litde Antoine, who was clearly as fond ol his 
cousin's touch and smile as Nick was; but Emile crossly made him 
stay. 
 'We'll begin at the top,' Wani announced as they left the room 
and started upstairs two at a time. On the second flight he said 
quietly, 'You didn't say where you were last night.' 
 'Oh, I went to Heaven,' said Nick, with mild apprehension H 
telling an innocent truth. 
 'I wondered,' said Wani, without looking round. 'Did you luck 
anyone?' 
 'Of course I didn't fuck anyone. I was with Howard and Simon.' 
 'I suppose that follows,' said Wani, and then allowed Nick a liny 
smile. 'What did you do, then?' 
 'Well, you have been to a nightclub, darling,' said Nick in a voice 
where sarcasm almost wished itself away. 'You've been photographed 
in several with your fiancee. We danced and danced and drank and 
drank.' 
 'Mm. Did you take your shirt off?' 
 ' I think I'll leave that to your jealous imagination,' Nick said. 
 They went along die landing and into Wani's bedroom. Wani 
busded dirough, with a just perceptible air of granting a concession, of 
counting on Nick not to look too closely at what the room contained, 
and went into a white bathroom beyond. 
 Nick followed slowly. Everything in the bedroom interested him, it 
was dead and alive at once, group photographs, from Harrow, from 
Oxford, the Martyrs' Club in their pink coats, Toby and Roddy Shepton 
and the rest; and the books, the Arnold and the Arden Shakespeare 
and the cracked orange spines of the Penguin Middlemarch and Tom 
Jones, the familiar colours and lettering, the series and ideas of all 
that phase of their life, stranded and fading here as in a thousand 
outgrown bedrooms, never to be looked at again; and the young man's 
princely bed, almost a double; and the mirror, where Nick now timidly 
checked his own progress - he looked perfectly all right. The 
puzzlement of a hangover… the creeping hilarity of the new drink… He 
strolled on into the bathroom. 
 Wani had got his wallet out, and was crushing and chopping a 
generous spill of coke on the wide rim of the washbasin. 'A lot of funny 
old stuff in there,' he said. 
 'I know,' said Nick. 'It's a little early for that, isn't it?' It was a 
lovely slide they were on with the coke, but sometimes Wani was a bit 
serious, a bit premature with it. 'You looked as if you needed it.' 
 'Well, just a small line,' said Nick. He looked around this room as 
well, with tense insouciance. He didn't really want to go down to lunch 
in reckless unaccountable high spirits and make a different kind of 
fool of himself. But a line wasn't feasibly resisted. He loved the 
etiquette of the thing, the chopping with a credit card, the passing of 
the tighdy rolled note, the procedure courteous and dry, 'all done with 
money', as Wani said - it was part of the larger beguilement, and once 
it had begun it squeezed him with its charm and promise. Being 
careful not to nudge him as he worked, he hugged Wani lighdy from 
behind and slid a hand into his left trouser pocket. 'Oh fuck,' said 
Wani distantly. In about three seconds he was hard, and Nick too, 
pressing against him. Everything they 11 ul was clandestine, and 
therefore daring and therefore childlike, since it wasn't really daring at 
all. Nick didn't know how lung it could go on - he didn't dream of it 
stopping, but it was silly and degrading at twenty-three to be sneaking 
sex like this, like a pickpocket as Wani said. But then again, on a 
hungover morning, moronic with lust, he saw a beauty in the slyness 
of II. I here were several pound coins in the flannel depths of the 
pocket, and they tumbled round Nick's hand as he stroked W. iui's 
dick. 
 Wani drew the powder into two long lines. 'You'd better i lose the 
door,' he said. 
 Nick lingeringly disengaged himself. 'Yeah, we've only got a 
minute.' He pushed the door to and came forward to take the lolled 
&#1032;20 note. 
 'Turn the key,' said Wani. 'That little boy follows me everywhere.' 
 'Ah, who can blame him,' said Nick graciously. 
 Wani gave him a narrow look - he was often dissatisfied by 
praise. They stooped in turn and zipped up the powder, and then stood 
for a minute, sniffing and nodding, reading each other's faces for 
comparison and confirmation of the effect. Wani's features seemed to 
soften, there was a subde but involuntary smile that Nick loved to see 
at the moment of achievement and surrender. He grinned back at him, 
and reached out 10 stroke his neck, and with his other hand rubbed 
playfully at Wani's oblique erection. They were on to such a good thing. 
 I le said, 'This is fucking good stuff.' 
 'God yes,' said Wani. 'Ronnie always comes through.' 
 'I hope you haven't given me too much,' Nick said; though over 
the next thirty seconds, holding Wani to him and kissing him 
lusciously, he knew that everything had become possible, and that the 
long demanding lunch would be a waltz and that he would play with 
Bertrand the tycoon and charm them all. He sighed and pulled Wani's 
left arm up to look at his famous watch. 'We'd better go down,' he said. 
 'OK.' Wani stepped back, and quickly undid his trousers. 
 'Darling, they're waiting for us…' But Wani's look was so 
fathomlessly interesting to him, command and surrender on another 
deeper level, the raw needs of so aloof a man, the silly sense of 
privilege in their romantic secret - Nick knelt anyway, and turned him 
round in his hands, and pulled his pants, die loose old-fashioned 
drawers that Wani wore, down between his thighs. 
 On die way downstairs they met litde Antoine, who had been 
dying to look for them and was going into every room in a mime of 
happy exasperation. It had taken a couple of flushes to dispose of the 
rubber, and they had got out with thirty seconds to spare. The boy 
claimed them and then wanted to know what they were laughing 
about. 'I was showing Uncle Nick my old photographs,' Wani said. 
 'They were rather funny,' said Nick, pierced by the generous twist 
to his lie, and also, absurdly, by the missed opportunity of seeing the 
photos. 'Oh,' said little Antoine, perhaps with a similar regret. 
 'You'd better have a quick look in here,' Wani said, and pushed 
open the door of the room above the drawing room, which was his 
parents' bedroom. He swept a hand over the switches and all the lights 
came on, the curtains began to close automatically and 'Spring' from 
The Four Seasons was heard as if coming from a great distance. Little 
Antoine clearly loved this part, and asked to be allowed to do it all 
again whilst Nick glanced humorously around. Everything was 
luxurious and he feigned dismay at his own deep footprints in the 
carpet. The richness of the room was its mixture of shiny pomp, glazed 
swagged curtains, huge mirrors, onyx and glaring gilt, with older, 
rougher and Inner things, things perhaps they'd brought from Beirut, 
Persian rugs and fragments of Roman statuary. ()n top of a small chest 
of drawers there was a white marble head of Wani, presumably, done 
at about the same age as litde Antoine was now, the wider, plumper 
face of a child. It was charming and Nick thought if he could have 
anything in the house, any object, it would be that. Bertrand and 
Monique had separate dressing rooms - each of them, in its order and 
abundance, like a department of a shop. 'You'd better loo*c at this too,' 
Wani said, showing him a large yellow painting of Buckingham Palace 
that hung on the landing. 
 'It's a Zitt, I see,' said Nick, reading the signature dashed across 
the right-hand corner of the sky. 'He's rather buying into Zitt,' said 
Wani. 'Oh - well, it's absolutely ghasdy,' said Nick. 'Is it?' said Wani. 
'Well, try and break it to him gently.' 
 They went down into the dining room, with little Antoine going in 
before them, lolling his head from side to side and saying 'eb-solutely 
gharsdy over and over to himself. Wani caught him from behind and 
gave him an enjoyable strangle. 
 Nick was placed on Moniques right, beside little Antoine, with 
Uncle Emile opposite. Uncle Emile had the air of a less successful 
brother, baggy and gloomy rather than gleamingly triangular. But it 
turned out that in fact he was Moniques brother-in-law, on a visit of 
indefinite duration from Lyon, where he ran an ailing scrap-metal 
business. Nick took in this story and smiled along the table as if they 
were being told a sitnmeringly good joke; it was only Wani's tiny frown 
that made him suspect he might be looking too exhilarated by his tour 
of the house. It was the magic opposite, all this, of the jolted widess 
hangover state of half an hour earlier. All their secrets seemed to fuse 
and glow. Though for Wani himself, severely self-controlled, it seemed 
hardly worth having taken the drug. The litde old couple were bringing 
in elaborately fanned slices of melon and orange. It was clear that 
citrus fruits were treated with special acclaim in the house; here as in 
the drawing room there was a daringly stacked obelisk of oranges and 
lemons on a side-table. The effect was both humble and proprietorial. 
Another Zitt, of the Stock Exchange and the Mansion House, done in 
mauve, hung between the windows. 
 'I see you're admiring my husband's new Zitt,' said Monique, with 
a hint of mischief, as if she would value a second opinion. Ah yes…!' 
 'He's really an Impressionist painter, you know.' 
 'Mm, and almost, somehow, an Expressionist one, too,' said Nick. 
'He's extremely contemporary,' said Monique. 'He's a bold colourist,' 
said Nick. 'Very bold…' 
 'So, Nick,' said Bertrand, spreading his napkin, and steadying his 
swivelling array of knives on the glassy polish of the table top: 'how is 
our friend Gerald Fedden?' The 'our' might have referred to just the 
two of them, or to a friendship with the family, or to a vaguer sense 
that Gerald was on their side. 
 'Oh, he's absolutely fine,' said Nick. 'He's in great form. Wildly 
busy - as always…!' Bertrand's look was humorous but persistent, as if 
to show that they could be candid with each other; having ignored him 
for the first half-hour he was turning the beam of his confidence on 
him, with the instinct of a man who gets his way. 'You live in his 
house, no?' 
 'Yes, I do. I went to stay for a few weeks and I've ended up 
staying for nearly three years!' 
 Bertrand nodded and shrugged, as if this was quite a normal 
arrangement. Uncle Emile himself, perhaps, might turn out to be just 
such a visitor. 'I know where it is. We're invited to the concert, 
whatever it is, next week, which we'll be charmed to come to.' 
 'Oh, good,' said Nick. 'I think it should be quite fun. The pianist 
is a young star from Czechoslovakia.' 
 Bertrand frowned. 'I know they say he's a bloody good man.' 
 'No, actually… oh, Gerald, you mean - yes, absolutely!' 
 'He's going to go to the very top of the ladder. Or almost to the 
top. What's your opinion of that?' 
 'Oh - oh, I don't know,' said Nick. 'I don't know anything about 
politics.' 
 Bertrand twitched. 'I know you're the bloody aesthete Nick was 
often pressed for insider views on Gerald's character and prospects, 
and as a rule he was wafflingly loyal. Now lie said, 'I do know he's 
madly in love with the Prime Minister. But it's not quite clear if the 
passion is returned. She may be playing hard to get.' Little Antoine did 
the furtive double-take of a child who is not supposed to have heard 
something, and Bertrand's frown deepened over his melon. It occurred 
to Nick that he was in a household with a very serious view of sexual 
propriety. But it was Monique who said, Ah, they're all in love with her. 
She has blue eyes, and she hypnotizes them.' 
 Her own dark gaze went feelingly down the table to her husband, 
and then to her son. 'It's only a sort of courtly love, isn't it,' said Nick. 
'Yah…' said Wani with a nod and a short laugh. 'You've met the lady, I 
imagine,' Bertrand said. 
 'I never have,' said Nick, humbly but cheerfully. 
 Bertrand made a pinched plump expression with his lips and 
stared into an imaginary distance for a moment before saying, 'You 
know, of course, she's a good friend of mine.' 
 'Oh, yes, Wani told me you knew her.' 
 'Of course, she is a great figure of the age. But she is a very kind 
woman too.' 
 He had the mawkish look of a brute who praises the kindness of 
another brute. 
 'She has always been very kind to me, hasn't she, my love? And 
of course I intend to return the compliment.' 
 'Aha…' 
 'I mean in a practical way, in a financial way. I saw her the other 
day, and…' he waved his left hand impatiendy to show he wouldn't be 
going into what had been said; but then went on, with weird candour, 
'I will make a significant donation to the party funds, and… who 
knows what then.' He stabbed and swallowed a slice of orange. 'I 
believe you have to pay back, my friend, if you have been given help' - 
and he stabbed the air with his empty fork. 
 'Oh, quite,' said Nick. 'No, I'm sure you do.' He felt he had 
inadvertently become the focus of some keen resentment of Bertrand's. 
 'You won't hear any complaints about the lady in this house.' 
 'Well, nor in mine, I assure you!' 
 Nick glanced around at the submissive faces of the others, and 
thought that actually, at Kensington Park Gardens, the worship of 'the 
lady, the state of mesmerized conjecture into which she threw Gerald, 
was offset at least by Catherine's monologues about homeless people 
and Rachel's wry allusions to 'the other woman' in her husband's life. 
 'So he's on the up-and-up, our friend Gerald,' Bertrand said more 
equably. 
 'What's his role actually?' 
 'He's a minister in the Home Office,' Nick said. 
 'That's good. He did that bloody quickly.' 
 'Well, he's ambitious. And he has the… the lady's eye.' 
 'I'll have a chat with him when I come to the house. I've met him, 
of course, but you can introduce us again.' 
 'I'd be happy to,' said Nick; 'by all means.' The black-jacketed 
man removed the plates, and just then Nick felt the steady power of 
the coke begin to fade, it was something else taken away, the elation 
grew patchy and dubious. In four or live minutes it would yield to a 
flatness bleaker than the one it had replaced. 
 However, the wine was served soon after, so (here was an 
amusing sense of relief and dependency. Bertrand himself, Nick noted, 
drank only Malvern water. 
 Nick tried for a while to talk to Emile about scrap metal, which 
tested his Cornelian French to the limits; but Bertrand, who had been 
looking on with an insincere smile and a palpable sense of neglect, 
broke in, 'Nick, Nick, I don't know what you two young men are getting 
up to, I don't like to ask loo many questions…' 
 'Oh…' 
 'But I hope it's soon going to start bringing in some money.' 
 'It will, Papa,' said Wani quickly, while Nick blushed in horror at 
the chasm he'd just hopped over, and said, 'I'm the aesthete, 
remember! I don't know about the money vide of things.' He tried to 
smile out through his blush, but he saw that Bertrand's little 
challenges were designed to show him up in a very passive light. 
Bertrand said, 'You're the writing man-' which again was something 
allowed for, an item in a budget, but under scrutiny and probably 
dispensable. 
 Nick felt writing men were important, and though he had nothing 
to show for it as yet he said again, 'That's me. ' He icali/. cd belatedly, 
and rather sickeningly, that he would have nprovise, to answer to 
Wani's advantage, to give body to what his father must have thought 
were merely fantasies. 'You know I want to start this magazine, Papa,' 
Wani said. 
 'Ah - well,' Bertrand said, with a puff. 'Yes, a magazine can he 
good. But there is a whole world of difference, my son, i mining a 
magazine than having your bloody face in a magazine!' 
 'It wouldn't be like that,' Wani said, somehow both crossly and 
courteously. All right, but then probably it won't sell.' 
 'It's going to be an art magazine - very high quality photography - 
very high quality printing and paper - all extraordinary exotic things, 
buildings, weird Indian sculptures.' He searched mentally through the 
list Nick had made for him. 
 'Miniatures. Everything.' Nick felt that even with his hangover he 
could have made this speech better himself, but there was something 
touching and revealing in how Wani made his pitch. 'And who do you 
suppose is going to want to buy that?' Wani shrugged and spread his 
hands. 'It will be beautiful.' 
 Nick put in the forgotten line. 'People will want to collect the 
magazine, just as they would want to collect the things that are 
pictured in it.' 
 Bertrand took a moment or two to see whether this was nonsense 
or not. Then he said, All this bloody top-quality stuff sounds like a lot 
of money. So you have to charge ten pounds, fifteen pounds for your 
magazine.' He took an irritable swig from his glass of water. 
 Wani said, 'Top-quality advertising. You know, Gucci, Carder… 
Mercedes? reaching for names far more lustrous than Watteau or 
Borromini. 'Luxury goods are what people want these days. That's 
where the money is.' 
 'So you've got a name for the bloody thing.' 
 'Yah, we're calling it Ogee, like the company,' Wani said, very 
straightforwardly. 
 Bertrand pursed his plump lips. 'I don't get it, what is it…? "Oh 
Gee!",' is that it?' he said, bad-tempered but pleased to have made a 
joke. 'You'll have to tell me again because no one's ever heard of this 
bloody "ogee".' 
 'I thought he was saying "Orgy",' said Martine. 'Orgy?!' said 
Bertrand. 
 Wani looked across the table, and since this unheard-of name 
had originally been his idea Nick said, 'You know, it's a double curve, 
such as you see in a window or a dome.' He made the shape of half an 
hourglass with his hands raised in the air, just as Monique, in one of 
her occasional collusive gestures, did the same and smiled at him as if 
salaaming. 'It goes first one way, and then the other,' she said. 
 'Exactly. It originates in… well, in the Middle East, in fact, and 
then you see it in English architecture from about the fourteenth 
century onwards. It's like Hogarth's line of beauty,' Nick said, with a 
mounting sense of fatuity, 'except that there are two of them, of 
course… I suppose the line of beauty's a sort of animating principle, 
isn't it…' He looked around and swooped his hand suggestively in the 
air. It wasn't perhaps the animating principle here. 
 Bertrand set down his knife and fork, and gave a puncturing 
smile. He seemed to savour his irony in advance, as well as the 
uncertainty, the polite smiles of anticipation, on the faces of the 
others. He said, 'You know, um… Nick, I came to this country, twenty 
years ago nearly, 1967, not a bloody good time in Lebanon 
incidentally, just to see what the chances were in your famous 
swinging London. So I look around, you know the big thing then is the 
supermarkets are starting up, you know, self-service, help-yourself - 
you're used to it, you probably go to one every bloody other day: but 
then…!' 
 Nick simpered obediently at the notion of how accustomed he 
was. He wasn't sure if the Ogee talk was over, or being treated to some 
large cautionary digression. 
 He said coolly, 'No, I can see what a… what a revolution there's 
been.' 
 Like other egotists Bertrand cast only a momentary, doubting 
glance at the possibility of irony aimed at himself, and stamped on it 
anyway. 'Of course it is! It's a bloody revolution.' He turned to gesture 
the old man to pour more wine for the others, and watched with an air 
of practised forbearance as the burgundy purled into the cut-glass 
goblets. 'You know, I had a fruit shop, up in Finchley, to start off with.' 
He waved his other arm fondly at that distant place and time. 'Bought 
it up, flew in the fresh citrus, which was our own product by the way, 
we grew all that, we didn't have to buy it off bloody nobody. Lebanon, a 
great place for growing fruit. You know, all that's come out of Lebanon 
in the last twenty years? Fruit and brains, fruit and talent. No one with 
any brains or any talent wants to stay in the bloody place.' 
 'Mm, the civil war, you mean.' He'd meant to mug up a bit on the 
past twenty years of Lebanese history, but Wani grew pained and 
evasive when he mentioned it, and now here it came. He didn't want to 
concur in his host's harsh judgement on his own country, it was itself 
a bit of a minefield. 
 Monique said, 'Our house was knocked down, you know, by a 
bomb,' as though not expecting to be heard. 
 'Oh, how terrible,' said Nick gratefully, since it was another voice 
in the room. 'Yes,' she said, 'it was very terrible.' 
 'As Antoine's mother says,' said Bertrand, 'our family house was 
virtually destroyed.' 
 'Was it an old house?' Nick asked her. 
 'Yes, it was quite old. Not as old as this, of course' - and she gave 
a little shiver, as if Lowndes Square dated from the Middle Ages. 'We 
have photographs, many…' 
 'Oh, I'd love to see them,' said Nick, 'I'm so interested in that kind 
of thing.' 
 Anyway,' said Bertrand, '1969 I open the first Mira Mart, up in 
Finchley, up in Finchley, it's still there today, you can go and see it 
any time. You know what the secret of it is?' 
 'Um…' 
 'That's what I saw, that's what you got in London, back then - 
twenty years ago. 
 You got the supermarkets and you got the old local shops, the 
corner shops going back hundreds of years. So what do I do, I put the 
two bloody things together, supermarket and corner shop, and I make 
the mini-mart - all the range of stuff you get in Tcsco or whatever the 
bloody place, but still with the local feeling, corner-shop feeling.' He 
held up his glass and drank as if to his own ingenuity. 
 And you know the other thing, of course?' 
 'Oh!-urn…' 
 'The hours.' 
 'The hours, yes…' 
 'Open early and close up late, get people before work and get 
people after work, not just the dear bloody housewifes going out for a 
packet of ciggies and a chit-chat.' 
 Nick wasn't sure if this was Bertrand's special tone for talking to 
an idiot or if its simplicity reflected his own vision of affairs. He said, 
critically, 'Some of them aren't like that, though, are they? The one in 
Notting Hill, for instance, that we always go to. It's quite grand' - and 
he shrugged in dulled respect. 
 'Well, now you're talking about the Food Halls! It's two different 
bloody things: the Mira Marts and the Mira Food Halls… The latter, the 
Food Halls, being for the bloody rich, posh areas. We got that round 
here. You know where that comes from.' 
 'Harrods,' said Wani. 
 Bertrand gave him a quick frown. 'Of course it does. The mother 
of all bloody food halls in the whole world!' 
 'I love to go to Harrods Food Hall,' Monique said, 'and look at the 
big… homards 'The lobsters,' muttered Wani, without looking at her, 
as though it was his accepted function to interpret for his mother. 
 'Oh, I know!' said Martine, with a smile of faint-hearted rebellion. 
Nick saw them often doing it, days probably were spent in Harrods, 
just round the corner but another world of possibilities, something for 
everyone who could afford it. 
 Bertrand gave them a patient five seconds, like a strict but fair-
minded schoolmaster, and then said, 'So now, you know, Nick, I got 
thirty-eight Mira Food Halls all round the country, Harrogate I got one, 
Altrincham I just opened one; and more than eight hundred bloody 
Mira Marts.' He was suddenly very genial - he almost shrugged as well 
at the easy immensity of it. 'It's a great story, no?' 
 'Amazing,' said Nick. 'It's kind of you to tell me a story you must 
know so well' - making his face specially solemn. He saw the bright 
orange fascia of the Notting Hill Food Hall, where Gerald himself 
sometimes popped round late at night with a basket and a bashful 
look as though everyone recognized him, shopping for pate and Swiss 
chocolates. And he saw the corner Mira Mart in Barwick, with its 
sadder produce in sloping racks, remote poor cousins of the 
Knightsbridge obelisks, and its dense stale smell of a low-ceilinged 
shop where everything is sold together. An orange, of course, topped 
by two green leaves, was an emblem of the chain. Then he looked at 
Wani, who was eating pickily (coke killed the appetite) and entirely 
without expression. His eyes were on his plate, or on the gleaming red 
veneer just beyond it; he might have been listening thoughtfully to his 
father, but Nick could tell he had slipped away into a world his father 
had never imagined. His submissiveness to Bertrand's tyranny was the 
price of his freedom. Uncle Emile, too, looked down, as if properly 
crushed by his brother-in-law's initiative and success; Nick himself 
quickly saw the charm of running off to Harrods with the ladies. 
 Then Bertrand actually said, 'All this one day will be yours, my 
son.' Ah, my poor boy!' Monique protested. 
 'I know, I know,' said Bertrand, nettled, and then smirking rather 
awfully. 
 'That day is doubtless a long way off. Let him have his magazines 
and his films. 
 Let him learn his business.' 
 Wani said, 'Thank you, Papa,' but his smile was for his mother, 
and his look, briefly and eloquently, as the smile faded, for Nick. He 
was at home with his father's manner, his uncontradicted bragging, 
but to let a friend in on the act showed a special confidence in the 
friend. Wani rarely blushed, or showed embarrassment of any kind, 
beyond the murmured self-chastisement with which he offered a seat 
to a lady or confessed his ignorance of some trivial thing. Nick 
absorbed his glance, and the secret warmth of what it acknowledged. 
 'No, no,' said Bertrand, with a quick tuck of the chin as if he'd 
been unfairly criticized, 'Wani is in all things his own master. At the 
moment fruit and veggies don't seem to interest him. Fine.' He spread 
his hands. 'Just as getting married to his bloody lovely bride doesn't 
seem to interest him. But we sit back, and we wait on the fullness of 
time. Eh, Wani?' And he laughed by himself at his own frankness, as 
though to soften its effect, but in fact acknowledging and heightening 
it. 
 'We're going to make a lot of money first,' Wani said. 'You'll see.' 
 Bertrand looked conspiratorially at Nick. 'Now you know, Nick, 
the big simple thing about money? The really big thing-' 
 Nick placed his napkin gently on the table, and murmured, 'I'm 
terribly sorry… I must just…' - pushing back his chair and wondering 
if this was even worse manners in Beirut than it was here. 
 'Eh…? Ah, weak bloody bladder,' said Bertrand, as if he'd 
expected it. 'Just like my son.' Nick was ready to take on any 
imputation that enabled him to leave the room; and Wani, with a 
bored, almost impatient look, got up too and said, Til show you the 
way' 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
The piano tuner came in the morning, and then the pianist herself, 
litde Nina Something-over as Gerald called her, came from two to five 
to practise: it was a wearing day. The tuner was a cardiganed sadist 
who tutted at the state of the piano and took a dim view in general of 
its tone, the tiny delay and bell-like bloom that were its special charm. 
('Oh,' said Rachel, 'I know Liszt enjoyed playing it…') From time to time 
he would break off his pitiless ascent of the keyboard to dash out juicy 
chords and arpeggios, with the air of a frustrated concert pianist, 
which was even worse than the tuning. Litde Nina, too, drove them 
mad with her fragments of Chopin and Schubert, which went on long 
enough to catch and lull the heart before they dropped it again, over 
and over. She had a lot of temperament and a terrifying left hand. She 
played the beginning of Chopin's Scherzo No .2 like a courier starting a 
motorbike. "When she'd finished Nick helped Elena bring up and 
arrange the old gilt ballroom chairs from die trou degloire. The sofas 
were trundled into new alignments, tall flower arrangements mounted 
the stairs on Elena's legs, and the room took on an unnerving 
appearance of readiness. Nick had one more task to do, which was to 
phone Ronnie, and he eyed the clock, in the run-up to six, as jumpily 
as if he was giving a recital himself. 
 He went out to a phone box on Ladbroke Grove, but it was back-
to-back with another and he thought perhaps the man who was in it 
would hear what he said; he seemed almost to be expecting him, since 
he wasn't evidently talking, just leaning there. And it was still very 
close to home; it seemed to implicate Gerald. He went on down the hill, 
into a street that looked far more amenable to drug-dealing, where a 
man who could well have been an addict was just coming out of the 
phone box on the corner. Nick went in after him, and stood in the 
stuffy half-silence, fiddling in his wallet for the paper with the number 
on it, and wishing he'd already had a line of coke, or at least a gin-and-
tonic, to put him in charge. He wished Wani could have done this, as 
usual, in the car, with 1 lie Talkman. Having given Nick the money, 
Wani liked to set him challenges, which were generally tasks he could 
more easily have done himself. Wani claimed never to have used a 
phone box, just as he had never been on a bus, which he said must be 
a ghasdy experience. So he had never breathed this terrible air, black 
plastic, dead piss, old smoke, the compound breath of the mouthpiece- 
Yep.' 
 'Oh, hello… is that Ronnie?' Yeah.' 
 '()h, hi! It's Nick here,' said Nick, with an urgent smile at a spot 
low down on the wall. It was like calling someone you'd landed at a 
party, but much more frightening. 'Do you leinember - I'm a friend of, 
um, Antony's…' 
 Ronnie thought for quite a while, while Nick panted riuouragingly 
into the phone. 'I don't know any Antony. No. You don't mean Andy?' 
 Nick tittered. 'You know - sort of Lebanese guy, has a white 
Mercedes… sometimes calls himself Wani…' 
 'All right, yeah - enough said! Yeah, Ronnie…' said I «" 1111 ic, 
and chuckled affectionately, or with a hint of ridicule, MI 1 hat Nick 
didn't know for a moment what he thought of Wani himself, any view 
of him seemed plausible. 'The man with the portable telephone. He's 
Lebanese, is he? I didn't know he was Lebanese.' 
 'Wani? Well actually he was born in Beirut, but he went to school 
here, and in fact he's lived in London since he was ten,' said Nick, 
getting snagged as usual in a sub-clause to a more important 
sentence. 
 '… right…' said Ronnie after a bit. 'Well I expect you'll be wanting 
to see me then. About something.' 
 The great thing about Ronnie, as Wani said, was that he always 
came through. The stuff was tip-top, he dealt to some big names, and 
if the price, at one-twenty a gram, was a little steep, the mark-down at 
three-fifty for a quarter-ounce was a deal indeed. (A quarter-ounce, 
seven grams, was the only metric equivalent Nick had yet been able to 
memorize.) The downside of Ronnie was a strange delaying manner 
that would have seemed sleepy if it hadn't been also a kind of 
vigilance. 
 He never rushed, he was never on time, and he had a puzzled 
porous memory. Nick had only met him once, when they'd driven 
round the block in his red Toyota and he'd watched the simple way the 
exchange was made. Ronnie was a cockneyfied Jamaican, with a tall 
shaved head and doleful eyes. He talked a lot about girlfriend troubles, 
perhaps just to make things clear. His voice was an intimate murmur, 
and since he was giving them something they wanted he had seemed 
to Nick both seductive and forgivable. 
 Today, it all felt much less happy. Ronnie asked him to ring back 
ten minutes later, when the routine of the first call was repeated 
almost verbatim, and again ten minutes after that, to check he was on 
his way. After each t all Nick hung around the streets and felt glaringly 
criminal as well as vulnerable, with &#1032;350 rolled up tight in 
rubber bands in his pocket. The area seemed suddenly to be infested 
with police cars. For several minutes a helicopter hammered overhead. 
Nick wondered how he would explain the money x» the police, then 
thought it was more likely they would wait until he got into the car 
before they made their move. He wondered if Gerald would be able to 
keep it out of the papers, if they'd be able to get Gerald into the papers, 
it was more than vulgar and unsafe, he could lose his seat if it came 
out that drugs were being taken in his house. How long would the 
sentence be? Ten years? For a first offence… And tlien, god, how would 
a pretty little poof with an Oxford accent survive in prison? They'd all 
be after his arse. He saw himself sobbing in a doorless lavatory. But 
perhaps a character reference from Professor Ettrick would help, or 
even someone at the Home Office - Gerald might not abandon him 
entirely! He was already at the place, the corner by the Chepstow 
Casde - a minute or two early. He perched at one of the picnic tables 
outside. The pub itself was shut, bleared light came out through 
plastic sheeting as work went on after hours, a new brewery had 
bought it, they were knocking the litde old bars into one big room to 
make it more spacious and unwelcoming. Twelve minutes went past. It 
was very suspicious the way that man at the bus stop kept glancing at 
him and never got on a bus. Ronnie was getting careless, his phone 
was obviously tapped, it would be what they called a knock, when 
everyone in the street, the blind man, the pizza boy, the lady with the 
dog, were revealed in a second as plain-clothes officers. The car pulled 
up, Nick strolled over and got in and they cruised off round the block. 
 'How's it going. Rick?' Ronnie said, his mournful head not moving 
but his glance going from side to side and back to the rear-view mirror. 
Nick laughed and cleared his throat. 'Very well, thanks,' he said. They 
sat low in the Celica, Ronnie long-legged, arms on his knees, like a boy 
in a go-kart, long fingers turning the wheel by its crossbar rather than 
the rim. 'Yeah?' said Ronnie. 
 'Well, that's good. How's that Ronnie, then?' 
 Nick laughed nervously again. 'Oh, he's fine, he's very busy.' It 
was a wonderfully approximate world the real Ronnie lived in, and 
perhaps he liked it that way, his customers all nicknames and 
mishearings, it was tactful and safe. 
 He looked in the mirror again, and at the same time his left hand 
went to his waistcoat pocket and then across to Nick, with the neat 
little thing held invisible under it. Nick was ready for that but he had 
to grope for the roll of notes in his pocket. Ronnie accelerated through 
an amber light, and it struck Nick he was breaking the law by not 
wearing a seat-belt. Ronnie wasn't wearing his either, that was the sort 
of world he was moving in, and he thought it might hurt his feelings if 
he belatedly buckled up. The journey must be nearly over, and the 
chances were they wouldn't have a prang. Awful, though, to get pulled 
over for a seatbelt violation, and then be questioned, and then 
searched… He nudged Ronnie's arm and he took the money and lost it, 
again without looking. 
 They pulled in behind the church at the crown of Ladbroke 
Grove, in the shadowy crescent of plane trees. 'Thanks very much,' 
said Nick. He really had to rush but he didn't want to seem unfriendly. 
Ronnie was looking out thoughtfully through the windscreen. 'This is 
an old church, Rick,' he said. 'This must be old.' 
 'Yeah - well, it's Victorian, I suppose, isn't it,' said Nick, who in 
fact knew all about it. 
 'Yeah?' said Ronnie, and nodded. 'God, there's some old stuff 
round here.' 
 Nick couldn't tell quite what he was getting at. He said, 'It's not 
that old - sort of 1840s?' He knew not everybody had a sense of 
history, a useful image, as he had, of the centuries like rooms in 
enfilade. For half a second he glimpsed what he knew about the 
church, that the reredos was designed by Aston Webb, that it was built 
on the site of the grandstand of a long-vanished racetrack. It was a 
knobbly Gothic oddity in a street of stucco. 'I'm telling you, I'm moving 
up here, too fucking right I am,' said Ronnie, in his protesting 
murmur. 
 'Mm, you should,' said Nick, unsure if he was humouring him or 
sharing a wry joke, but excited anyway at the thought of having him as 
a neighbour. He was sexy, Ronnie, in his haggard spectral way… 'Get 
away from that woman, I'm telling you' - he shook his head and 
laughed illusionlessly .1 hope you're not having woman trouble, do 
you, Rick?' 
 'Oh… no… I don't,' said Nick. 'Still bad, is it?' 
 'I'm telling you,' said Ronnie. 
 Nick could see that Ronnie might be a bit of a handful, and that 
his line of work might make a certain kind of girl uneasy. He wanted to 
lean over and get out his probably long and beautiful penis and give 
him the consolation that a man so perfecdy understands - right here, 
in the car, in the dappled shade across the windscreen. But Ronnie 
had to get on - he offered his hand, coming down at an angle from a 
high raised elbow. 
 Nick got out of the car and turned to walk the two hundred yards 
to the house. 
 In the street the sense of danger squeezed about him again, and 
the people who passed him as they came home from work frowned and 
sneered as they saw that he held a tiny parcel, a crass mistake, a 
heavy sentence, gripped tight in his hand in his pocket, ready, at the 
dreaded moment, to be flung down a drain. But when he turned up the 
steps and looked to left and right he had a gathering rapturous feeling 
he had got away with it. Of course nobody knew, it was totally safe, 
nobody had seen, it was nothing but an unknown car that slipped past 
the end of the street in a second. And now a flood of pleasure was 
waiting to be released. 
 He rushed through the hall, up the stone stairs, there were 
voices already in the drawing room, the moan and yap of the first 
guests' opening platitudes, up and up, up the familiar creaking attic 
stairs, and into his hot still room that was waiting for him with 
birdsong through the window and the bed reflected in the wardrobe 
mirror. He closed the door, locked the door, and over a smiling five 
minutes changed his shirt, put in cufflinks, tied a tie and pulled on his 
suit trousers, all intercut with tipping out, chopping and snorting a 
trial line of the new stuff, hiding the rest in his desk, unrolling the 
banknote and rolling it up backwards, wiping the desk with his finger 
and his finger on his gums. Then he shrugged on the jacket, tied his 
shoes, leapt downstairs and talked brilliantly to Sir Maurice Tipper 
about the test match. Nick sat at the end of a row, like an usher. He 
could see out onto the first-floor landing, where little Nina Glaserova, 
with her long red hair in a braid down her back, was standing and 
staring, not into the room but at a clear point in the dark oak of the 
threshold. Her eyes seemed to work straight through it, into a space 
where Chopin, Schubert and Beethoven waited for justice to be done to 
them. She listened as Gerald told the story - father a notable dissident 
- imprisoned - travelling scholarship withheld - without seeming to 
recognize it as her own, or knowing of course that dissident wasn't 
generally a term of approval in Gerald's book; artistic freedom was 
unem-phatically invoked, and there was a joke, which she didn't get, 
though it made her look up, into the room, at the rows of utterly 
unknown laughing people, people of great consequence perhaps, whom 
it was her mission to enthral. The clapping started, Nick gave her an 
encouraging nod, she paused for a second, then scuttled in through 
the audience, looking so much like a determined waif that a sigh of 
starded tenderness seemed to sound like an undertone of the 
applause. She gave a momentary bow, sal down and began 
immediately - it was almost funny as well as thrilling when the 
motorbike summons of tlu- (ihopin Sihcr/. o rang out. There were 
about fifty people in the room, a loose coalition of family, colleagues 
and friends. Nina Glaserova was an unknown quantity, and Gerald's 
claims for her were political as much as artistic. He hoped for a 
success but he wasn't making a great social effort. 
 Beside Nick a thin-lipped man from the Cabinet Office groped for 
his programme sheet as if the music had come as a slighdy unpleasant 
surprise - he made a litde scuffle with his chair and the paper. One or 
two people snapped their glasses cases as they tried well-meaningly to 
catch up with the leaping flood of sound. It was all so sudden and 
serious, the piano was quivering, the sound throbbed through the 
floorboards, and there were hints on some faces that it could be 
thought rather bad form to make quite so much noise indoors. 
 Nick could see the far curve of the front row, with Lady Partridge 
at the end, next to Bertrand Ouradi and his wife, and then Wani, in 
steep profile against the raised piano lid. Catherine, just behind them, 
was leaning on her boyfriend Jasper's shoulder, and Polly Thompson 
was casually squashing against Jasper from the other side. Then there 
was Morgan, a steely young woman from Central Office whom Polly 
had brought along as if no one would be surprised. To see Nina herself 
Nick had to crane round the big white bonce of Norman Kent, who was 
as sensitive to music as he was to conservatives, and kept shifting in 
his seat. 
 His frayed denim jacket collar made its own effect among a dozen 
grades of pinstripe. Penny was sitting beside him, and pressing against 
him to calm him and to thank him for coming. Nick wondered what he 
thought of Nina, he wondered what he thought of her himself, too 
assailed by the sound, by the astounding phenomenon of it, to know if 
she was really any good. Here came the opening again, the admonitory 
rumble, the reckless, accurate leap. She had clearly been ferociously 
schooled, she was like those implacable litde gymnasts who sprang out 
from behind the Iron Curtain, curling and vaulting along the keyboard. 
As the sadly questioning middle section gathered weight, she put on a 
fearless turn of speed. She gestured very hard at her effects, and made 
you doubt she knew their cause. For the programme sheet Nick had 
rifled some old sleeve notes, to give a professional look to things, and 
he had put in Schumann's description of the B-flat minor Scherzo as 
'overflowing with tenderness, boldness, love and contempt'. He played 
the words through to himself as he gazed across the rows at his lover's 
head. 
 When the Chopin had finished, Nina bowed and rushed out, and 
Nick saw her on the landing again, waiting in fact like someone about 
to jump, too young and high-minded to care very much for applause, 
or to know what to do with it. 
 Gerald was clapping in the loud, steady, hollow way he had. One 
or two people stood up, the man from the Cabinet Office took in the 
next item on the agenda, and the lady behind Nick said, 'No, sadly we 
re at Badminton that weekend.' 
 It was a couple of Schubert Impromptus that followed, the C 
minor and the stream-like E-flat major, which requires such 
unfaltering evenness of touch. 
 Nick had heard her play through the very beginning of it a dozen 
times, until he was screaming at her in his head to go on. Well, now 
she did, watching her own hands busying up and down the keyboard 
as if they were astonishing automata that she had wound up and set 
in motion, in perfect synchrony, to produce this silvery flow of sound. 
She made it seem a bit like an exercise, but you could tell, if you 
listened, that the piece was life itself, in its momentum and its 
evanescence. The modulations in it were like instants of dizziness. 
Nick felt she played the B minor middle section too abruptly, so that 
the visionary coherence of the thing was spoiled. 
 He found himself staring at Gerald's mother and Wani's father, 
who made a funny pair. Bertrand was sitting there in the lustrous 
housing of his suit, very still, in respect for the tedious protocol of the 
event, with only his thin black moustache to betray his impatience as 
he pursed and flexed his lips in unconscious little kisses. Beside him 
Lady Partridge, her head tilted up, her face a mask of blusher and 
brown powder, like someone just back from a skiing holiday, was also 
clearly elsewhere. From time to time she glanced sideways at her 
neighbour, and at his drably dressed wife. Nick knew it Was upsetting 
for her to sit next to what she always called an A-rab, but something 
seemed to kindle in her too at the closeness of so much money. 
 They had decided before the concert that they would do without 
an interval, so after the Schubert Gerald stood up and said in his 
genial, penetrating tone, the tone of a commander among friends, that 
they would go straight into the final item, Beethoven's 'Farewell' 
Sonata, and then they could all have more to drink and some rather 
good salmon - an idea that was greeted with applause all of its own. 
Nina came back in looking slighted and doubly determined, Nick 
clapped her very vigorously, and when she played the first three 
descending notes, 'Le-be-wohl', a shiver ran up his back. The man 
beside him looked at him suspiciously. But for Nick, to listen to music, 
to great music, which was all necessity, and here in the house, where 
the floor trembled to the sudden resolve of the Allegro, and the piano 
shook on its locked brass wheels - well, it was a startling experience. 
He felt shaken and reassured all at once - the music expressed life and 
explained it and left you having to ask again. If he believed anything he 
believed that. Not everyone here, of course, felt the same: Lady 
Kimbolton, there, the tireless party fund-raiser, kept a careful frown as 
she looked discreetly through her appointments diary, then shook the 
bangles down her arm as she came to attention again - the grey 
attention, mere good behaviour, of the governing class; she might have 
been in church, at the memorial service of some unloved colleague, in 
a world of unmeant expressions, the opposite of Beethoven. Gerald, at 
the other end of Nick's row, loved music, and was nodding now and 
then, just off the beat, like someone catching on to an idea, but 
afterwards Nick knew he would say it had all been either 'glorious' or 
'great fun' - even Parsifalhe had described as 'great fun', when 
'glorious' had seemed the more likely option. Others were clearly 
touched by what they heard: it was Beethoven, after all, and the piece 
told a story, of departure, absence and return, which no one could fail 
to follow or to feel. 
 It was the absence that was best, and little Nina, whom it was 
hard to think of without her 'little', seemed almost visibly to grow up as 
she played it. It was a proper andante espressivo, it moved and it 
moved along, she didn't ham up the emotion, in fact you saw her 
curbing some keen emotion of her own to the wisdom of Beethoven, so 
that the numbness of absence, the wistful solitude, the stifled climaxes 
of longing, came luminously through. Nick searched out Wani again, 
the sliver of profile, the dark curls crowding behind his ear - and 
wondered if he was touched, and if so in what way. He was watching 
his ear but he couldn't tell what he heard. In Wani, it was hard to 
distinguish complete attention from complete abstraction. Nick 
focused on him, so that everything else swam and Wani alone, or the 
bit of him he could see, throbbed minutely against the glossy double 
curve of the piano lid. He felt he floated forwards into another place, 
beautiful, speculative, even dangerous, a place created and held open 
by the music, but separate from it. It had the mood of a troubling 
dream, where nothing could be known for certain or offer a solid 
foothold to memory after one had woken. What really was his 
understanding with Wani? The pursuit of love seemed to need the 
cultivation of indifference. The deep connection between them was so 
secret that at times it was hard to believe it existed. He wondered if 
anyone knew - had even a flicker of a guess, an intuition blinked away 
by its own absurdity. How could anyone tell? He felt there must always 
be hints of a secret affair, some involuntary tenderness or respect, a 
particular way of not noticing each other… He wondered if it ever, 
would be known, or if they would take the secret to the grave. l; or a 
minute he felt unable to move, as if he were hypnotized by Wani's 
image. It took a little shudder to break the charm. 
 There was a strange rough breath from Norman Kent, who was 
crying steadily - making rather a thing of it perhaps, pulling off his 
glasses and swiping his face with his hand. Nick admired the spirit of 
it, the defiant sensitivity, and also felt put out, since he often cried at 
music himself but on this occasion hadn't managed to do so. Penny 
rested her hand on her father's shoulder, and braved this familiar 
embarrassment. Nick saw she was blushing, which she easily did. 
Then the music turned on a sixpence, and the light-headed rush of the 
finale began. The marvellous marking, Vivacissimamente, was a red 
rag to Nina, and the music flashed by in delirious chirrups and 
stampings. Nick seemed to see Beethoven, or rather Nina herself, 
striding up and down some sonorous wooden-floored room in frenzied 
impatience for the joyful return. Norman made a grunt of rueful 
amusement, and Penny twisted round, as if freed by the optimistic 
turn of events, and looked gently, and still blushing, at Gerald, who 
caught her eye, lowered his gaze and coloured slightly also. Well, there 
was such an old tension between the two men, on stubborn matters of 
principle; for years it had been only Rachel's stubbornness that could 
make them forget their principles enough to meet, and nod at each 
other, and exchange doggish banter. 
 Of course it was painful for Penny, and now perhaps she was 
making her own plea for reconciliation. Typing up Gerald's diary from 
the tape each day she must have a useful sense of his feelings. 
 The sonata finished and firm applause broke out, given a new 
edge of enthusiasm by the fact of its being the end - the whole 
experience was suddenly seen in a brighter light, it was time for a 
drink, they'd all done rather well. Norman Kent clapped with his hands 
above his head when Nina came back in, Catherine called out a hectic 
'Bravo,' and Jasper imitated her and grinned as if he'd made a joke in 
class. For a second or two Nina stood there stiffly, then she sat down 
without a word and played Rachmaninov's Prelude in C-sharp minor. 
It was a piece the older members of the audience tended to know well, 
and though they didn't specially want to hear it, they indulged it and 
exchanged distracted smiles. 
 After that there was very decisive applause, the piece had gone 
on for quite a while, one or two people looked round at the drinks table 
and the exit and started talking, and Nina came back in and played 
Bach's Toccata and Fugue in D minor, in the famous Busoni 
transcription. At this Lady Kimbolton looked at her watch as if she was 
virtually blind, holding her arm up to the light, and a number of people 
started fanning themselves with their programme sheets. This caught 
on as a form of mutiny, with the associated jiggling of bracelets. When 
Nina came back the next time Gerald had stood up and was saying, 
'Um… aah,' as if amiably bringing a meeting to order, but she sat down 
anyway and played the Sabre Dance by Khachaturian. It all seemed 
quite natural to Nick, she must have been told to have three encores 
ready, but there was still a possibility that she had four, so at a sign 
from Gerald he went out after her and congratulated her and asked 
her to stop. She stood on the landing and gazed down the pompous 
curve of the stairs as the applause pattered quickly to a close and the 
greedy roar of the party began. 'Hello, Judy!' 
 'My dear.' Lady Partridge stood rigid while he kissed her rosy 
cheek - Nick never knew if she regarded a kiss as a homage or a 
liberty. He grinned at her, as if she was having as much fun as he was. 
'You seem very cheerful,' she said. 
 Nick looked in the mirror where he did appear bright-eyed, 
sharing a rich secret with himself. 'Well, a successful recital, I c 
bought.' 
 'Did you,' said Lady Partridge; and then, merely to be agreeable, 'I 
liked the last piece she played. I think I've heard ii before.' 
 'Oh, the Khachaturian.' 
 She gave him a very dry look. 'Got a swing to it.' 
 'Mm, it certainly has' - Nick laughed quietly and ilclightedly, and 
after a second Lady Partridge smiled slyly too,. is if she'd been cleverer 
than she knew. 
 A waitress came past and they both took new glasses of 
champagne. 'Extraordinary people…' Lady Partridge was s. iying. As a 
rule she was happy and busy in Gerald's political world, she treated 
his colleagues very graciously, and felt a licrce thrill when, amongst 
the drab shop talk that alas made up most of their social dealings, 
they gave her an undiluted fix of policy, the really unanswerable need 
to reduce manufacturing, curb immigration, rationalize 'mental health' 
(what abuse. ind waste there were there!), and get public services back 
into private hands. They were like rehearsals for the telly, and even 
more inspiring. They liquidated every doubt. Nick said, 'That's Lord 
Toft, isn't it… the mart who builds all the roads.' 
 'Nothing extraordinary about Bernie Toft,' Lady Partridge said. 
Sir Jack himself of course had been in the construction business. 'I 
don't know why Gerald has to ask that awful artist man.' 
 'Oh, Norman, you mean? He's not very good, is he?' 
 'He's a red-hot socialist,' said Lady Partridge. 
 They both looked over to where Norman Kent was standing by 
the piano, holding on to it symbolically, and probably conscious of his 
portrait of Toby hanging behind him, as if it was an element in his own 
portrait. Most people dodged him with a preoccupied smile and 
pretended to be searching for someone else, but Catherine and Jasper 
were talking to him. His voice rose emotionally as he said, 'Of course 
you must, my dear girl, paint and paint and paint,' and shook 
Catherine by the shoulder. 'Do you happen to know who that young 
man is with my granddaughter?' Lady Partridge said. 'Yes, it's Jasper, 
he's her new boyfriend.' 
 'Ah…' Lady Partridge gave an illusionless nod or two; but said, 
'He looks a cut above the last one, anyway.' 
 'Yes, he's all right 'He even appears to own shoes.' 
 'I know, amazing!' Nick's main feeling about Jasper, very clear to 
him at the moment, was that he needed to be tied up face down on a 
bed for an hour or two. 
 'He's an estate agent, actually.' 
 'Very good-looking,' said Lady Partridge, in her own odd lustful 
way. 'I imagine he sells masses of houses.' Trudi Titchfield came past 
with a grimace, as if not expecting to be remembered. 'Lovely party,' 
she said. 'It's such a lovely room for a party. We sadly only have the 
garden flat. Well, one has the garden, but the rooms are rather low.' 
 'Yes,' said Lady Partridge. 
 Trudi lowered her voice. 'Not long of course before a very special 
party. The Silver Wedding…? I hear the PM's coming.' 
 'I don't think the Queen's coming,' said Lady Partridge. 'No, not 
the Queen - the PM - in a radiant whisper. 'The Queen! No, no…' 
 Lady Partridge blinked magnificendy. 'All rather hush-hush,' she 
said. 
 Sam Zeman came past and said, 'You're making me a rich man, 
my dear!' which was charming and funny, but he didn't stop to 
expand. Perhaps it was just the code of business, but Nick felt they'd 
used up their store of friendship in the gym and the restaurant, and 
that they would never be close to each other again. 
 In the crowd around the buffet (all chaffing courtesy and furtive 
ruthlessness) little Nina was mixing with her audience, who in general 
were nice enough to say 'Well done!' and ask her where on earth she 
had learnt to play like that. She had simple expressionless English, 
and the English people talked to her in the same way, but louder. 'So 
your father, is in prison! You poor thing? Just in front of Nick, Lady 
Kimbolton was greeting the Tippers. Lady Kimbolton's first name was 
Dolly, and even her close friends found ways of avoiding the natural 
salutation. 
 'Good evening, Dolly,' said Sir Maurice, with a satirical little bow. 
'Hello!' said Sally Tipper. 'Well, that was very enjoyable.' 
 'I know, heartbreaking,' said Lady Kimbolton. 'I imagine you saw 
the Telegraph this morning?' 
 'I did indeed,' said Sir Maurice. 'Congratulations!' 
 'I do like to hear music in the home,' Lady Tipper said, 'as in the 
times of Beethoven and Schubert themselves.' 
 'I know…' said Lady Kimbolton, her square practical face tilting 
this way and that to see what was on the table. 'Nigel must be chuffed,' 
Sir Maurice said. 
 'Maurice and I have been to a number of concerts at friends' 
houses lately, it's an excellent move,' said Lady Tipper, who was 
known to be artistic. 
 'I know, there seems to be an absolute mania for concerts,' Lady 
Kimbolton said. 
 'This is the second one I've been to this year.' 
 'I hear Lionel Kessler, you know…? had the Medici Quartet at 
Hawkeswood for a marvellous evening with Giscard d'Estaing.' 
 'I think that's really what gave Gerald the idea,' said Nick, joshing 
in between them as they got to the table. 'Oh, hello…' 
 'Hello, Dolly,' said Nick. He knew he could do quite a funny 
sketch about Gerald's growing preoccupation with the concert idea, 
which had come to a peak of competitive angst when Denis Beckwith, 
a handsome old saurian of the right enjoying fresh acclaim these days, 
had hired Kiri te Kanawa to sing Mozart and Strauss at his eighty-fifth 
birthday party. But something made him tread carefully. 'You know 
how competitive he is,' he said. 
 'We're all for competition!' said Dolly Kimbolton, claiming her 
plate of salmon from the waiter. 
 'Jolly good, jolly good…' said Gerald, weaving through behind 
them. 'Clever you to introduce us to a new artiste,' said Sally Tipper. 'I 
liked that last thing she played,' said Sir Maurice. Gerald looked round 
to see where Nina was. 'We thought rather than going for a big name 
The 'Badminton' lady was darting in for a bread roll. 'You're so right,' 
she said. 'I hear Michael's hiring the Royal Philharmonic for their 
summer party.' 
 'Michael…?' said Gerald. 
 'Oh?… Heseltine? Yup… yup…' She hunched in fake apology as 
she backed away. 
 'Yup, the whole blinking RPO. What it must be costing. But 
they've had a good year,' she added, in a tenderly defiant tone. 'I 
thought we'd had a pretty good year,' Gerald muttered. Nick had been 
avoiding Bertrand Ouradi, but as he turned from the table with his 
plate there Bertrand was. 'Aha, my friend the aesthete!' he said, and 
Nick was reminded of an annoying foreign waiter, perhaps, or taxi 
driver, for whom he was identified by a single joke. But he was able to 
say excitedly, 'How are you?' 
 Bertrand didn't answer - he seemed to suggest the question was 
bodi trivial and impertinent. He looked around the room, where people 
were grouping on the sofas and at litde tables brought in by the staff 
and swiftly covered with white clodis. I Ic didn't know where to settle, 
among tliese braying English Miobs; his expression was proud and 
wary. 'Bloody hot, isn't it,' he said to Nick. 
 'Come and talk to me'; and he led him, again like a waiter, with 
half-impatient glances over his shoulder, among the dotted supper 
tables - not to the cool of the great icar balcony but to a window seat at 
the front, looking onto i lie street. Perching there, knee to knee, pardy 
screened by die ioped-back curtains, they had a worrying degree of 
privacy. ' Moody hot,' said Bertrand again. 'Thank god diat beast has 
jnt bloody air conditioning': he nodded at die maroon Rolls-Royce 
Silver Shadow parked at die kerb below. 
 Ah,' said Nick, unable to rise to such a wretched brag. In I be 
back window of the car shiny white cushions were neatly aligned; he 
couldn't see the number plate but the thought that it must be BO 
something made him smirk - he pressed the a litde harder into a 
ghasdy smile of admiration. One of (Catherine's neuroses was a horror 
of maroon; it outdid her phobia of die au sound, or augmented it 
perhaps, with some worse intimation. Nick saw what she meant. 
 Bertrand asked him a few questions about the recital, and paid 
attention to die answers as though at a useful professional briefing. 
'Amazing technique,' he repeated. 'Still very young,' he said, and shook 
his head and dissected his salmon. High and capable though he was, 
Nick hesitated to play die aesthete very thoroughly, hesitated to be 
himself, in case his tone was GOO intimate and revealing. The 
influence of Bertrand was as in its way as the coke, and he found 
himself speaking gruffly to him. He wondered actually, despite die 
keenness of his feelings, if Nina had been much good. Reactions were 
skewed by her being so young. He pretended he was Dolly Kimbolton 
and said, 'The Beedioven was heartbreaking,' but it wasn't a phrase 
that Bertrand saw a use for. He looked at him narrowly and said, 'That 
last thing she played was bloody good.' 
 Nick glanced out into the room to find Wani, who was sitting at a 
table with his mother and a middle-aged woman who looked quite 
prickly and confused under his long-lashed gaze. It was almost a decoy 
of Wani's to let his gaze rest emptily but seductively on a woman. He 
still hadn't spoken to Nick since his arrival; there had been a turn and 
a nod, a sigh, as if to say, 'These crowds, these duties,' when they were 
taking their seats. If it made him uneasy to see his lover and his father 
tete-a-tete he was too clever to show it. Bertrand said, 'That son of 
mine, who's he flirting with now?' 
 Nick laughed easily and said, 'Oh, I don't know. Some MP's wife, I 
expect.' 
 'Flirting, flirting, that's all he bloody does!' said Bertrand, with a 
mocking flutter of his own eyelashes. Dapper and primped as he was, 
he became almost camp. Nick pictured the daily task of shaving above 
and below that line of moustache, the joy of the matutinal steel, and 
then the joy of the dressing room that was like a department of a shop. 
He said, 'He may flirt, but you know he never really looks at another 
woman,' and was thrilled by his own wickedness. 
 'I know, I know,' said Bertrand, as though cross at being taken 
seriously, but also perhaps reassured. 'So how's it going - at the 
office?' 
 'Oh fine, I think.' 
 'You still got all those pretty boys there?' 
 'Um 'I don't know why he has to have all these bloody pretty 
poofy boys.' 
 "Well, I think they're very good at their jobs,' Nick said, so 
horrified he sounded almost apologetic. 'Simon Jones is an excellent 
graphic designer, and Howard Wasserstein is a brilliant script editor.' 
 'So when does the bloody shooting start on the film?' 
 'Ah - you'd have to ask Wani that.' 
 Bertrand popped a new potato into his mouth and said, 'I already 
did - he never tells me nothing.' He flapped his napkin. 'What is the 
bloody film anyway?' 
 'Well, we're thinking about adapting The Spoils ofPoynton, um…' 
 'Plenty of smooching, plenty of action,' Bertrand said. 
 Nick smiled thinly and thought rapidly and discovered that these 
were two elements entirely lacking from the novel. He said, 'Wani's 
hoping to get James Stallard to be in it.' Bertrand gave him a wary 
look. 'Another pretty boy?' 
 'Well, he's generally agreed to be very good-looking. He's one of 
the rising young stars.' 
 'I read something about him 'Well, he recently got married to 
Sophie Tipper,' Nick said. 'Sir Maurice Tipper's daughter. It was in all 
the papers. Of course she used to go out with Toby - Gerald and 
Rachel's son.' He produced all this hetero stuff like a distracting proof; 
he hoped he wouldn't normally be so cravenly reassuring. 
 Bertrand smiled as if nothing would surprise him. 'I heard he let 
a big fish go.' 
 Nick blushed for some reason, and started talking about the 
magazine, with the brightness of a novice salesman, not yet committed 
and not yet cynical; he told him that he and Wani were going on a trip 
to research subjects for it - and that was the nearest he could get to 
stating the unspeakable fact of their affair. 
 For a second he imagined telling Bertrand the truth, in all its 
mischievous beauty, imagined describing, like some praiseworthy 
business initiative, the skinhead rent boy they'd had in last week for a 
threesome. Just then he felt a kind of sadness - well, the shine went 
off things, as he'd known it would, his mood was petering into 
greyness, a grey restlessness. He felt condemned to this with Bertrand. 
It was just what had happened at Lowndes Square: the secret certainty 
faded after half an hour and gave way to a somehow enhanced state of 
doubt. The manageable joke of Bertrand became a penance. Nick was 
powerless, fidgety, sulkily appeasing, in the grip of a man who seemed 
to him in every way the opposite of himself, a tight litde bundle of ego 
in a shiny suit. Something awful happened with a waitress, who was 
taking round a wine bottle. She was black, and Nick had noticed 
already the flickers of discomfort and mimes of broadmindedness as 
she moved through the room and gave everyone what they wanted. 
Bertrand held out his glass and she filled it with Chablis for him - he 
watched her as she did it, and as she smiled and turned interrogatively 
to Nick, Bertrand said, 'No, you bloody idiot, do you think I drink this? 
I want mineral water.' The girl recoiled for just a second at the smart of 
his tone, at the slap-down of service, and then apologized with steely 
insincerity. Nick said, 'Oh, I'm sure we can get you some water, we've 
got masses of water!' in a sweedy anxious way, as if to soften 
Bertrand's tone, to apologize for him himself, to give a breath of 
laughter to a rough moment; while Bertrand held the glass out stiffly 
towards her, expressionless save for a steady contemptuous blink. She 
held her dignity for a moment longer, while Nick's smile pleaded with 
her not to mind and with him to relent. But Bertrand said, 'Don't you 
know bloody nothing? 
 - Take this away,' and glared at Nick as if to enlist or excite a 
similar outrage in him. Then when the girl had marched off, without 
saying a word, he looked down, sighed, and smiled ruefully, almost 
tenderly at Nick, as though to say that he would have liked to spare 
him such a scene, but that he himself was afraid of no one. 
 Nick knew he should move away, but he hadn't finished his main 
course; he took shameful refuge in it as a reason not to make a scene 
of his own. Other people must have heard. Tucked away in the window 
seat they must look like conspirators. Bertrand was talking about 
property now, and weighing the merits of wn against those of SW3; it 
seemed he too was thinking of moving to the neighbourhood. He 
looked at the room as if trying it on. 'Well, it's lovely here,' Nick said 
sadly, and gazed out of the window at the familiar street, at Bertrand's 
horrible maroon car, at the half-recognized evening life in the houses 
opposite, and at the big blond man who came up from the area of one 
of them, unlocked the big black motorbike that stood on the pavement 
outside, straddled it, pulled on and buckled his helmet, kicked the 
bike into eager life and three seconds later was gone. Only a buzz, a 
drone that faded as it rose, could be heard amid the high noise of talk 
in the room. It was as if the summons of the Chopin had been 
answered and the freedom seized by a lucky third person. 
 'Aah…' Gerald was saying, hovering like a waiter himself, the best 
of all waiters, 'I hope everything's all right.' He held a bottle of water in 
one hand and a freshly opened bottle of Taittinger in the other, as if 
hedging his bets. 
 'Marvellous!' said Bertrand, pretending not to notice these things, 
and then making a Gallic gesture of flattered surprise. 'You're very 
kind, to wait on me yourself.' 
 'These young girls don't always know what they're doing,' said 
Gerald. Nick said, 'Gerald, obviously you've met… Mr Ouradi.' 
 'We haven't really met,' said Gerald, bowing and smiling 
secretively, 'but I'm absolutely delighted you're here.' 
 'Well, what a marvellous concert,' Bertrand said. 'The pianist had 
amazing technique. For one so young…' 
 'Amazing,' Gerald agreed. 'Well, you saw her here first!' 
 With an effect of creaking diplomatic machinery Dolly Kimbolton 
rolled into view, and Bertrand stood up, passing his plate with its 
toppling knife and fork to Nick. 'Hello!' she said. 
 'Have you met Lady Kimbolton? Mr Bertram Ouradi, one of our 
great supporters.' 
 They shook hands, Dolly leaning forward with the air of a busy 
headmistress rounding up stragglers for some huge collective effort. 
Bertrand said, in his tone of clear, childish self-importance, 'Yes, I'm 
making quite a contribution. 
 Quite a big contribution to the party.' 
 'Splendid!' said Dolly, and gave him a smile in which political zeal 
managed almost entirely to disguise some older instinct about Middle 
Eastern shopkeepers. 
 'I don't know if we might all have a litde chat…?' said Gerald, 
raising the champagne bottle. 'And I think we might be needing this.' 
The suggestion obviously didn't include Nick, who as so often wasn't 
visible and certainly wasn't relevant, and who was left, when the other 
three went off, holding Bertrand's unfinished supper as well as his 
own. He closed the door, locked the door, and reached out for Wani, 
who patted him and kissed him on die nose as he turned away. 
'Where's the stuff?' said Wani. 
 Nick went over to the desk, unhappy but caught up too in the 
business of the coke, which if he was patient enough might make them 
both happy again. He got out the tin from the bottom drawer. Wani 
said, 'A tin is such an obvious place to hide it.' 
 'Darling, no one even knows I've got anything to hide.' He passed 
Wani the packet and smiled reproachfully. 'It's just like our wonderful 
secret love affair.' 
 Wani pulled out the chair and sat down at the desk, litde clouds 
and gleams of possible rejoinders passing across his features. He 
peered at the stack of library books and selected Henry James and the 
Question of Romance by Mildred R. 
 Pullman, which had a sleek Mylar sleeve protecting its dark 
jacket. 'This should do,' he said. He had never been in Nick's room 
before, and it was clear that it held no magic for him of the kind Nick 
had felt in Wani's room at Lowndes Square. Well, he wasn't one who 
noticed such things. He didn't thank Nick for meeting Ronnie or show 
any intuition of the scary drama it had been for him. 
 
 
 
Nick said, to remind him, 
 
'I had such a sweet litde chat with Ronnie. It seems he's hoping to 
move to this area.' Wani said nothing, tipping out a bit of the rough 
powder onto the book. 
 'He is very nice, isn't he?' Nick went on. 'It was quite a business - 
ringing him and waiting and ringing again… And of course he was 
late…!' 
 Wani said, 'You only like him because he's a wog. You probably 
fancy him.' 
 'Not particularly,' said Nick, whose wave of sexual feeling for him 
had been just a part of the criminal excitement, tension and relief at 
the same time, the feeling that Ronnie accepted not only his money but 
him; and then, to get it done, '1 wish you wouldn't use that word. I 
keep trying to believe you're not as irredeemable as your father.' 
 Wani weighed this up for a moment. 'So what was Papa talking to 
you about?' he said. 
 Nick sighed and paced across the room - where they both were 
again, in the subdy glamorized light and depth of the wardrobe mirror. 
He had imagined Wani's being here so often, lor secret sleepovers and 
also, in some other dispensation, Irccly and openly, as his lover and 
partner. He said, 'Oh, he wants to move to this area too, apparently.' 
He gave a snuffly kllgh. 'I ought to put him in touch with Jasper.' 
 "That Jasper's a sexy litde slut,' said Wani, and it wasn't i|iiite 
his usual tone. 'Yeah…? All white boys look the same to me,' said Nick. 
'Ha ha.' Wani studied his work. 'So - what else did he say?' 
 'Your old man? Oh, he was just pumping me again about you, 
and about the film. 
 He has no idea what's going on, of i ourse, but I think he's 
decided that I hold the key to the mystery. I did what I could to 
persuade him there wasn't a mystery' 
 'Maybe you're the mystery,' said Wani. 'He doesn't know what to 
make of you.' 
 This was probably true, but also terribly unfair. Nick was longing 
to make a declaration, and now he felt violent towards Wani as well: 
his pulse was thumping in his neck as he stood behind him, then put 
his hands on his shoulders. All evening he'd needed to touch him, and 
the contact was convulsive when it came. Wani was working 
painstakingly and a little defensively with his gold card, making rapid 
hatching movements to and fro across the partially visible features of 
Henry James - not the great bald Master but the quick-eyed, tender, 
brilliant twenty-year-old, with an irrepressible kink in his dark hair. 
 Nick squeezed Wani's neck with each clause: 'I wish we didn't 
have to carry on like this, I feel I've got to tell someone, I wish we could 
tell people.' 
 'If you tell one person you've told everybody,' Wani said. 'You 
might as well take a full-page ad in the Telegraph.' 
 'Well, I know you're very important, of course…' 
 'You don't think we'd be at a party like this if people knew what 
we did, do you?' 
 'Mm. I don't see why not.' 
 You think you'd be hobnobbing with Dolly Kimbolton if she knew 
you were a pretty boy.' 
 'She does know I'm a - that's such an absurd phrase!' 
 'You think so?' 
 'And anyway hobnobbing, as you call it, with Dolly Kimbolton is 
hardly an indispensable part of my life. I've never pretended not to be 
gay, it's you that's doing that, my dear. This is 1986. Things have 
changed.' 
 'Yes. All the poofs are dropping like flies. Don't you think the 
mother and father of Antoine might worry a bit about that?' 
 'That's not really the point, is it?' 
 Wani made a litde moue. 'It's part of the point,' he said. 'You 
know I have to be incredibly careful. You know the situation… There!' 
He raised his hands as if he'd balanced something. 'Now there's a line 
of beauty for you!' And he looked aside into the mirror, first at Nick 
and then at himself. 'I think we have a pretty good time,' he said, in a 
sudden weak appeal, but it was short of what Nick wanted. 
 Something happened when you looked in the mirror together. 
You asked it, as always, a question, and you asked each other 
something too; and the space, shadowy but glossy, the further room in 
which you found yourself, as if on a stage, vibrated with ironies and 
sentimental admissions. Or so it seemed to Nick. Now it was like a 
doorway into the past, into the moment he had thought 'Oh good' 
when Ouradi first appeared, having missed the start of term, in the 
Anglo-Saxon class, and was called on to translate a bit of King Alfred, 
which he did very decently - Nick had fixed on him already and 
expected him, as a latecomer and a foreigner, to look for a friend in 
this group of raw eighteen-year-olds. But he had vanished again at 
once, into some other world not quite discernible through the evening 
mist on Worcester College lake. And the 'Oh good,' the 'Yes!' of his 
arrival, the sight of his beautiful head and provoking little penis, were 
all Nick got, really, from Wani, in those Oxford years, when he himself 
was in disguise, behind books and beer glasses, 'out' as an aesthete, a 
bit of a poet, 'the man who likes Bruckner!' but fearful of himself. And 
now here he was with Wani, posing for this transient portrait, almost 
challenging him in the glass - and it was like the first week again: he 
was tensed for him to disappear. 
 He said, 'Do you ever sleep with Martine?' It hurt him to ask, and 
his face stiffened jealously for the answer. 
 Wani looked round for his wallet. 'What an extraordinary 
question.' 
 'Well, you're quite an extraordinary person, darling,' said Nick, 
thinking, with his horror of discord, tliat he'd been too abrupt, and 
pulling a hand through Wani's springy black curls. 
 'Here, have some of this and shut up,' said Wani, and grabbed 
him between the legs as he came round the chair, like boys in a 
playground, and perhaps with the same eagerness and confusion. Nick 
didn't resist. He snorted up his line, and stepped away. Then Wani too, 
re-rolling the note, bent his head and was about to swoop when they 
both heard the dim cracks of footsteps, very close, already on the turn 
of the top stairs; and a voice, under the breath, indistinguishable. 
 Wani twitched round and glared at the lock of the door, and Nick 
with his heart racing ran through the memory of turning the key. Wani 
snorted his line, up one nostril, pocketed the note and the wrapper 
and turned over the book, all in a second or two. 'What are we doing?' 
he muttered. 
 Nick shook his head. 'What are we doing…? Just talking about 
the script Wani gave an absurd sigh, as if it might just do. Nick had 
never seen him so anxious; and somehow he knew, as he held his 
gaze, that Wani would punish him for having observed this moment of 
panic. It wasn't the drugs so much as the hint of a guilty intimacy. 
And now that it was done it was surely the locking of the door that was 
suspicious. 'No, just ten minutes, baby,' the same voice said, Nick 
smiled and closed his eyes, it was Jasper's phoney drawl, the familiar 
floorboard outside the bathroom creaked, a dress brushed the wall, 
and they heard the door of Catherine's room close, and almost at once 
the rattle of the key. Nick and Wani nodded slowly and smiles of relief 
and amusement and anticipation moved in sequence across their 
faces. 
 For Wani the first hit of coke was always an erotic rush, and for 
Nick too. They had kissed the first time they did coke together, their 
first kiss, Wani's mouth sour with wine, his tongue darting, his eyes 
timidly closed. Each time after that was a re-enactment of a thrilling 
beginning. Anything seemed possible - the world was not only doable, 
conquerable, but lovable: it showed its weaknesses and you knew it 
would submit to you. You saw your own charm reflected in its eyes. 
Nick stood and kissed Wani in the middle of the room - two or three 
heavenly minutes that had been waiting to happen, a glowing collision, 
a secret rift in the end of the day. They stood there, in their suits, 
Wani's lightweight Italian 'grey', black really, like one of his father's 
suits but made to hint and flow, Nick, in the needle-fine pinstripe Wani 
had bought him, like one of the keen young professionals of the age, 
the banker, the dealer, the estate agent even… Funny how sound 
travelled in an old house - through blocked-off chimney spaces, along 
joists. A rhythm almost inaudible to the cautious couple or 
unsuspecting soloist who made it was relayed as a workmanlike 
thump through the ceiling below or, as in this case, a busy squeak in 
the room next door. Stroking Wani's penis through his open fly, 
kissing his neck so that his skin stood up in shivers, Nick laughed but 
he was embarrassed too, almost shocked to hear them at it (which he 
never had before) and at it so prompdy and so fast. No wasteful 
foreplay there - it made him wonder if Catherine was liking it, if Jasper 
wasn't being a brute with her, when surely she needed such careful 
handling. He felt Wani's grip tighten on his shoulder, pressing him 
down, and he went down on one knee, looking up at him sternly, and 
then on both knees and pulled his cock into his mouth. Wani wasn't 
big but he was very pretty, and his hard-ons, at least until the coke 
piled on too deep, were boyishly steep and rigid. 
 Nick worked on him easily and steadily, his own dick still 
buttoned away in a hard diagonal, something else waiting to happen, 
and the squeak of the telltale floorboard coming in rapid runs, like a 
manic mouse, and then with impressive intermittence; Nick almost 
went with it, but it was a distraction too, like the voices on the stair, a 
kind of brake or warning. They must have moved the bed, or they were 
fucking on the floor perhaps. He pictured tliem, Catherine vaguely and 
anxiously, Jasper much more vividly. 
 Wani's hands stroked and clutched at Nick's hair, tugged on it 
unpleasantly hard. 'They're really going at it,' he murmured. 'The little 
sluts…' Nick glanced up and saw him smiling, in his erotic trance, not 
at him directly but at the two of them in the mirror; and also (Nick 
knew) staring through the mirror, and me wardrobe itself, into die 
room beyond, which he had never seen and which was just as readily 
the motel bedroom of some seedy flick. 'They're really going at it - die 
little sluts' - Nick heard how he loved saying it again, whispering it, 
and grunted as Wani's little dirusts against his face fell into the 
accelerating rhythm of the kids next door. He felt awkward, pulled in 
to service a fantasy he couldn't quite share - he tried again, he'd jerked 
off a few times about Jasper already, but Catherine was his sister, and 
on lidiium, and, well… a girl. He heard her voice now, quick staccato 
wails… and Wani's breathing, slipping away from him just at the 
moment he had him. And then another idea came to him, a second 
resort, a silent, comical revenge on Wani while he brought him off- it 
was Ronnie he'd invited in, to solace him for his woman trouble, to give 
him ten minutes of real care, man to man. It took a little adjustment, 
of course, a little further twist on make-believe, since the Ronnie he'd 
imagined was twice the size of Wani - at least. But as Wani pulled out 
and Nick squeezed his eyes tight shut, it could almost have been 
Ronnie in front of him, instead of the man he loved. 
 Downstairs, a litde later, in die drawing room, the coda of the 
party was unwinding, and Gerald opening new bottles of champagne 
as though he made no distinction between the boring drunks who 'sat', 
and die knowing few of the inner circle, gathered round the empty 
marble fireplace. The Timmses were there, and Barry Groom, with 
their different fanatical ways of talking, their shades of zeal and 
exasperation - all alien to Nick more than ever in die lull after drugs 
and sex. He saw that Polly Tompkins was sitting with them, as if 
among equals, and already impatient for somediing superior. Gerald, it 
was clear, hadn't yet got round to die new paper on Third World debt. 
'Have a look at it,' said Polly, and nodded at him like a genial don. The 
strange thing was that it was also Gerald's nod, just as his white collar 
was Gerald's collar. The mimicry wasf artful, slightly amorous, and 
since the love was hopeless, slighdy mocking too. 
 Really everything nice about Polly was a calculation. 
 Morgan, the woman Polly had brought, came to join Gerald's 
group, where they were going back over the scandal of Oxford refusing 
the PM an honorary degree. 
 John Timms, with his intense belief in form, regarded the 
incident as an outrage, but Barry Groom, who hadn't bothered with 
Oxford, said, 'Fuck 'em's what I say,' in a sharp frank tone that made 
Morgan blush and then weigh in like a man herself. The only touching 
thing about her was her evident uncertainty as to when or why 
anything was funny. 'They seem to think the lady's not for learning,' 
Gerald said. She looked bewilderedly at their laughing faces. 
 From the balcony, in the late July evening, the gardens receded 
in depth beyond depth of green, like some mysterious Hodgkin, to a 
point where a faintly luminous couple reclined on the grass. The 
astonishing greenness of London in summer. The great pale height of 
the after-dusk sky, birds cheeping and falling silent, an invincible 
solitude stretching out from the past like the slowly darkening east. 
The darkness climbed the sky, and die colours surrendered, the green 
became a dozen greys and blacks, the distant couple faded and 
disappeared. 
 'Hallo there…!' 
 'Oh hi, Jasper.' 
 'How are you, then, darling?' - almost tweaking him in the ribs. 
'Very well. How are you?' 
 'Ooh, not bad. A bit tired…' 
 'Hmm. What have you been up to?' 
 Young Jasper, no younger probably than Nick, but with his 
chancy just-out-of-school look, quick and lazy at the same time, his 
flirtiness, his assumption he knew you, as if by bedding, or flooring, 
Catherine he gained equal rights, an instant history, with her intimate 
old friend… Jasper couldn't have known they'd been overheard 
upstairs, but his little smirk coming and going invited you to guess 
he'd been up to something. He had the pink of sex about him still. He 
leant by Nick on the balustrade, and he was clearly fairly drunk. 'Is 
Catherine OK?' 
 'Yeah… She's a bit knackered, she's turned in. This isn't really 
her sort of scene.' 
 Nick stared at the compound presumption of this remark and 
said, 'Things going OK between you two?' 
 'Ooh yes,' said Jasper, with a momentary pout, a wincing frown, 
to say how very hot it was. 'No, she's a lovely lady.' 
 Nick couldn't rise to this. After a moment he said, as nicely as he 
could, 'You are looking after her, aren't you, Jasper?' 
 'Hark at Uncle Nick,' said Jasper, piqued and somehow furtive. 
 'I mean, she seems quite steady at the moment, but it would just 
be disastrous if she came off this medication again.' 
 'I think she's got it all sorted out,' said Jasper, after a pause, 
adjusting his tone, his whole accent. He stood back and pushed his 
right hand through his glossy chestnut forelock, which immediately fell 
forward again; then the hand went into his jacket pocket, with just the 
thumb hooked out: subtly annoying gestures meant perhaps to convey 
commitment and dash to the doubtful house-buyer. 'She thinks the 
world of you, Nick,' he said. Polly Tompkins had come out onto the 
balcony, perhaps jealous at seeing Nick with the boy he had squashed 
unavailingly earlier. Nick introduced them in a thinly amused tone 
which made no great claims for either of them. 'I thought you were 
avoiding me,' he said. 
 Jasper was waiting casually to see what the terms were, and if 
this big fat double-breasted man, who could have been anything 
between twenty-five and fifty, was part of the gay conspiracy or the 
straight one. Polly said, 'You're such a social butterfly, I haven't been 
able to reach you with my net,' and looked at Jasper as if to say he 
could find a use for him, if Nick couldn't. Nick said, 'Well, I was a 
social caterpillar for years.' 
 Polly smiled and took out a packet of fags. 'You seem to be very 
close with our friend Mr Ouradi. What were you talking to him about, I 
wonder?' 
 'Oh, you know… cinema… Beethoven… Henry |ames.' 
 'Mmm…' Polly looked at the Silk Cut - a quitter's ten -but didn't 
open them. 'Or Lord Ouradi, as I suppose we shall soon be saying.' 
 Nick struggled to look unsurprised as he ran through all the 
reasons that Polly might be pulling his leg. He said, 'I wouldn't be 
surprised - there's a sort of reverse social gravity these days, isn't 
there. People just plummet upstairs.' 
 'I think Bertrand's rather more deserving than that,' said Polly, 
successfully resisting and pocketing the cigarettes. 
 Anyway, he's not British, is he?' Nick said airily, and rather 
proud of this objection. It was Polly, after all, who'd once called him a 
Levantine grocer. 
 'That's hardly an insuperable problem,' said Polly with a i|iiick 
pitying smile. 
 'Well, we must be going. I just wanted to say goodbye. Morgan 
has an early start tomorrow. She has to lly up to Edinburgh.' 
 'Well, my dear,' said Nick, 'one never sees you these days. I've 
given up keeping your place warm for you at the Shaftesbury' - a 
kindness, a bit of a sentimental gesture at the sort of friendship they 
had never actually had. 
 And Polly did a small but extraordinary thing: he looked at Nick 
and said, 'Not that I remotely concur with what you've just said - about 
the peerage.' He didn't flush or frown or grimace, but his long fat face 
seemed to harden in a fixative of threat and denial. 
 He went in, and Jasper followed him, turning to give Nick a curt 
little nod, in his own unconscious impression of Polly, so that the 
mannerism seemed to spread, a note of contempt that was a sign of 
allegiance. 
 
 
 
IO 
 
The service stairs were next to the main stairs, separated only by a 
wall, but what a difference there was between them: the narrow back 
stairs, dangerously unrailed, under the bleak gleam of a skylight, each 
step worn down to a steep hollow, turned tightly in a deep grey shaft; 
whereas the great main sweep, a miracle of cantilevers, dividing and 
joining again, was hung with the portraits of prince-bishops, and had 
ears of corn in its wrought-iron banisters that trembled to the tread. It 
was glory at last, an escalation of delight, from which small doors, 
flush with the panelling, moved by levers below the prince-bishops' 
high-heeled and rosetted shoes, gave access, at every turn, to the back 
stairs, and their treacherous gloom. How quickly, without noticing, one 
ran from one to the other, after the proud White Rabbit, a well-known 
Old Harrovian porn star with a sphincter that winked as bells rang, 
crowds murmured and pigeons flopped about the dormer window while 
Nick woke and turned in his own little room again, in the comfortable 
anticlimax of home. 
 On his back, in the curtained light, the inveterate habits of home 
took hold of him without a word… Wani, of course… yes, Wani… in the 
car… and that time with Ricky, the outrage of it… though home, 
historically, was a shrine of Toby-longing, almost extinct now, worked 
up only in moods of vicious nostalgia… still, it seemed possible… Toby 
of three years ago… at Hawkeswood… morning after the great party… 
calling him into the King's Room, sweaty with hangover under one 
roiled sheet… 'Fuck, what a night…!' and then he darted to the 
bathroom… only time he saw him naked… great innocent rower's 
arse… did that happen… did what happened next happen… and Wani 
that night… met him on the stairs… who would have dreamt… dark 
green velvet… oh god, Wani in the flat… tied to the posts of the ogee 
bed… It must be Mrs Creeley with his mother in the drive. They were 
talking about the car, Nick's little Mazda, 'a nice litde runaround' his 
father had called it, to minimize their evident anxiety as to how he had 
come by such a thing. NG 2485: Mrs Creeley was thrilled by the 
number plate, Mrs Guest perhaps not so sure. 
 ('You must be doing very well, dear,' she had said, in just the 
tone she would use to say 'You don't look very well, dear.') Wood 
pigeons in the trees, in the thick spruces at the front, making their 
broody calls, reproachful, condoning -who knew? The two women 
moved away, in the slow trawl of gossip, over the gravel: talk about the 
sale of the field, syllables only, on the faint breeze through the open 
top window, overlaid by the pigeons, the talk beaded and chiming, 
rhythmic and nonsensical, the breeze lifting and dropping the curtain 
in one lazy breath, hushing the voices. The lie-in: time-honoured 
concession of school holidays, the rare weekend visits. His father 
would have gone to the shop - he might have woken to the familiar 
drag of garage door, thump of car door, and then wandered sideways 
again into staircase dreams. Mrs Creeley went, he didn't hear his 
mother come inside, she had probably got up in gardening trousers, an 
old blouse that didn't matter. They had Gerald descending tonight, and 
the house, inside and out, would be ready for an inspection… A little 
later came the leisurely clop of a horse, sounds as abstract and 
calming as other people's exertions on the tennis courts at home -at 
his other home. He wasn't sure, but he thought it was right that no 
horse had equal tone or resonance in all four hooves, as it distanced it 
made an odd sauntering impression, a syncopation, until lastly only 
one hoof continued faintly to be heard. 
 Out on the edge of town was where they were, where they'd 
carefully and long-sightedly chosen to be, on Cherry Tree Lane, decent 
post-war houses with plenty of garden, and only a view of fields at the 
back, and horses leaning in from time to time to chomp at the 
delphiniums and the weeping willow. And now the dreaded thing had 
happened, Sidney Hayes had bought next door, and thus at last got 
access from the lane to the field where he kept his horses, and got 
planning permission too, exceedingly quickly, five houses to the acre. 
Everyone had objected to the plans, and Nick had even been made 
embarrassingly to bring it up with Gerald, as their MP, who said of 
course he'd put a stop it, but quickly lost interest since no conditions 
had been breached, in fact rather the reverse, there was a property 
boom, home ownership was within the grasp of all, and even with the 
new development on top of them the value of 'Linnells' was destined to 
soar. All this cast a muddling running shadow over Don and Dot 
Guest's lives. They were more comfortable than they'd ever been, 
business was better, and yet across their treasured view a long-held 
worry was about to materialize in bricks and slates. 
 Despite its long mute presence in his life Nick found it hard to 
care for the house, its pinkish walls and metal-framed windows; it 
lacked poetry. At Linnells, as Gerald had said of Hawkeswood, the 
contents were the thing: a ruck of furniture, crowded families of 
Staffordshire and Chelsea figures, three clocks ticking competitively in 
one room, where the real family sat, supervised and even a little 
oppressed by their own possessions. Which changed, unpredictably, 
when something came into the shop that Don wanted to live with, or 
when a buyer was suddenly found for something in the house. So the 
market squeezed on them, acceptably, amusingly, and they would let a 
chest or a grandfather clock go, which in Nick's young life had the 
status of an heirloom already. For years he had had a nice wide walnut 
bed, a snug double of imagined couplings - the whorls and fans in the 
grain of the walnut were the underwater blooms of adolescent thought, 
pale pond-life of a hundred lie-ins. But one Christmas, in fact die one 
after he had come out, he arrived home to find it had been sold from 
under him, and replaced by something plain, modern, single and 
inhibitingly squeaky. In the past year or so, as business boomed, Don 
had started asking 'London prices', which had always been family code 
for extortion. 
 Meanwhile London prices themselves had climbed, so Guest's 
was still cheaper and worth a day trip from town. Yesterday, after the 
big uneasy surprise of the car, Nick had had his own surprise, the 
missing bureau. 'You'll never guess what I got for it,' his father said - 
with a look of unaccustomed and still embarrassed greed. 
 Nick came downstairs and glanced out coyly at the car. He liked 
to give himself that little prepared surprise, it was new enough for the 
thrill of its first arrival to flare up beautifully again each morning. Like 
a child's new present it lit up a dull day, and made it worth getting up 
and going out, just to sit in the simmer of London traffic and feel the 
throb of possession. If it had shocked his parents, then it had shocked 
him too, die colour, the grin of it, the number plate, all things he 
wouldn't have chosen for himself. But the burden of choice and 
discretion had been taken off him, it was what Wani wanted him to 
have, and he let himself go. The car was his lower nature, wrapped in 
a gift ribbon, and he came to a quick accommodation with it, and 
found it not so bad or so low after all. A first car was a big day for a 
boy, and he wished his parents could just have clapped their hands at 
the fun of it; but that wasn't their way. He explained, as he smiled 
anxiously, that it was all to do with work, it was a tax write-off, it was 
nonsense he didn't understand himself. He tried to entertain diem with 
the mechanism of the roof, and opened the bonnet for his father to 
look at the cylinders and things, which he did with a nod and a hum; 
clocks, not engines, were his oily interest. Nick wondered why they 
couldn't share in his excitement; but had to admit, after ten minutes, 
that he'd somehow known they wouldn't - the hilarity of his arrival had 
been a self-delusion. He thought of an obscure childhood incident 
when he'd stolen ten shillings from his mother to buy her a present of 
a little china hen; he'd denied it through such storms of tears that he 
wasn't sure now if he'd stolen the money or not; he'd almost convinced 
himself of his innocence. The episode still darkened his mind as a 
failed, an obscurely guilty, attempt to please. It was the same with the 
car, they couldn't see where it came from, and they were right in a 
way, since they knew him so well: there was something very important 
he wasn't telling them. In Rachel's terms the Mazda was certainly 
vulgar and potentially unsafe; but for Don and Dot its shiny red snout 
in the drive was more than that, it was the shock of who Nick was, and 
the disappointment. 
 Gerald was in Barwick on various duties, first the Summer Fete, 
which he was opening at two o'clock, and later a dinner at the Crown 
to mark the retirement of the agent; in between he was due to look in 
at Cherry Tree Lane for a drink. 
 It was the last weekend bef amp; re their departure to France, 
and his usual bad temper about anything to do with Barwick was only 
soothed by the prospect of making speeches at at least two of these 
events. Rachel had stayed at home, and Penny had come tip with 
Gerald to write down people's names on bits of paper and prevent 
those muddles which had caused some bad feeling in die past. 
 The Barwick Fete, which Nick hadn't been to since his 
schooldays, was held in Abbots' Field, a park near the middle of town. 
On a normal Saturday afternoon the field had two dim attractions, a 
fragment of the once great Augustinian abbey, and a Gents where the 
maniacal rejoinders and obliterations of the graffiti had come to 
interest Nick in his adolescence even more than the Curvilinear tracery 
of the monks' choir. He had never made contact in the Gents, never 
acted on die graffiti, but whenever he passed it on a walk with his 
mother and heard the busy unattended flush of the urinal, his look 
became tense and tactful, he felt the kinship of an unknown crowd. 
Today the field was ringed with stalls, there was a skittle alley hedged 
with straw bales, a traction engine let out shrill whistles, and the silver 
prize band warred euphoniously with a jangling old carousel. Nick 
wandered round feeling both distinguished and invisible. He stopped 
to talk to friends of his parents, who were genial but just perceptibly 
short with him, because of what they knew or guessed about him. 
 The friendliness, a note of bright supportive pity, was really 
directed to his parents, not to him. It made him wonder for a moment 
how he was talked about; it must be hard for his motlier to boast 
about him. Being sort of the art adviser on a non-existent magazine 
was as obscure and unsatisfactory as being gay. He scented a false 
respect, which perhaps was just good manners; a reluctance to be 
drawn into truth-telling talk. He saw Mr Leverton, his old English 
master, who had done The Turn of the Screw with him and sent him 
off to Oxford, and they had a chat about Nick's doctorate. Nick called 
him Stanley now, with a residual sense of transgression. He felt a kind 
of longing behind Mr Leverton s black-framed glasses for the larger 
field of speculation Nick was moving in, and for other things too. The 
old tone of crisp enthusiasm quavered with a new anxiety about 
keeping up. He said, 'Come back and see us! Come and talk to the A-
level lot. We've had a very jolly Hopkins group this year.' Later Nick 
said hello to Miss Avison, who much earlier in his life had taught him 
ballroom dancing; his motlier had said it would be something he'd 
always be grateful for. 
 She remembered all the children she'd taught, and with no 
acknowledgement that they'd grown and changed and hadn't danced a 
waltz or a two-step for twenty years. Nick felt for a moment he was still 
a treasured and blissfully obedient little boy. 
 The tannoy crackled and whined. Nick was at the far end of the 
field, dawdling behind a group of local lads, and pretending to admire 
a stall of primitive local pottery. The mayoress made a very dull 
speech, but it rode on the goodwill of the audience, and on the 
expectation that it would be over much sooner than it was. Families 
rambled with a half-attentive air across the grass. Her chain could be 
seen, the glint of glasses, and her bright-blue, white-bowed prime-
ministerial dress, on the low platform; and, Gerald, standing behind, 
with beaming impatience. She said something unfortunate about not 
being. ible to get a celebrity to open the proceedings this summer, but 
at least the person they had got was on time - 'unlike a cer-t. iin star of 
the airwaves last year!' After this Gerald leapt up to i lie mike as if 
seizing the controls of a bus from a drunk. 
 There was applause, not easy to measure, lost in the open air; as 
well as one or two shouts and klaxon-squawks to remind (icrald that 
though he had a large majority there were still constituents unsedated 
by council-house sales and tax cuts. 'I liked it when they had Derek 
Nimmo,' a woman said to Nick. Nick knew what she meant, he 
absorbed people's gibes about i Icrald without protest, but still felt the 
old secret pride at knowing him. He gazed around, followed the Carter 
boy's? hazing arse with his eyes, smiled loyally at Gerald's jokes, and 
sensed in them a mixture of piety and condescension rather like his 
own. He felt so decadent here. And how could you honestly expect 
Gerald, at the door of the Cabinet, in the I. uly's favour, an amusing 
speaker from the floor of the House, to bother very much for an 
audience of squalling kids and deaf pensioners? 
 Catherine said Gerald despised his constituents. 'If only you 
didn't have to be MP for somewhere,' she said, 'Gerald would be 
completely happy. You know he loathes Barwick, don't you.' Nick had 
laughed at this, but wondered if his 'dear ma and pa' were in fact 
exempt from die loathing. 'This is a classic English day,' Gerald was 
saying now, 'and a classic English scene.' And Nick appealed against 
Catherine's judgement. Surely something else is happening, beneath 
the cheerful imposture: it can't help mattering to him - as he speaks 
these platitudes he comes to think they're fine words after all, he's 
caught up on a wave of rhetoric and selfesteem. He told a joke about a 
Frenchman on a cycling holiday tliat went down well; and as he wound 
up, at just the right time, he managed to suggest that far from being a 
rich businessman who came down from London to loathe them he was 
in fact the spirit of Barwick, the Pickwick of Barwick, opening the fete 
to them as if it were his own house. He cut the tape, which demarcated 
nothing, in a decisive lunge: the sliding snap of the shears could be 
heard over the microphone. 
 After this Gerald was led off on a quasi-royal tour of the fete, his 
style hampered by the mayoress, who fell naturally into the role of 
consort. Nick wanted to keep an eye on who was going into the Gents, 
but felt the pull of the London party too, and strolled over to join 
Penny. 'That went well,' he said. 
 'Gerald was excellent, of course,' said Penny. 'We're not very 
pleased with the mayoress.' They watched the mayoress now, at the 
jam stall, looking at the prices as if they were trying to cheat her, and 
might need beating down; at which Gerald, who didn't know the shop 
price of anything except champagne and haircuts, impulsively bought 
two jars of marmalade for a fiver and posed with them for the local 
press. 'Hold them up a bit, sir!' - and Gerald, always reassured by the 
attendance of photographers, cupped them in front of him, almost 
lewdly, until Penny came forward, silent agent of a wish, and took 
them from him; he held on to them for a moment as he passed them 
over and murmured, 'Je dois me separer de cette femme commune.' 
 At the tombola he bought ten tickets, and stood around waiting 
for the draw. The prizes were bottles, of all kinds, from HP Sauce to 
Johnnie Walker. He hadn't dressed for the country at all, and his 
keynote blue shirt with white collar and red tie, and'his double-
breasted pinstripe suit, stood out as a dash of Westminster among the 
shirtsleeves and jeans and cheap cotton frocks. He nodded and smiled 
at a woman beside him and said, 'Are you having a good day?' 
 'Mustn't grumble,' said the woman. 'I'm after that bottle of cherry 
brandy.' 
 'Jolly good - well, good luck. I don't suppose I'll win anything.' 
 'I don't suppose you need to, do you?' All right, Mr Fedden, sir!' 
said the tombola man. 
 'Hello! Nice to see you…' said Gerald, which was his politician's 
way of covering the possibility that they'd met before. 'Here we go, 
then! HP Sauce, I expect, for you, isn't it, sir?' 
 'You never know your luck,' said Gerald - and then, as the 
hexagonal drum was cranked round, 'Something for everybody! All 
shall have prizes!' 
 Ah, we've heard that before,' said a man in gold-rimmed glasses 
who evidently fell into the category of 'smart-alec socialist', the sort 
who asked questions full of uncheckable statistics. 
 'Nice to see you too,' Gerald said, turning his attention to the 
numbers. 'Hah!' said the man. 
 The cherry-brandy lady won a half-bottle of Mira Mart gin, and 
laughed, and blushed violendy, as if she'd already drunk it and 
disgraced herself. Lemonade, dien Guinness, went next. Then Gerald 
won a bottle of Lambrusco. 'Ah, splendid…'he said, and laughed 
facetiously. 
 'I understand you like a drop of wine, sir,' said the tombola man, 
handing it over. 'Absolutely!' said Gerald. 'Don't keep it,' whispered 
Penny, just beside him. 'Mmm…?' 
 'One doesn't keep the prize. Doesn't look good…' 
 'Looks bloody awful,' Gerald muttered; then boomed 
considerately, 'I don't feel I should snatch victory from my own 
constituents.' Shy cheers were sounded. 
 'Barbara - can I persuade you…?' 
 The lady mayor seemed to register at least three insults in this 
proposal: to her status, to her taste, and to her well-advertised 
abstinence. Nick had a hunch too that she wasn't called Barbara. 
Wasn't she Brenda Nelson? The botde lay for a moment in Gerald's 
hands, as if tendered by a mocking sommelier. Then he passed it 
hastily back to the trestle table. 'Give someone else a treat,' he said, 
with a nod. 
 Still, die feeling that he ought to be allowed to win some-thing\zA 
clearly taken hold of him. Seeing his chance, craning round as if he'd 
lost someone, he struck out by himself through the crowds. Penny 
trotted patiently after him, clutching the marmalade, and then Nick, 
some way behind the wake of laughter and agitation that followed 
Gerald's passage. 
 The sport of welly-whanging was unknown in the Surrey of 
Gerald's youth, as it was of course in contemporary Notting Hill; the 
only wellies he ever touched in middle life were the green ones 
unhoused from the basement passage for winter weekends with 
country friends. But at Barwick, which still had a regular livestock 
market and loose straw blowing in the street, the welly, black, leaden-
soled, loose on the heel, was an unembarrassed fact, and whanging it 
a popular pastime. Gerald approached die flimsy archway made of two 
poles and a banner, beneatli which a white chalk crease had been 
drawn. 'Put me in for a go!' he said. He had die expression of a good 
sport, since he was new to the game, but a glint of steel showed 
dirough. 'That's 25p a whang, sir, or five for a pound.' 
 'Ooh, give us a quid's worth,' said Gerald, in a special plummy 
voice he used for slang. He groped busily in his pockets, but 1ie'd 
spent all his change already. He got out his wallet and was hesitandy 
offering a &#1032;20 note when Penny stepped forward and put a 
pound coin on the table. Ah, splendid…' said Gerald, observing a 
couple of teenage boys who weren't making an effort - die boot plonked 
to earth a few feet in front of them. 'OK…!' 
 He took the boot and weighed it in his hand. People gathered 
round, since it was something of an event, their MP, in his bespoke 
pinstripe and red tie, clutching an old Wellington boot and about to 
hurl it through the air. 'Know how to whang it, then, Gerald?' said a 
local, perhaps kindly. Gerald frowned, as though to say that 
instruction could hardly be necessary. He'd seen the ineffectual lob of 
die boys. He took his first shot from the chest, in muddled imitation 
perhaps of a darts-player or shot-putter, the sole to die fore. But he 
had underestimated die weight of the diing, and it landed between the 
first two lines. 'You've got to really whang it,' said a sturdy but 
anxious-looking woman, you know…' - and she made a big arcing 
gesture. The boot was handed back to him by a litde boy and he tried 
again, with a barely amused smile, as if to say that taking advice from 
working-class women in headscarves and curlers was all part of being 
their MP. He dutifully imitated her windmilling gesture, but perhaps 
because of die restriction imposed at the top of the arc by his tighdy 
tailored jacket, he let go of the boot in a twirling spin - it turned over 
two or diree times in the air before diudding to the grass. 'Now that's a 
bit better,' someone murmured. 'Now you're getting there!' Another 
man called out hectically, 'Up the Conservatives!' Nick realized with a 
soft shock that there was a lot of goodwill for Gerald among the crowd, 
as well as the common sense of delight at seeing a famous person 
perform even the simplest task; and Gerald seemed to draw on this for 
his third attempt. He unbuttoned his jacket, an action which itself was 
greeted with approval, and sent the welly in a vigorous underarm lob, 
still wastefuUy high, but landing beyond the twenty-yard mark. There 
was applause, and varied advice, as to where to hold the boot, at the 
top or halfway down or at the heel, and Gerald obligingly tried out the 
different grips. The fourth go was as wildly wrong as a return off tlie 
edge of the racket in tennis. There was some exasperation among the 
onlookers, again mixed in with a kind of solicitude, and a very ironic 
voice, which turned out to be that of the smart-alec socialist, said, 
'That's all right, you have to be prepared to make a fool of yourself For 
his final shot, with a sharp snuffle as he let go, Gerald sent the missile 
in a long low arc, and it landed and bounced wobblingly aside in the 
uncali-brated zone beyond twenty-five yards. The boy ran in and stuck 
a blue golf tee at the point of contact. There was applause, and 
pictures were taken by the press and the public. 'I hope I've won a 
prize,' Gerald said. 
 'Ah, you won't know yet, Gerald,' said a helpful local. It was an 
extension perhaps of the bogus camaraderie of election time, the blind 
forging of friendships, that constituents felt free to call their MP by his 
Christian name, and in Geralds face a momentary coldness was 
covered by a kind of bashful-ness, bogus or not, at being a public 
property, the people's friend. 'Mr Trevor,' murmured Penny at his 
elbow. 'Septic tank.' 
 'Hullo, Trevor,' said Gerald, which made him sound like the 
gardener. 'Five o'clock,' Mr Trevor said. 'That's when we'll know: one 
that's thrown the farthest wins the pig.' And he pointed to a small pen, 
previously hidden by the crowd, in which a Gloucester Old Spot was 
nosing through a pile of cabbage stalks. 
 'Goodness…' said Gerald, laughing uneasily, as if he'd been 
shown a python in a tank. 'Breakfast, dinner and tea for a month!' said 
Mr Trevor. 
 'Yes, indeed… Though we don't actually eat pork,' Gerald said, 
and he was turning to move on when he saw the man in gold-rimmed 
glasses approaching the oche and weighing the gumboot knowingly in 
his hand. 
 Ah, Cecil'll show you a thing or two!' shouted out the woman in 
curlers, who maybe wasn't Gerald s friend after all -you never knew 
with these people. Cecil was slight, but wiry and determined, and 
everything he did he did with a thin smile. Gerald waited to see what 
happened, and Nick and Penny closed in and tried to talk to him about 
something else. 'I bet he knows some trick,' said Gerald, 'what…?' 
 Cecil's trick was to take a short run-up, and then with a 
complete revolution of the arm to send the welly flying as if to a waiting 
batsman - it was a dropper, the boot descending steeply to a spot a 
yard beyond Gerald's final mark; the boy ran out and pressed in a red 
golf tee. Then Cecil had another trick, which was to throw it underarm, 
lofting it not too high, and bringing it down short of the first shot, but 
still beyond the blue tee. He had a grasp of the weight and direction of 
the thing, the trajectory, no mid-air wavering or tumbling. He refined 
and varied these methods, and with his last go went a good three yards 
over his own record. Then, wiping his hands, his smile twitchily 
controlled, he walked over and stood not next to but near Gerald. Ah, 
shame, but there you are,' said Mr Trevor. 'Still, if you've no use for the 
animal -' Gerald said breezily, 'Oh, damn the animal,' and looked from 
Penny to Nick, and then to the bristlingly insouciant figure of Cecil. He 
began to remove his jacket, with tiny quick head-shakings, his colour 
rising, making a joke of his own temperament, frowning and smirking 
at once. 'I feel that can't be allowed to pass without a firm rejoinder,' 
he said, in his humorous but meaningful debating tone. There were 
cheers, and also a few whistles, as his jacket came off and blue braces, 
dark sweat-blooms, were revealed: a sense, depending on how you 
looked at it, that Gerald was being a terrific sport or that he was 
making a fool of himself, as Cecil had said. Penny, always vigilant, took 
his jacket with an eyebrow-flicker of caution, but enough of a smile to 
be publicly supportive. 
 Then she had to search in her bag for another pound coin. 'So 
you've won a pig!' 
 Nick's mother said, bringing Gerald through into the sitting room 
at Linnells. 
 'Goodness…' 
 'I know…' said Gerald. He still looked a bit flushed from the 
effort, in need of a shower perhaps, hair smeared back, a bit barmy 
still with adrenalin. 'It went to five rounds but I got him in the end. I 
won convincingly.' Dot Guest glanced about the densely furnished 
room, gestured at one seat after another, and seemed to feel that the 
house was too small altogether for Gerald. He kicked against things, 
he was untamed, it was almost as if the pig had come barging in after 
him. He went to the window at the back and said, 'What a charming 
view. You're virtually in the country here, aren't you.' 
 Courteously, and very timidly, clearing a space on a side table, 
Dot murmured, 'Yes… we are… as good as…' and then looked up 
gratefully as Don came in with gin-and-tonics on a silver tray. Gerald 
had entirely forgotten about the field. 
 'Well, what a day, who'd have thought it,' he said: 'welly-
whanging: another string to my bow.' And he flung himself down in 
Don's armchair as if he lived there, just to put them at their ease. 
'Thanks so much, Don' - reaching up for his drink. 'I feel I've earned 
this.' 
 'Where is the pig?' Nick's father said. 
 'Oh, I've given it to the hospital. One doesn't keep the prize, 
obviously, on these occasions. Good health!' 
 Nick watched them all take refuge in their first sip. He felt 
ashamed of the smallness of the drinks, and the way his father had 
made them in the kitchen and brought them in like a treat. His 
parents looked at Gerald proudly but nervously. They were so small 
and neat, almost childlike, and Gerald was so glowing and sprawling 
and larger than local life. Don was wearing a bright red bow tie. When 
he was little Nick had revered his father's bow ties, the conjurors trick 
of their knotting, the aesthetic contrasts and implications of the 
different colours and patterns - he'd had keen favourites, and almost a 
horror of one or two, he had lived in the daily drama of those strips of 
paisley silk and spotted terylene, so superior to the kipper ties of other 
dads. But now he was made uneasy by the scarlet twist below the trim 
white beard; he thought his father looked a bit of a twit. 
 Dot said, 'We're lucky you had time to come and see us. I know 
you must be terribly busy. And you're about to go away, aren't you?' It 
was one of her 'professional' worries, all parts of the great worry of 
London itself, along with fainting Guardsmen and the tedium of being 
in The Mousetrap, as to how MPs coped with their massive workloads; 
it was something Nick had been asked to find out when he moved in. 
His conclusion, that Gerald didn't do die work at all, but relied on 
briefings by hard-working secretaries and assistants, was considered 
cynical and therefore untrue by his mother. 
 Gerald said, 'Yes, we're off on Monday,' and gave a great shrug of 
relief. Nick could see him, bored and suggestible, start brooding at 
once on the superior pleasures of the manoir. 
 'I wonder how you fit it all in,' Dot said, 'all the reading you must 
have to do. It worries me - Nick says I'm silly… You probably never 
sleep, do you, I don't see how you could! That's what they say about… 
the Lady, isn't it?' 
 Nick had inculcated his parents with Gerald's form the Lady, but 
was embarrassed to hear them use it in front of him. He seemed to 
take it as a tribute, however, both to her and to himself. 'What, four 
hours a night?' he said, with an admiring chuckle. 'Yes, but the PM's a 
phenomenon - terrifying energf. I'm a mere mortal, I need my beauty 
sleep, I'm not ashamed to say.' 
 'She looks beautiful without any sleep, then,' said Dot piously, 
and Don nodded his agreement, too shy, as yet, to ask the question 
that burned in them both: what was she like? 
 Gerald, knowing they wanted to ask that, showed he hadn't lost 
sight of the original question. 'But you're right, of course.' He took 
them into his confidence. 'The paperwork can be quite overwhelming at 
times. I'm lucky in that I'm a fast reader. And I've got a memory like an 
ostrich. I can gut the Telegraph in ten minutes and the Mail in four - 
you just get a knack for it.' 
 'Ah,' said Dot, and nodded slowly. And how is your daughter?' 
She was being attentive and courteous, and Nick saw that she would 
run through things that troubled her, and hope to get a better answer 
out of Gerald than she could out of him. 'I know you've been worried 
about her, haven't you?' 
 'Oh, she's fine,' said Gerald breezily; and then seeing some use in 
the idea of being worried, 'She's had her ups and downs, hasn't she, 
Nick - the old Puss? 
 It's not easy being her. But you know, this thing called librium 
that she's on has been an absolute godsend. Sort of wonder drug…' 
 'Mm… lithium,' said Nick. 
 'Oh yes…?' said Dot, looking uneasily from one to the other. 
'She's just a much happier young pussycat. I think we've turned the 
corner.' Nick said, 'She's doing some great work now, at St Martin's.' 
 'Yes, she's doing marvellous collages and things,' said Gerald. 
 Ah, modern art, no doubt,' said Don, with a dreary ironic look at 
Nick. 
 'Don't pretend to be a philistine, Dad,' said Nick, and saw him 
unable to separate the praise from the reproach; the French 
pronunciation of philistine didn't help. 
 'It seems to work for her, anyway,' said Gerald, who liked the 
therapeutic excuse for Catherine's large abstract efforts. And she's got 
a super boyfriend, that we're all very happy about. Because we haven't 
always had good luck on that front.' 
 'Oh…' said Dot, and looked down at her drink as if to say that 
neither, indeed, had they. 
 'Mm, we're jolly proud of her, in fact,' said Gerald grandly, so that 
he seemed slightly ashamed. And we're all going to be together in 
France this year, which Rachel and I are delighted about. First time for 
some years. And Nick too, as you know, will be joining us… at least for 
a bit… long overdue…' and Gerald guzzled the rest of his gin-and-
tonic. 'Oh,' said Dot, you didn't say, dear.' 
 'Oh, yes,' said Nick. 'Well, I'm going with Wani Ouradi, you know, 
who I'm working with on this magazine - we're going to Italy and 
Germany to look at things for that, and then we hope to drop in at… 
the manoir, for a few days on the way back.' 
 'That'll be a wonderful experience for you, old boy,' Don said. And 
Nick thought, really the poor old things, they do as well as they can; 
but for a minute he almost blamed them for not knowing he was going 
to Europe with Wani, and for making him tell them a plan so heavy 
with hidden meaning. It wasn't their fault that they didn't know - Nick 
couldn't tell them things, and so everything he said and did took on 
the nature of a surprise, big or little but somehow never wholly benign, 
since they were aftershocks of the original surprise, that he was, as his 
mother said, a whatsit. 
 'Because you normally have Nick to look after the house for you, 
don't you,' she said. 'When you're away.' She clung to this fact, as a 
proof of his trustworthiness to important others, who apparently didn't 
care about his being a whatsit one way or the other. 
 'Poor old Nick, he has got rather landed with that in the past. 
This year we'll have our housekeeper and her daughter move in, and 
they can do a massive clean-up of the house without us getting under 
their feet. It makes a bit of a holiday for them.' Gerald gestured 
liberally with his empty glass. 
 'That sounds like the sort of holiday I'm used to!' said Dot, who 
longed for the spoiling of a hotel, but was subjected to her sister-in-
law's cottage at Holkham each September. 
 Don brought Gerald a refill, and had a tiny one himself; they 
tended not to go at quite that pace. He said, 'He's a good chap, is he, 
this Ouradi?' 
 'You haven't met him… no… Oh, he's a charmer, absolutely. My 
son Tobias and he were great friends at Oxford - well, you all were, 
weren't you, Nick.' 
 'I didn't get to know him well until a bit later,' Nick said carefully, 
remembering the bathroom of the Flintshires' Mayfair house, the way 
the coke numbed their lips as they kissed. It gave him a tingle now, 
the thought of the other world that was waiting for him. 'Someone in 
his position can't help but do well,' said Don. 'I have the feeling…' said 
Gerald, with a condescending twinkle. 'I know high hopes are riding on 
him. The father's quite a character, of course.' 
 'He's the supermarket chappie, isn't he.' 
 'Bertrand? Oh, a great man!' said Gerald, who used the word very 
freely, as if hoping it might stick as easily to himself. 'I mean, an 
outstanding businessman, obviously… Awfully sad, I didn't know till 
the other day, but you know, they lost their first son.' 
 'Oh, really…' 
 'Yup, he was knocked down by a lorry in the street, in Beirut of 
course. The child and his nanny or whatever they call them were both 
killed. Bertrand Ouradi was telling me about it only the other day.' 
 Nick had to pretend he already knew this, and nodded sombrely 
to confirm it to his parents, who murmured in sympathy but seemed 
not to care much, as if a death in Beirut were only to be expected. 'Yes, 
it was an awful thing,' Nick said. It was a total surprise. His first 
thought was that his smug reckonings of intimacy with Wani looked 
very foolish. It was the family mystery, hardly glimpsed, far stronger 
and darker than their little sexual conspiracy. And Wani was carrying 
that burden… He seemed instantly more touching, more glamorous 
and more forgivable. 
 'His fiancee looks a sweet little thing,' said Dot. 'I've seen her at 
the hairdresser's.' 
 'Really…' 
 'In the Tatler, I mean!' 
 'Ah, yes 'Of course Nick was in the Tatler, after that marvellous 
party of yours. We dined out on that for months.' This was one of his 
mother's favourite boasts, and strictly a figure of speech, since they 
only dined out about three times a year. 'Who's the other one we see? 
That great big fat one, that Nick knows? - Lord Shepton: he's always 
in.' 
 'What about this little runaround of Nick's?' said Don, with 
anxious enthusiasm. 
 'Mm, she's a lively little thing,' said Gerald. 
 'Did you say he'd given the car to you, dear, I didn't quite 
understand 'I told you, Mum,' Nick said, 'it's like a company car. I can 
drive it while I'm working for him.' 
 'He must think very highly of you,' Dot said doubtfully. 'Well, it's 
all another world, isn't it?' No one quite assented to this, and after a 
moment she went on, 'And how's your son?' 
 'Oh, he's in great shape. Set up his own little company now, we'll 
see how he gets on.' 
 'We used to see his name in the paper a lot!' said Don, as if 
Toby's back-half paragraphs on share prospects had been the highlight 
of their days. 
 'Mm, I think that was a bit of a wrong turning. He's an outdoor 
sort of chap, you know, far too confined by office life… Well, it only 
lasted five minutes; and good on him for giving it a go.' 
 'Oh, absolutely 'It was a bit more than that,' said Nick. 
 'Mm? Nick's probably right,' said Gerald. 'What was it, six 
months on the Guardian, where I don't think he felt at all at home, 
and then a year or so on the Telegraph, on the City desk… yah.' 
 'Some of Nick's university friends seem to have made their 
fortunes already,' said Dot. 'Who was it, dear, you said had bought a 
casde or something?' 
 'Oh…' said Nick, regretting having bragged about this. 'Yes, one 
of them has. 
 It's quite a small castle…! But he's in reinsurance, you know.' 
 Ah,' said Dot. Nick hoped she wouldn't ask him what reinsurance 
was. 'They go so fast these days, don't they!' she said, as if Gerald 
might be equally breathless at the thought. 'Lord Exmouth's son's 
doing jolly well,' said Don. Ah yes,' said Gerald. 'One of our local blue-
bloods!' He had suddenly become a Barwick man at the mention of the 
indigenous aristocracy. 
 'That's right,' said Don. 'Well, I look after the clocks at 
Monksbury, so I've seen young Lord David on and off since he was a 
little boy' 
 'Really…?' Gerald gave him a narrow look over the rim of his 
glass. 'You don't go to the Noseleys, I suppose?' 
 'Not since the old lady died,' said Don. 'I did a lot of work out 
there, ooh, ten years ago now I suppose. Of course they had death-
watch beetle at Noseley Abbey. They had a devil of a job getting rid of 
the little tinkers!' 
 Nick got up to pass round a dish of stuffed olives and made small 
waiterly noises to distract his father from saying what he knew was 
coming next. 'Thanks so much,' said Gerald. 
 'No, it's a pleasure doing things at these great houses,' Don said. 
'Even if they're not very quick at settling their accounts.' He looked 
round fondly. 
 'We've got so many of them round here. Nick's tired of hearing 
this, but I've got two earls, one viscount, one baron and two baronets 
on my books!' 
 'Quite a tally,' said Gerald. 'We'll have to see if we can find you a 
duke.' 
 'Of course, the fabulous thing,' said Nick, in a rush of shame, 'is 
the quality of the furniture in all these houses. Things that have been 
there for centuries.' 
 'Quite so…' Gerald nodded, as if he took that point very seriously 
himself. He raised and lowered his eyebrows, in perplexity at his empty 
glass. 
 Don said, 'Nick tells me you have some lovely pieces at your 
London house.' 
 'Oh…' A fair bit of French work, I believe?' 
 ' Quite a bit of French work, yes,' said Gerald, who didn't have a 
clue where most of it came from. And some lovely paintings too.' 
 Gerald gave them a look of thoughtful beneficence, just coloured 
with impatience, even a kind of disdain - or so it seemed to Nick, who 
felt for both parties, as though he were witnessing an argument with 
himself. 'You know you really should come and see us, shouldn't they, 
Nick? - or come even when we're away. Come when we're in France 
and make yourselves at home. Have the run of the place. You could 
have a look at all our stuff, while you're about it, and tell us what's 
what.' 
 'Well, that's immensely kind,' said Don, smiling at the seduction 
of the idea. 
 'Oh, I don't think we could,' said Dot, whose fear of liberties in 
general included even those that might be allowed to herself. 'I mean, 
it's awfully nice of you, of course…' She looked crushed by the offer, 
and bit her cheek as she peered at Don. Nick thought his mother 
sometimes obtuse and narrow-minded, he deplored her sillinesses, 
and at the same time he was so attuned to her moods, to the currents 
of implication between a mother and an only child, that he could trace 
the lines of her anxiety without effort. To come to Kensington Park 
Gardens, to stay in the house and rootle hesitantly around in it, would 
satisfy a curiosity; but it would also give unforgettable shape and 
detail to the world in which Nick lived, with its tolerance and its 
expenditure, its wine cellars and its housekeepers who hardly spoke 
English, and the Home Secretary ringing up just like that, which Nick 
said sometimes happened. It would be a flood of knowledge, and in 
general, as she said, she would rather not know anything more. 
 'Give it some thought, anyway,' said Gerald; and Nick knew, as 
his parents murmured and glowed, that it would never be mentioned 
again. He drove into the Market Square and slowed down as they 
approached CLOCKS D. N. GUEST ANTIQUES: 'There's our shop!' - he 
raised an arm, as if showing him the Doge's Palace or some other great 
thing he was about to visit. 
 'Absolutely!' said Gerald. Nick could only glance at it, but it had a 
presence for him, like a surprise he had prepared for someone else 
who could never feel it as keenly as he did himself. That side of the 
square was in shadow now, though the sun still glared on the odier 
side, on the white stucco front ©f the Crown Hotel. A cloudless sky 
above the roofs, the shops all shut, emptiness of a country town on a 
high summer evening; not quite empty, as weekenders strolled before 
dinner, peering into the locked shops, with a look of hoping to get the 
best from the place, and some lads, or 'louts', roamed about under the 
arches of the market hall. The market hall was the jewel of the town, a 
cage of glass and stone on a high arcade, still locally claimed, against 
all the evidence, as a work of Sir Christopher Wren. It had been the 
pride of Nick's childhood, he had done a project about it at school with 
measured plans and elevations, at the age of twelve it had ranked with 
the Taj Mahal and the Parliament Building in Ottawa in his private 
architectural heaven. The moment of accepting that it was not by Wren 
had been as bleak and exciting as puberty. Now he revved round it, the 
lads looked up, and he savoured the triumph of coming home in a 
throaty little runaround. It was as though the achievements of sex and 
equities and titles and drugs blew out in a long scarf behind him. No, 
it was real superiority, it was almost lonely, a world of pleasures and 
privileges these boys couldn't imagine, and thus beyond their envy. He 
pulled up in front of the Crown and Gerald sprang out, pushing a 
hand through his hair, torn between his sporty show-off self and a hint 
of compromised dignity, even of some worse anomaly in being seen in 
such a car with a young gay man. Penny was waiting, with her blush 
and her tight smile, her obedient strictness, and he went gratefully 
towards her. 'Have fun!' said Nick, and roared off half round the 
square again, thinking just how much he would like to do so himself. 
 He pulled into a parking space in the middle, where the market 
was on a Thursday, and turned off the engine. He would have to go 
home in a minute for dinner, and a cautious post-mortem on Gerald's 
visit. There would be a sense, at dinner, of new avenues of worry 
opened up… the suspicion, now Gerald had gone, that they didn't 
quite trust him: for all their nerves and good manners they had a 
sharp ear for bombast, they were more sensitive than they admitted; 
they would have noticed that Gerald asked them nothing at all about 
themselves; and they would think about Nick's London life from now 
on with a degree or two less of reassurance. His eyes ran over the shop 
again, which looked very shut, empty but purposeful, everything 
shadowy beyond the chairs in the window. It seemed freshly strange to 
have his family name there on a shopfront, he felt his schoolboy pride 
and his Oxford snobbery pinch on it from both directions, on his very 
own name, N. GUEST, plumb in the middle. He watched a group of 
boys passing slowly behind him, and moved his head to follow them in 
the mirror, where they seemed to prance and linger in a tinted 
distance. There was the clatter of a kicked can, a belch that echoed 
across the square. He thought, what if he'd stayed here, so far from 
the essentials of Heaven, the Opera, Ronnie's deliveries…? For a 
moment he laboured in the fiction of that alternative life - there were 
cultured people here, of course, with books and gramophones: when 
he tried to picture them they all took the form of his teachers at 
Barwick Grammar, Mr Leverton and his Hopkins group. There were 
one or two school friends he could probably count on. Statistically 
there ought to be five or six hundred homos in Barwick, hidden away, 
more or less, behind these shopfronts and unreadable upper windows. 
The Gents in Abbots' Field would become a wearisome magnet, an 
awful symbol. Across the road, half-dazzled by the evening sun, 
couples were arriving at the Crown for the dinner, the women in long 
skirts, their hair done, the men in suits, greeting each other with litde 
pats and after-yous, confusing attempts at social kissing (not between 
the men, of course), all of diem excited to be hearing their MP later on, 
but calm too with the sense of accumulated Tightness in being 
Conservatives. And fuck, there was Gary Carter, setting out on the 
scent of his own Saturday night, in a short denim jacket and stiffly 
tight new jeans and that terrible sexy haircut; he called across to a 
mate under the market hall, he showed himself off to him somehow, 
with the funny unchallengeable poofiness of a handsome straight boy 
in a country town. Though girls apparendy loved boys' bums too - good 
judgement, though Nick wasn't sure what they wanted with them. 
Gary passed under the market hall and out the other side, and started 
to amble back along the pavement behind. It was time to go; Nick 
sensed the atmosphere of Linnells waiting, in all its stolid innocence of 
what it was taking him away from. Then he shook himself, shocked to 
be dragged under and back by these small-town dreams. One way or 
another the place had to be left; he felt his long adolescence, its 
boredom and lust and its aesthetic ecstasies, laid up in amber in the 
sun-thickened light of the evening square; how he always loved the 
place, and how he used to yearn for London across the imagined miles 
of wheat fields, piggeries, and industrial sidings. He thought he would 
just cruise out past Gary and stir his interest and fix a picture of him 
in his mind for later. He started die car, and craning round to reverse 
into the road he saw the folder with Gerald's speech in it lying on the 
back seat. 
 Penny was sure to have another copy for him, in the hotel, 
though probably one without these inked-in jokes, underlinings and 
reminders: die text was revealingly marked up for so confident a 
speaker. The names Archie' and 'Veronica' were ringed in red at the top 
of the first sheet. The thing to do was to find Penny and insinuate the 
speech back into Gerald's hands. Drinks would be under way now, 
and Nick pictured already one of the grimly decorous 'suites', used for 
low-grade business conferences and Rotary dinners, where the 
function would be taking place. He was only wearing crumpled linen 
trousers and a short-sleeved shirt, but he could dart in like a 
stagehand with a forgotten prop, he could be functionally invisible, 
and for the Barwick Conservatives disbelief could remain suspended. 
 In the crowded front hall he was still the driver, die messenger, 
and if any of the guests recognized him, members of the Operatic, men 
who had filled his teeth and fitted him for school blazers, they didn't 
show it. If it was a snub it was also a relief. He asked at reception, and 
the girl thought Gerald had gone out to the car park at the rear - she 
tliought he wanted some air. Nick sidled out and went into the long 
corridor which turned and stepped up and stepped down through 
various awkward annexes towards the back of the building. Here 
hunting prints and old Speed maps of the county were hung against 
red-flock wallpaper; and the carpet was red, with an oppressive black 
swirl, like monstrous paisley. 
 Couples came towards him, half-smiling, crisply reassuring each 
other about the locked car, the tidied hair, the tablets patted in a 
pocket. They seemed satisfied by this passageway, the sketchy 
historical sham of it, the beer smells and cooked lamb smells in the 
spaces between fire doors. And there was Gerald, at the next corner, 
glancing to left and right as if planning an escape, a last quick minute 
of his real life before the show started -Nick didn't shout out because 
of the people in between, but he saw him push open a door at the side 
and pop in. 
 The sign said 'Staff Only', so that Nick looked round too -it was 
probably a back way through to the Fairfax Suite. Inside there was a 
service passage, less glaringly lit, and he saw Gerald's head through 
the small wired window in another wing door - and Penny's too, 
giggling: that was good, it meant things were under control. The door 
was still settling back in lazy wafts which was why perhaps the noise 
of Nick pushing it open didn't alert them - it was just a further 
rhythmic displacement of the stale air. He managed to make a 
kerfuffle, half turning back, trapping his leg and dropping the folder so 
that neither of them would know he had seen Penny's hand, like an 
amorous teenager's, tucked in the back pocket of Gerald's trousers. 
 However, he had seen it, and the shock of it, trite but enormous, 
made him distracted at dinner, when the anticipated crabwise 
conversation about Gerald took place. He agreed rather sourly with 
their jokey criticisms and spoke of him as if he'd never much cared for 
him. This made them even more uneasy. There was a summer repeat 
of Sedley on ITV, and they watched it after dinner in their excited 
ceremonious way, Dot saying (quite tipsy by now), 'My son knows him, 
you know! He's a great friend of Patrick Grayson!' and Nick thinking, 
why can't you see what a frightful old poof he is. 
 When they turned in, unbelievably early, the high summer 
twilight still beautiful outside, Nick called out 'Sleep well!' and closed 
his door with a bewildering sense of loss, as though Gerald and Rachel 
were really his parents, and not the undeviating old pair in their twin 
beds in the next room. Later he heard his father snoring through the 
wall, and the creak of his mother's bed - he pictured her pulling the 
blankets over her ears. Rachel had once admitted to Nick that Gerald 
snored too, though she'd done it in the way she sometimes pretended 
to a disadvantage, from polite awareness of her own good fortune ('I 
know, we can never get into Tante Claire'): 'He can make a bit of a 
rumpus,' she'd said. Nick drew and resisted various conclusions from 
what he had seen; he was greedy and then reluctant for unpleasant 
sensations. He thought perhaps he was being a bit of a prig. He 
thought of Gerald s regular visits to Barwick with Penny, almost 
always without Rachel. It was a system, a secret so routine it must 
have come to seem secure. And the steady disguise, of course, of die 
'loathing' for Barwick, the chore of the surgery, the boredom of 
meetings with Archie Manning… And what about in London? 
Presumably they couldn't do it there, the risk of detection would be too 
great. Or didn't much actually go on? Could Penny possibly be the sort 
of girl for all that? There might be some other excuse for die glimpse he 
had had in the hotel. Impossible to think of one. He wondered if Gerald 
was snoring now, and the image of what he probably was doing rose 
alarmingly in Nick's sex-picturing mind. Or if he was snoring, then it 
seemed to his partner like a bearable penalty of an illicit affair… Nick 
stopped and drew back with distaste for his own imagining of die 
thing. A little later he woke and die house was silent again, and the 
shock of what was happening came over him, his grown-up scorn of its 
utter banality and his child's ache of despair. He saw it had already 
become a secret of his own, a thing to carry unwillingly, a sour 
confusion of duties. He lay awake listening to the silence, which was 
illusory, a cover to a register of other sounds… the sigh of a grey 
poplar, the late half-conscious toppings-up of the cistern overhead, 
and within his ears remote soft percussions, like doors closing in non-
existent wings of the house. 
 
 
 
II 
 
(i) Toby said, 'You get a glimpse of the chateau on your left,' and he 
slowed down as a gap in the trees appeared. They saw steep slate 
roofs, purple-black brick, plate glass, the special nineteenth-century 
hardness. 'Right…' said Wani. 
 'But you don't have that any longer?' 
 'My grandfather sold it after the war,' said Toby. 
 'So who lives there now?' said Nick, whose heart was always 
caught by a lodge-house on a side road or a pinnacle among trees, and 
by Gothic Revival more dian Gothic itself. 'Can we go in?' 
 'It's a retirement home for old gendarmes,' Toby said. 'I have been 
in - it's pretty depressing'; and he pushed on along the potholed lane. 
'Oh,' said Nick doubtfully. 
 'They don't give you any trouble?' Wani wanted to know. 
 'They can get a bit rowdy,' Toby said. 'Once or twice we've had to 
call the police' - and he looked in the mirror to see if Nick smiled at his 
joke. Oh, Toby's jokes! - they made Nick want to scrunch him up in a 
protesting hug. 'So the house we're going to…?' said Wani. 
 'The manoir… was the original big house on the estate. It's jolly 
old, sort of sixteenth century I think - well, you'll see. It's not as big as 
the chateau, but it's much nicer. At least we all think so.' 
 'Right…' Wani drawled again, with a slight suggestion that he 
might have preferred the larger house, but was ready to muck in at the 
manoir. 'And this still belongs to Lionel?' 
 'Strictly speaking, yah,' said Toby. 
 Wani gazed out of the window as though he knew the value of 
everything. 'And so one day, old chap, it will all belong to you,' he said, 
with a mixture of rivalry and satisfaction. 
 'Well, me and my sis, of course.' This occupied a future that Nick 
couldn't easily imagine. 'So who's down here now?' asked Wani. 
 'Just us at the moment, I'm afraid,' said Toby: 'Ma and Pa, me 
and Catherine - oh, and Jasper.' 
 'Oh, is that her little boyfriend…' 
 'Yeah, have you met him, he's an estate agent.' 
 'I think I know who you mean,' said Wani. 
 'Jasper and Pa seem to have become best friends. I think he'll 
have the house on the market by the time we leave.' 
 Nick gave a snuffly laugh from the back seat, and thought what a 
terrible litde operator Jasper was, oiling his way into the family with 
his forelock and his dodgy voice; and Wani too - how flawless he was, 
making his quick social reconnaissance, everything hidden from Toby, 
his old friend. He looked at the backs of their heads, Wani's black 
curls, Toby's cropped and sunburned nape, and felt for an eerie 
moment what strangers they were to him, and perhaps to each other. 
They were only boys, but the height and territorial presumption of the 
Range Rover threw them into relief as men of the world, Toby sporting 
and unimaginative, Wani languid, with the softness and vigilance of 
money about him. 
 Perhaps being old friends didn't mean very much, they shared 
assumptions rather than lives. 
 Wani said, 'Oh, I bought the Clerkenwell building by the way' 
 'Oh, you did,' said Toby, 'good.' 
 'Four hundred K. I thought, really…' 
 'Yah…' said Toby, setting his face, looking bored. There was 
something stiff but acceptably adult to them both about this, about 
saying so litde. Wani hadn't even mentioned the deal to Nick. It was 
typical of his secrecy, both grand and petty, since he had given Nick 
the five thousand: he made him feel how that sum was eclipsed by the 
unnamed sublimities of his own transactions. 
 Nick said/Oh, that's great, I can't wait to see it.' He found he 
tried to keep up, as if to show that he had money, for the first time in 
his life; but having some money, and sitting in a car behind Toby and 
Wani, only made him realize how litde money he had - he felt self-
conscious with them now in a way that he never had when he was 
penniless. 'So no chance of Martine joining us?' Toby said. 
 'I don't think my mother can spare her,' said Wani, in a tone of 
imponderable irony. 'She'll have to one day,' said Toby, and gave a big 
laugh. 
 'I know…' said Wani; 'anyway, what about you, you fucker, are 
you seeing anyone?' 
 'Nah…' said Toby, with a sour grin of independence, and then 
gratefully, as if the joke could never fade, Ah! Here's our wrinkled 
retainer.' An old man was riding a bicycle towards them over the 
patchy road surface, his slowly rising and falling knees jutting out 
sideways - he stopped and tottered into the grass verge as Toby pulled 
up. 'Bonjour, Dede… Et comment va Liliane aujourd'hui?' 
 The old man held on to the car and looked in at them cautiously 
and with a hint of cunning. 'Pas bien,' he said. 
 Ah, je suis desoleV said Toby - insincerely it seemed to Nick, but 
it was only the play-acting, the capable new persona that came with 
speaking in a foreign language. A longish conversation followed, Toby 
fluent but with little attempt at a French accent, a sense of heightened 
goodwill and simplicity between them, and the old man's laconic 
answers coming like stamps of authenticity to die new arrivals, trying 
to hear and follow what was being said. Wani of course was a native 
French-speaker, but for Nick there was a warm sense of success when 
he could make out D6d6 s words. Jokes understood in a foreign 
language became amusing in a further, exemplary way: he was storing 
them already as the coinage, the argot, of their ten-day visit. He sat 
back, smiling tolerantly, loving the heat and the sunlight through the 
huge old roadside oaks and chestnuts, and the sense of a prepared 
surprise, of being led through screened back ways towards a view. 
There was that tingle in the air that you got in even modestly 
mountainous country, the imminence of a drop, of space instead of 
mass. 
 Toby wound up the conversation, they all nodded solicitously at 
Dede, and the car crept on again. Nick said, 'I hope your 
grandmother's still coming down.' 
 'Don't worry,' said Toby, 'she's coming on Tuesday. And the 
Tippers are coming too, I'm sorry about that.' 
 'That's fine,' said Wani. 
 'It's bloody good to have you guys here,' Toby said, and looked 
affectionately for Nick again in the mirror. 
 'It's fabulous to be here,' said Nick, with just a shiver, as they 
turned in between urn-crowned gate-piers, of the old feeling, from the 
first day at Oxford, the first morning at Kensington Park Gardens, of 
innocence and longing. 
 A three-sided courtyard was made by the sombre entrance front 
of the house, creeper-covered and small-windowed, a lower wing to the 
left, and an old barn and stable on the right. The house itself hid the 
view, and it was only through the open front door and the shadowy 
hallway that Nick caught a hint of the dazzle beyond, a further small 
doorway of light. He picked his bags out from the car, and watched 
Wani gesturing belatedly as Toby plucked up his cases and strode 
indoors with them, his sandalled feet thwacking on the stone flags and 
his calf muscles square and brown. He seemed to tread there for a 
moment, framed and silhouetted, as he had at the Worcester lodge, all 
diose years ago, in the archway that led from the outside world to the 
inner garden: Toby, who was born to use the gateway, the loggia, the 
stairs without looking at tliem or thinking about them. And something 
else came back, from that later first morning at Kensington Park 
Gardens: a sense that the house was not only an enhancement of 
Toby's interest but a compensation for his lack of it. 
 From the hall they caught a glimpse through a series of rooms 
curtained against the steep sunlight, but stabbed across by it here and 
there. There were china bowls, oak tables, books and newspapers, 
straw hats, the remotely threatening mood of holiday routines, of other 
people's leisure, of games to be inducted into, things the Feddens had 
already said and done lingering in the shadows among the squashy old 
armchairs. The rooms were tall, deep-raftered, stone-walled, so that 
you would have a sense of living in the depths of them, like rooms in a 
castle or an old school. But for now they were deserted, the party were 
all elsewhere. 
 Toby led them on up the wide shallow stairs. On the upper floor 
an ochre-tiled passageway ran the length of the house, with bedrooms 
opening off it like prettily appointed cells. Nick and Wani were at the 
far end. 'Mum's put you in opposite rooms,' said Toby, 'so I hope you're 
not fed up with each other.' Wani raised his eyebrows, puffed and 
shrugged like a Frenchman: they did their double act. It was hard for a 
moment to believe this wasn't the usual discreet arrangement for an 
unmarried couple, that Toby wasn't in on the secret, hadn't the first 
suspicion. Nick was used to deceiving adults but he felt sad about 
tricking Toby. He saw the wound it would be to his childish good 
nature if he found out. But Wani presumably was hardened against 
such anxieties. Nick looked at him, and had a brief cold intuition of 
their different shades of relief about the rooms - his own that they were 
close, and Wani's that they were apart. Wani was on the front, and 
Nick, as family perhaps, had the smaller, darker room looking out at 
the end of the house into the branches of an ancient plane tree. 
 'Fantastic!' he said. He got on with unpacking, and hung up the 
suits he had brought - always wary of what rich people meant by 
'informal'. His laundry had all been done by the hotel in Munich, and 
was rustlingly interleaved with tissue paper. He noticed diat a tap in 
his bathroom dripped and was leaving a rusty stain. By the bed mere 
was a bookcase with old French novels, left-behind Frederick Forsyths, 
odd leather-bound volumes of history and memoirs with the coroneted 
Kessler bookplate. There was a pair of strange little paintings on glass 
in varnished pearwood frames. He took possession of the room, and 
talked himself out of a tiny sense of disappointment with it. 
 Toby was still chatting in Wani's doorway, his hands in his 
shorts pockets, the undeniable bulge above the waistband these days, 
something comfy about him, as well as something passive and 
perplexed. Nick loved him with that fondness of an old friendship that 
accepts a degree of boredom, and is soothed and even sustained by it. 
What he felt was distilled affection, undemanding but principled. 'Ah, 
he can tell us,' Toby said. 
 'Yah, what was the name of the brothel we went to in Venice?' 
said Wani. He was unpacking too, though as coyly and delayingly as 
he had undressed that day at the Highgate Ponds. 
 'Oh, the ridottoY said Nick. 'Yes, it's this really exquisite litde 
casino, I suppose it was a brothel, really. "II ridotto della 
Procuratoressa Venier". It's just behind San Marco.' 
 'There you are,' said Wani. 
 'It's been done up by the American branch of Venice in Peril. You 
ring the bell and the lady shows it to you.' 
 'OK…' said Toby. 'So it's not a functioning brothel…' Wani said, 
'Anyone less like a madam than die lady from Venice in Peril it would 
be hard to imagine. I'm having a feature on the top brothels of the 
world in my first issue.' Your advertisers will love that,' said Toby. 
 'Don't you tliink?' said Wani. 'Well, beautiful brothels.' He looked 
at Nick, whose idea the feature had entirely been. 'You know - risottos.' 
 Toby said; 'You should have taken me with you. You can't expect 
poor old Guest to go sniffing round tarts' parlours.' 
 'No, you'd have been much more use,' Wani said, and gave him a 
level grin, so that Nick was jealous for a second and went on to wonder 
- it had never been clear - if Wani fancied Toby. Well, it was possible, 
but unlikely, for some large social reason, which perhaps boiled down 
to die fact that Toby couldn't be bought. 
 'Drinks at six,' Toby said. 'But come and have a swim first. 
Everyone's outside' 
 - and he slapped off down the echoing hallway. 
 Then Nick strode across Wani's room, pushed open the loosely 
coupled shutters, and had his first look at the view: of wooded spurs, 
dropping from either side like interlaced fingers, and beyond them one 
bright curve of the Dronne with a rocky bluff above it, bright too in the 
late afternoon sun. There was the glare of France in high summer, the 
colours simplified, dry and drab, but twitching with light, and the 
shadows baffling, like deep grey gauze. Down below, three or four 
stony terraces dropped away from die house, linked by stairways - it 
was hard from here to work them out. Yeah, I'm going to change,' said 
Wani. 'Good idea,' said Nick, turning and smiling. 'Hmm. OK…' - with 
the frowning reluctance of a boy. 
 'Darling, I spent half last night with my tongue up your arse, I'm 
not going to be too shocked if you take your shirt off.' 
 Wani gave a dry litde laugh and arranged his various pairs of 
slippers and moccasins on die floor of the wardrobe. 'It's what people 
might say,' he muttered. 
 'What, because I'm gay, you mean?' Nick said, with a flash of the 
eyebrows. 
 'Well, there's no one else in the house. And I'll just carry on 
looking out of die window… I'll crane out of the window': which he did, 
to see that direcdy below there was a white awning, covering, 
presumably, the table, die famous table evoked by Gerald - widi 
apologies to Napoleon - as the first dining room of Europe. It was the 
table and the awning that made it their view - the one often referred to 
by Gerald as his own landscape, one of the few things, like the music 
of Strauss, on which he was all unembarrassed sensibility. Of course it 
wasn't quite what Nick had expected; again it took a minute for the 
reality to blot and erase the long-imagined, subtly finer view. 
 Beyond the awning, steps led down on the left through the shade 
of a sprawling fig tree towards a low-roofed further structure, which 
Nick thought must be the pool-house. And just then Catherine came 
up them, noiselessly barefoot, on tiptoe at the heat of the stones, a 
blue towel round her shoulders and her hair still wet. She looked very 
young, childlike, nipping across the terrace, peering about; and with a 
vague air of crisis to her, Nick felt, as if she'd been dressed like this in 
a London street. Toby came out from the house and she said, 'Are they 
here?' - in her way of not quite noticing him even though she was 
asking him a question. 'They'll be down in a minute,' Toby said, going 
on himself towards the steps to the pool. Catherine sat on her towel on 
the low terrace wall, pushed back her hair, and her eyes drifted slowly 
upwards across the front of the house until she saw Nick leaning out 
of the end window and grinning at her. 'Hello, darling!' 
 'Hello, darling!' Nick opened his arms to the view and then, with 
the sort of dumb camp she liked, pretended to throw flowers down at 
an adoring crowd. She beamed and raised her hands in noiseless 
applause. 'Come down at once!' she called. 'We're coming…' 
 Wani had put on his swimming trunks under his white linen 
trousers, and they showed as a provocative black shadow. Nick was a 
little exercised about the types of swimwear, and the different 'registers 
of poolside life. The knob-flaunting Speedos appropriate for an 
unsocial fifty lengths or a scientific hour of sunbathing might seem ill-
judged for cocktails or ping-pong, when sexless bags might be 
preferred. But perhaps not; sun-worship was half the point of a home 
in France, and the Feddens might not feel, as Nick somehow did, that 
if die contours of his penis were visible, then the question of what he 
liked to do with it was at the forefront of everyone's mind. 
 Cadierine kissed the two boys in very different ways: she butted 
her face against Wani's and brayed 'Hello!' and showed that she didn't 
really know him or expect much of him. She pulled Nick into the 
embrace of her towel, so that her thin body in its damp swimsuit 
pressed against him, and he wriggled away laughing as he hugged her. 
'Thank god you're here at last,' she said. 'How are you, darling?' 
 'I'm fine. Gerald's having an affair, did you know?' 
 Nick blinked and recoiled offendedly, but then tried to keep 
smiling. 'Gerald?' 
 His whole image of the coming ten days was changing; he would 
have to find out who knew, and how much Catherine knew, of course. 
He felt horribly guilty himself for knowing, and doing nothing, and his 
main wish, in this first instant, was to clear himself. 'You can't be 
serious,' he said, postponing for a further second or two die really 
irreversible question, with whom? 'No, it's true. He's having an affair 
with Jasper.' Nick gasped. 'Darling! How outrageous!' 
 'I know, it's a scandal.' 
 'Has it been going on long?' 
 'The whole week. There's this hideous room called the fumoir and 
they go in there together and play chess and smoke cigars. Well, you'll 
see. No one else can bear to go in, so we don't know exactly what they 
get up to.' 
 'Let's hope the press don't get to hear about it,' Nick said, with a 
giddy feeling of reprieve mixed up with the real and re-awoken sense of 
risk. 'It's like being kissed by a lav.' 
 'Oh… the cigars…?' 
 'Incidentally,' she said to Wani, we're on septic here, so nothing 
funny down the bog.' 
 'No… right…' said Wani, and chuckled and frowned. It was just 
comic brusqueness, an urge to ruffle this exquisite new arrival, and 
also clairvoyant, Nick felt, as though she knew that a closeted 
cokehead would always be in the WC. She led them down the stairs, 
under the wide leaves of the fig tree, and out onto the flagged surround 
of the swimming pool. 
 The pool occupied another long terrace, open to the south, so 
mat the glitter of the water seemed to reach and hang against the 
distance. At the near end was the pool-house, a little cottage in itself, 
with shuttered windows and wet footprints going in and out at the 
door. Thick-cushioned loungers, turned towards the sun at different 
times, lay abandoned around the pool, but close by, under a huge red 
umbrella, Rachel was stretched out with her eyes closed, and the 
straps of her black swimsuit looped down over her upper arms. Her 
mouth was slightly open, she might have been asleep, or in the border-
zone of voices where the sunned mind dallies with sleep for seconds at 
a time. She was more beautiful and vulnerable than Nick was prepared 
for; he had never seen her undressed - he thought it was a private view 
she might not want Wani to share. A few feet away, at an angle, Gerald 
was lying, propped up, with the meltwater of a long drink in a beaker 
beside him, dark glasses on, head bent over a book in his lap, but 
unambiguously asleep, since the pages of the book stood up in a 
quivering comb. 
 Beyond them, Jasper sprawled on his tummy on the blue-tiled 
ledge just below the surface of the pool, looking away at the view, and 
giving an impression of adolescent boredom. He was wearing huge 
multi-coloured swimming-bags, and as he lazily kicked the water they 
glistened and ballooned, deflated and clung, one buttock pink, the 
other lime-green. Nick saw Wani looking at him. Then Toby came 
marching out of the pool-house, and Catherine, wanting to take the 
credit, shouted, 'Here they are!' and woke them all up. 'You look such 
old wrecks lying there,' she said, and cackled in the 'mad' style that 
she now allowed herself. 
 Gerald started speaking at once, Rachel wriggled as she 
stretched and sat up, and the two boys bent down rivalrously to kiss 
her. Jasper came sploshing across the pool. Nick hadn't seen them for 
a while, of course, and finding them here, in the nearly naked torpor of 
their private world, he saw everything that was wonderful about them, 
and something else, like one of Catherine's glittering intuitions, their 
unsuspecting readiness for pain. At dinner under the awning Nick and 
Wani were given the second stage of their welcome, which was to be 
made to feel how dull and plotless life had been without them, and 
how enjoyable it was going to be now they were here. They all revealed 
their frustrations, and made bids on the new arrivals to do the things 
they had been wanting to do themselves. After a week of family 
deadlock, of interlocking boredoms, there was going to be an outburst 
of activity, a high plateau of achievement. Wani politely agreed to 
everything that was proposed, though he looked a bit queasy at Toby's 
plan to discover an underground lake. Gerald said, 'We really must do 
the Hautefort hike again, twenty kilometres, take all day if we need to.' 
Jasper squeezed Nick's knee under the table and said there was a little 
bar in Podier, which 'a man of discrimination such as yourself should 
certainly visit; and Catherine, perhaps satirically, said she'd always 
wanted to do some hang-gliding. Then she said she was going to paint 
Nick's portrait, but everyone objected that it would take too much of 
his time. It was left to Rachel to say, with her ironic quiver, that she 
hoped Nick and Wani would feel free to do nothing at all. 
 'No, of course,' said Gerald insincerely. He was lazy, but he 
wasn't good at pure idleness, which he felt like a failure of self-
assertion. He was obviously finding his annual poolside trek through 
one of the fatter Trollopes an irksomely passive exercise, though he 
said how splendid it was, and what great fun. 'I think they might enjoy 
the hike,' he said. 'We haven't done it since 83.' He poured himself a 
full glass of wine, and passed the bottle along the candlelit table. 
 'How did you get on in Venice?' Rachel said. She was looking at 
Nick, but Nick passed the question to Wani with a steady look. 
'Fascinating!' he said. 'What a fascinating place.' 
 'I know… isn't it fascinating,' said Rachel. 'Had you never been 
before?' 
 'Do you know, I'd never been before.' Wani, who barely knew 
Gerald and Rachel, had immediately absorbed their echoing and 
affirmative style of chat. 'Where did you stay?' 
 'We stayed at the Gritti,' said Wani, with a shrug and a wince, as 
if to say they'd taken the path of least resistance. 
 'Goodness…! Well…!' Rachel said, in dazzled surrender to the 
magnificence of this, but somehow agreeing that they could have made 
a subder and more deeply informed choice. 'You must have stayed 
diere yourself,' said Wani. Rachel shook her head. 'I think perhaps 
once…' 
 'Mm, where was it we stayed, Puss?' said Gerald. 
 'I don't know,' said Catherine. After her breakdown last year she 
had gone with her parents to Venice for a tense attempt at 
recuperation, which she now claimed scarcely to remember. 
 'We had a marvellous time, I must say,' said Gerald, with jovial 
shortness of memory. 
 'Yeah, amazing place,' said Jasper, and smiled at him, with the 
candlelight in his eyes, as if recalling some intimate moment. 'Oh, 
when were you last there?' said Nick airily. 
 'Ooh, must be two… three years ago?' said Jasper, dropping his 
head and letting his forelock tumble. 
 'And where did you stay?' Wani asked, and watched for the 
answer as if himself imagining some intimacy - sweat-dampened 
sheets, discarded towels. Jasper appeared to consider several possible 
answers, very quickly, before saying, 'Some friends of ours have got a 
flat there, actually, yah.' 
 'Oh, well, you are lucky,' said Rachel smoothly, leaving a doubt 
as to whether she believed him. 'Near San Marco?' said Nick. 
 'Not far from there,' Jasper said, and made a business of passing 
the wine bottle back to Gerald, who emptied the last of it and said, 'We 
loved the Caravaggios.' 
 Nick said nothing, and couldn't decide if he wanted Wani to make 
a fool of himself. Wani was wary enough to say, 'I'm not sure…'. Rachel 
was blinking and saying, 'No, darling, aren't the Caravaggios-' and 
Catherine said, 'They're Carpaccios,' and slapped her hand on the 
table. 
 Gerald gave a wounded smile and said, 'You can remember those 
anyway.' 
 Wani, never ruffled, almost sinisterly charming, said, 'What made 
an enormous impression on me was the rococo architecture in 
Munich.' 
 This statement was left to resonate for a few moments, while they 
each forked over how to tackle it. Wani looked along the table with an 
absence of self-irony that was very like his father's - and in the upward 
glow of the candles the deep sculpture of his face was like his father's 
too. What touched Nick was partly his lover's conscienceless 
appropriation of anything useful he said, and partly Wani's evident 
feeling that in France, on the terrace of a beautiful old house, among 
Nick's own 'family', he could play the aesthete as confidendy as Nick 
did at Lowndes Square. The actual history of their stays in both cities, 
the coke, the sex, the 'late starts', was their glamorous secret; die 
further story, of unseen treasures, wasted time and money, the dull 
dawn of the truth that Wani was rather a philistine, was Nick's secret 
alone. He said, 'Yes, you loved that stuff, didn't you.' 
 'You went to Munich, darling…' Rachel said to Gerald. 
 'Oh, yes,' said Gerald, with the fond, embarrassed look he had 
when recalling his humbler pre-Rachel life. 'Badger and I stopped off at 
Munich, didn't we, on our famous drive to Greece. Badger would seem, 
on reflection, to have kept me away from that city's more rococo… um 
'There's one quite fabulous church,' said Nick. 
 Toby, who had been quiet since diey'd moved on from potholing, 
said, 'What's the difference between baroque and rococo?' 
 'Oh,' said Wani, smiling tolerantly at his old friend, 'well, the 
baroque is more muscular, the rococo is lighter and more decorative. 
And asymmetrical,' he remembered, making a trailing gesture in the 
air with his left hand and batting his long lashes so that Nick thought 
he had absorbed far more from him than his capsule guides to style - 
it was extraordinary that they couldn't see at once what he was like. 
'The rococo is the final deliquescence of the baroque,' he said, as if he 
really couldn't be plainer. 'Mm, extraordinary stuff,' said Gerald 
vaguely. 
 'Yuk,' said Catherine, 'I can't stand that kind of thing, it's all 
froth.' 
 'Well, we'd hardly expect you to like it, old girl, if we like it 
ourselves,' said Gerald. 
 'It's just make-believe for rich people,' said Catherine. 'It's like 
naughty lingerie.' 
 'Right…' Said Toby, as if slowly getting the picture, but he 
blushed too. 
 Wani, not wanting controversy, said, 'It's really just a great 
subject for the magazine. Think luxury artwork!' And tlien, 'It was 
Nick's idea, actually' Ah well, now it all makes sense,' said Toby. 
 'Oh, I hope it doesn't make that,' said Nick, and they all laughed 
at his droll murmur and the hint of a paradox. He lay in the dark, as 
the smell of the burning mosquito coil spread through die room. The 
night was very still, the doors didn't quite reach the floor, and he could 
hear Wani moving about in his room across the landing. He wanted to 
be with him, as he had been, more or less, for the past ten days, in the 
thoughtless luxury of top-class hotels; but he felt the relief of being 
alone as well: the usual relief of a guest who has closed his door, and a 
deeper thing, the forgotten solitude which measures and verifies the 
strength of an affair, and which, being temporary, is a kind of 
pleasure. He heard Wani switch off his lamp, and his own darkness 
deepened a fraction, without the faint spill of his light under the door. 
He wondered if they were sharing this sense of ghostly proximity, if 
Wani was lying with his eyes open, thinking of him, listening for him, 
masturbating perhaps as Nick half consciously was - not even that, 
just a boyish solace and reflex of being alone, the blind friendship of 
the hand… Or had he plumped his pillow, tussled his head and 
shoulder into it with a sigh, drawn up his legs in the defensive position 
which made Nick want to curl in behind him and shelter him? It would 
be easy to go to him now, they both had wide beds, but he could hear 
already the echo of the door latches in the long corridor like triggers to 
Wani's sense of danger. 
 When he woke an hour later out of a Venice dream he stared in a 
sort of panic at the grey square of the window and the unrecognized 
mass of the chest of drawers. 
 Then it came back to him, like going upstairs, the shocks and 
connections of the past twenty-four hours. He felt horribly hot, and 
kicked off the sheet and drank the dimly visible glass of water. In the 
dream Wani was drowning: he stood on the canal-side, knees bent in a 
tense crouch, looking back over his shoulder with an undecided but 
accusing expression, then fell in with a dead splash. 
 It had been very hot all the trip, the hottest Nick had ever known; 
in Venice, for all its dazzlements, they had moved in a heatwave stink 
of decay; in Munich, in the glaring avenues, the temperature reached a 
hundred and four. The heat put a strain on them which they didn't 
acknowledge to each other. They went to the Asamkirche, which had 
Nick beaming and sighing with delight; Wani strolled about with an air 
of provisional goodwill, as if waiting for an explanation. Nick longed to 
share the beauty with him, to communicate with him through it, but 
Wani, out of shyness or pride, was lighdy mocking of what Nick said. 
You could really only tell Wani one useful thing at a time - too much 
information was an affront to his selfesteem. Nick stayed on in die 
church, and the loneliness heightened his pleasure and his pride in 
his own responsiveness. At the Nymphenburg Palace, among surging 
coachloads, the pleasure was harder won, but he felt he took in these 
marvels of the rococo by right - they might have been make-believe for 
rich people when they were built, but now they were more than that, 
they were celebrations in and of themselves. On their first afternoon 
there Nick went into a gay shop called Follow Me - something Wani did 
at last with a deprecating snigger. Surrounded by harnesses and 
stardingly juvenile pornography they bought the Spartacus gay guide 
to the world and a siege supply of rubbers, which Wani affected to 
have nothing to do with: he handled the book lightly, as if assessing its 
threat, the thick sleek india-paper weight of the tiling, some heretical 
bible". They took a taxi to the English Garden, and had walked only a 
short distance under the trees when they realized that the people 
ahead of them were naked. There were families having picnics in their 
unembarrassable German way, and old men with peeling crowns 
standing by themselves like forgotten games masters, and then a zone 
that was mainly young men, sitting and sprawling in an air of casual 
tension as palpable as the dust and insects in the slanting sunlight. A 
wonderful cold stream, the Eisbach, chuckled past between steep 
banks, and Nick stripped off and clambered down into it - when he 
lifted his feet from the pebbly bottom he was swept along laughing and 
breathless, waving back to Wani, and then out of sight, racing past the 
lawns, the naked smiling figures on the bank, boys with guitars, 
games with rubber balls, in a rush of beautiful cold abandon towards a 
wood and a distant pagoda… until he saw that the boys were jeering 
and pointing and the people walking dogs were clothed and severely 
normal, as if they could have no connection with the happy nude 
species hidden round the bend in the river. So then he toiled back 
against die current, feet curled and aching on the slippery stones, until 
he could pull himself out and skulk back along the bank, giving quick 
furtive tugs to his embarrassingly shrivelled penis. 
 He woke again and took a long distracted moment to see that this 
hadn't happened. He'd been lying in the richly coloured recall of the 
minutes before sleep and the holiday story had slipped and run with 
its own fast current into an anecdote odder than the afternoon they 
had lived through, Wani's bright fixated attempt to pick up the boy 
who roamed through the gardens with a bucket shouting 'Pepsi!' - his 
astonishment that he couldn't be bought. Nick turned his pillow, and 
coughed and settled again. He sank through back-lit clouds, pink and 
grey, the landing at Bordeaux airport that morning. There had been a 
storm, but it was turning aside, and they saw suddenly how close the 
ground was, the sunlight passing in a crawling wink across ponds, 
glasshouses and canals, seams of gold flashing through the vapour in 
fiery collusion. (ii) On Monday morning Wani asked if he could make 
some phone calls. Rachel said, 'Absolutely!' and Gerald said, 'Please… 
my dear fellow!' with a gesture towards the cupboard-like room where 
the phone and the expectant new fax machine were. 
 'It's just these business things I've got to deal with,' Wani sighed, 
cleverly apologizing for what Gerald liked best about him. He went into 
the room and rather awkwardly, since everyone was watching him, 
closed the door. He had told them last night about the property he'd 
just bought in Clerkenwell, and had asked for Gerald's advice on 
aspects of the sale and the planned redevelopment: a wall had come 
down, and they'd suddenly seen how they might get on. When Wani 
emerged from the phone room he asked him if he could borrow the 
Range Rover to go into Perigueux, and this time it was vaguer 
magazine 'business' that he mentioned. Nick knew that frown of 
pretended vexation, the bold contempt for obstacles on the path to 
pleasure, and it made him nervous. But Gerald, clearing his throat 
and as it were waking up to his own kindness and reasonableness, 
said, 'Well yes… why not! - feel free…' And then added, Anything for 
business!' 
 'It's just that I can meet a very good photographer there, and 
after the fascinating things you were saying about the cathedral…' 
 'Oh, St Front,' said Gerald, warily flattered. 'Yes indeed…' 
 Nick almost said, 'Oh, but you know it's all a nineteenth-century 
rehash 'Will you be back for lunch?' said Rachel. Wani promised he 
would. He didn't suggest taking Nick, and Nick felt both jealous and 
relieved. They stood at the front door and watched the car disappear 
from the forecourt. It was the sort of moment when in London they 
would have begun a bold and funny family inquest into the absent 
person; but today that didn't feel right. 
 They went out onto the terrace, and Gerald nodded several times 
at Nick and said, 'Charming fellow, your friend.' 
 'He certainly is,' said Nick, seeing that Gerald wanted 
reassurance, and noting that Wani was now properly his friend rather 
than Toby's. 
 'One doesn't quite know whether to mention the fiancee,' Gerald 
said. 
 'Oh, well I did,' said Rachel. And it's all right. He told me all 
about it. 
 Apparently they're getting married next spring.' 
 Ah, fine,' said Gerald, while Nick turned away with a protesting 
thump of the heart to look at the view. The morning post brought 
several thick packets of papers for Gerald and he took them off to the 
end room, sighing petulantly. It was clear that without Penny he felt he 
couldn't tackle work, and clear too, presumably, that he couldn't invite 
Penny here. He had taken over the end room as an office; Nick wasn't 
sure what he did in it, but he always emerged with a watchful smile, 
even tiptoeing a little, like someone about to break a piece of news. The 
Penny question weighed on Nick, and tlien appeared so remote and 
unsubstantiated that he might have imagined it. Gerald was being 
dioroughly affectionate to Rachel, and when they lay side by side in the 
sun diey seemed soaked in their own intimate history, as well as 
disconcertingly sexy and young. 
 Even so there was something difficult and self-indulgent about 
Gerald, as if the holiday was both a licence and a penance. 
 Nick wandered off to explore the hidden corners of the little 
estate. He found the morning, and the freedom to use it, weighed 
rather heavily on him now Wani had gone. He went down the 
crumbling steps from terrace to terrace, like a descent into his own 
melancholy. The lower levels dropped more steeply, they were hidden 
from the house and had a neglected air: the parched stony soil showed 
through the thin grass. Clearly Dede and his son hardly bothered with 
these bits - perhaps it was only guests, in their appreciative 
aimlessness, who ever climbed down here. There was a look of disused 
agricultural terraces as much as garden; a distant whine of farm 
machinery, and the scurry of lizards running over dead leaves. On 
each level there were walnut trees thick with half-hidden green fruit. 
Nick went through a gap in a hedge and found some old stone sheds, a 
grassy woodpile, a rusty tractor. He was doing what he always did, 
poking and memorizing, possessing die place by knowing it better than 
his hosts. If Rachel had said, 'If only we still had that pogo stick!' Nick 
could have cried, like a painfully eager child, 'But we do, it's in the old 
shed with the broken butter churn and the prize rosettes for onions 
nailed to the beams.' 
 It struck him that a sign of real possession was a sort of 
negligence, was to have an old wood-yard you'd virtually forgotten 
about. 
 He fetched his book and went down to the pool. The heat was 
climbing and a high-up lid of thin cloud had soon expired into the 
blue. Jasper and Catherine were already in die water, and Jasper 
looked pleased to be discovered struggling with her, almost fucking 
her; he winked at Nick as he went into the pool-house to change. The 
wink seemed to follow him in. There was a bare suggestive atmosphere 
in the pool-house, which always felt cool and secret after the dazzle of 
the pool-side, and seemed to carry some coded memory or promise of a 
meeting. 
 Nick would have had Wani there last night if Gerald hadn't been 
hanging, even snooping about. There was the first room, with a sink 
and a fridge and bright plastic pool toys, lilos and rings, an old rowing 
machine standing on end; and the changing room beyond, with a 
slatted bench and clothes hooks, and the shower opening straight off 
it, behind a blue curtain. Only the rather smelly lavatory had a door 
that could be locked. 
 Nick came out in his new litde Speedos and walked along the 
pool's edge. The water was the clear bright answer to die morning, a 
mesmerizing play of light and depth. A few dead leaves were floating on 
it, and others had sunk and patched the blue concrete bottom. 
Dragonflies paid darting visits. He crouched and stirred the surface 
with his hand. On die far side Jasper had lifted Catherine up to sit on 
the tiled shelf, with the water lapping between her legs, and him 
hanging on to her, looking as if he'd like to do the same. She made 
some quick remark about Nick's being there, and then called, 'Hello, 
darling!' Jasper turned and floated free and gave Nick his sure-fire 
smile, said nothing, but lazily trod water and kept looking at him. He 
had a tiny repertoire, a starter kit, of seducer's tricks, and got obvious 
satisfaction from deploying them, regardless of results. Nick found him 
embarrassing and resistible, which didn't preclude his figuring in some 
of his most punitive fantasies: in fact it made them all die more 
pointed. Jasper kicked across the pool towards him and it looked at 
first, in the welter of refractions, as if he was naked; then, when he 
sprang out streaming on to the poolside, he saw that he was wearing a 
litde cut-away flesh-coloured item. "What do you think of Jaz's thong?' 
said Catherine, obviously assuming that Nick fancied him. 
 'Yeah, I don't like to wear it when her mum's about,' said Jasper 
considerately. 
 He posed for Nick, held in his brown stomach, and flashed him 
his number-two smile. 
 'What do you think?' said Catherine, grinning, a bit breathless, in 
her tone of sexual fixation. 
 'Hmm,' said Nick, peering at the sleek pouch in which Jaz's 
crown jewels, as he called them, were boyishly slumped. 'You'd have to 
say, darling, it leaves disappointingly little to the imagination.' He 
made a sorry moue and strolled off to the lounger at the far end of the 
pool, where he had left his book. 
 He was reading Henry James's memoir of his childhood, A Small 
Boy and Others, and feeling crazily horny, after three days without as 
much as a peck from Wani. 
 It was a hopeless combination. The book showed James at his 
most elderly and elusive, and demanded a pure commitment unlikely 
in a reader who was worrying excitedly about his boyfriend and semi-
spying, through dark glasses, on another boy who was showing off in 
front of him and clearly trying to excite him. From time to time the 
book tilted and wobbled in his lap, and the weight of the deckleedged 
pages pressed on his erection through the sleek black nylon. He noted 
droll phrases for later use: 'an oblong farinaceous compound' was 
James's euphemism for a waffle - compound was sublime in its 
clinching vagueness. He wondered just what Wani was up to in 
Perigueux. He suspected he was picking up some charlie, which 
seemed a shame and a danger - he wished Wani wasn't so fond of it; 
then he felt frustratedly, after three days off that as well, how lovely 
and just right it would be to have a line. It was amazing, it went really 
to the heart of Wani's mystique, that he knew how to find the stuff in 
any European city. In Munich Nick had waited in the taxi outside a 
bank, gazed tensely for ten minutes at the chamfered rustication of its 
walls and the massive swirling ironwork of its doors, while Wani was 
inside 'seeing a friend'. The photographer in Perigueux was probably 
another such friend. There were childish shrieks from the pool, as 
Jasper dive-bombed Catherine. Nick was delighted Wani had missed 
this airing, or drenching, of the thong; he would tease him about it 
later, over their first line. He longed to have a swim himself, but now 
the young couple were in a huddle, standing just within their depth, 
laughing and spluttering as they kissed: the pool was theirs, like a 
bedroom. They were mad with sex, in love with their own boldness; 
Nick felt Jasper might try to involve him too if he went in. His role was 
to be Uncle Nick, adult and sceptical, which seemed to make the 
baffled Jasper more and more provocative. He thought he could 
probably have him if he wanted, but he didn't want to give him that 
satisfaction. A minute later they got out, intently casual, Jasper's 
stocky hard-on sticking up at an angle, and went into the pool-house 
and closed die door. Edgar Allan Poe, James said, though a figure in 
his childhood, had not been 'personally present' 
 - indeed, 'the extremity of personal absence had just overtaken 
him'. Minute after minute went by, now the hiss of the pool-house 
shower could be heard, and Nick lay and flicked a fly from his leg, and 
felt the morning's discontent rise into envy and impatience. 'The 
extremity of personal absence': at times the Master was so tactful he 
was almost brutal. He remembered what Rachel had said about Wani's 
wedding, and the image of him doing to Martine what Jasper was 
doing to Catherine filled him with a bitter jealousy - well, it was 
probably nonsense, probably waffle. The words slid and stuck 
meaninglessly in front of his eyes. (iii) Next day Toby was teaching Nick 
and Wani how to play boules: they were out on the dusty compacted 
square of the forecourt. Wani had been wet about the game until he 
turned out to be good at it, and now he was absorbed and unironical, 
tripping after the ball, yapping and grinning when he bombed the 
other boules away from the jack-ball, or cochonnet. 'Bien tire!' said 
Toby, with a sweeter kind of happiness, at retouching an old friendship 
through a game, and with comic disconcertment, since he usually won 
games himself. Nick was applauded when he made a fluky good throw, 
but it was really a tussle between Wani and Toby. Now he'd got the 
drugs Wani had become more natural and more popular. 'Yup, seems 
to be settling in,' said Gerald, taking the credit himself, like the 
manager of a hotel renowned for its beneficial regime. 'I know…' said 
Rachel, who had borne the brunt of Wani's princely charm: 'he seems 
to be getting in the holiday mood.' A nod went round which admitted 
the reservations they'd had before, and a mood of solidarity was 
discovered, just in time, before the arrival of the Tippers and Lady 
Partridge. Nobody but Gerald wanted to see the Tippers, and Nick 
paced and stood about in the drive, bored by the game, but already 
sentimental about their little routines here, and his esoteric success, 
being deep in France, in a lovely old house, with his two beautiful 
boys. 
 Toby had just flung the cochonnet across the court when a big 
white Audi with Sir Maurice Tipper at the wheel swung in through the 
gate and ran over it. 
 'Fucking great,' said Toby, and waved and smiled resignedly. In 
the back were his grandmother and Lady Tipper, who had the passive 
air of women of all classes, nattering dutifully as they were driven they 
hardly knew where. Lady Partridge gestured in a general way at the 
house, as if to say she thought it was the right one. Nick ran over to 
open her door, and in die momentary release of chilled air the scent of 
leather and hairspray seemed to carry the story of the whole journey. 'I 
know,' said Lady Partridge, establishing her feet on the ground before 
pushing herself up, and looking for attention but not for help. 'I have 
always caught the train.' 
 'Good flight, Gran?' said Toby, kissing her cheek. 
 'It was perfectly all right,' said Lady Partridge, with her usual 
indifference to a kiss. 'It's quite a trek from the airport. Sally's been 
explaining to me all about operas' - and she gave the three boys a 
shrewd smile. 
 Sally Tipper said, 'The first-class seats were just the same as 
tourist class, you got proper china, that was all. Maurice is going to 
write to John about it.' 
 She watched her husband, who came and shook hands with 
Toby, and said, 'Tobias,' in a coldly pitying tone. 
 'Welcome, welcome!' said Toby, in a weak flourish of good 
manners, avoiding the eye of the man who might have been his father-
in-law, and going to the boot to take care of the bags. Nick got an 
inattentive hello from each of them, and the feeling, which he'd had in 
the past, of being an element they could neither accept nor ignore. 
Catherine came out of the house, as if to inspect some damage. 'Oh, 
how are you, Cathy?' said Sally Tipper. 'Still mad!' said Catherine. 
 Then Gerald and Rachel appeared. 'Good, good…' said Gerald. 
'You found us…' 
 'We thought at first it was sure to be that splendid chateau up 
the road,' said Lady Tipper. 
 'Ah no,' said Gerald, 'we're not at the chateau any more, we 
muddle along down here.' There was a complicated double round of 
kisses, ending up with Sir Maurice facing Gerald and saying, 'Oh no, 
not even in France…!' and laughing thinly. 
 The Tippers were not natural holidayers. They came beautifully 
equipped, with four heavy steel-cornered suitcases, and numerous 
other little bags which had to be handled carefully, but sometliing else, 
unnoticed by them, was missing. They muttered questions to each 
other, and gave an impression of covert anxiety or irritation. When 
they came down on their first afternoon Sir Maurice said a lot of faxes 
would be coming through for him, and could they be sure there was 
enough paper in the machine. He was clearly looking forward to the 
arrival of the faxes above all. Wani sucked up to him and said he was 
expecting some faxes too, meaning that he would keep an eye on the 
machine, but Sir Maurice gave him a sharp look and said he hoped 
they wouldn't impede his own faxes. It was only four thirty but Gerald 
was marking his guests' arrival with a Pimm's, and Lady Partridge, 
with her son as her licence, accompanied him in a gin and Dubonnet. 
 The Tippers asked for tea, and sat under the awning, glancing 
mistrustfully at the view. When Liliane, slow, stoical, and clearly 
unwell, came out with the tray, Sally Tipper gave her instructions 
about different pillows she needed. Sir Maurice talked to Gerald about 
a takeover they were both interested in, though Gerald didn't look 
quite serious with a fruit-choked tumbler in his fist. Lady Tipper 
complained to Rachel about the smell of hot dogs in the Royal Festival 
Hall. Rachel said surely that would all change now they'd got rid of 
Red Ken, but Lady Tipper shook her head as if deaf to any such 
comfort. Nick tried naively to interest Maurice Tipper in local beauty 
spots which he hadn't yet seen himself. 'You're a fine one to talk!' said 
Sir Maurice -grinning quickly at Gerald and Toby to show he wasn't so 
easily taken in. He was used to total deference, and mere pleasantness 
aroused his suspicion. The democracy of house-party life wasn't going 
to come naturally to him. Nick looked at his smooth clerical face and 
gold-rimmed glasses in the light of a new idea, that the ownership of 
immense wealth might not be associated with pleasure - at least as 
pleasure was sought and unconsciously defined by the rest of diem 
here. 
 Sally Tipper had a lot of blonde hair in expensive confusion, and 
a lot of clicking, rattling, sliding jewellery. She shook and nodded her 
head a good deal. It was virtually a twitch -of annoyance, or of almost 
more exasperated agreement. She had a smile that came all at once 
and went all at once, with no humorous 'gradations. She said before 
dinner she'd like to have drinks indoors, which, since the whole point 
and fetish of the manoir for the Feddens was to do everything possible 
outside, didn't promise well. They sat in the drawing room with all the 
overhead lights on, like a waiting room. Nick had seen the names 'Sir 
Maurice and Lady Tipper' in gold letters on the donors' board at 
Covent Garden, and had seen her there in person, sometimes with 
Sophie, but never with her husband. He thought they might have a 
theme for the week, and said quietly that the recent Tannhduser 
hadn't been very good. 
 ' Very good… I know… / thought…' said Lady Tipper, and shook 
her head in wounded defiance of all the carpers and whiners. 'Now, 
Judy, that you really should see,' she went on loudly. 'You'll know that 
one, the Pilgrims' Chorus.' 
 Lady Partridge, fortified by being enfamille and half-tight, said, 
'It's no use asking me, dear. I've never set foot in an opera house, 
except once, and that was thirty years ago, when… my son took me,' 
and she nodded abstrusely at Gerald. 'What did you see, Judy?' said 
Nick. 'I think it was Sabme,' Lady Partridge said after a minute. 'How 
marvellous!' said Lady Tipper. 'I know, ghastly,' said Lady Partridge. 
 'Oh, Ma!' said Gerald, who was listening in with a dis-i racted 
smile from a chat about shares with Sir Maurice. 
 'I applaud your taste, Judy,' said Nick, with the necessary 
emphasis to get through, and heard what a twit he sounded. 'Mm, I 
think it was by Stravinsky.' 
 'No, no,' said Nick, 'it's by the dreaded…: Richard Strauss. Oh, by 
the way, Gerald, I've found the most marvellous quote, by Stravinsky, 
in fact, about the dreaded.' 
 'Sorry, Maurice…' murmured Gerald. 'Robert Craft asks him, "Do 
you now admit any of the operas of Richard Strauss?" and Stravinsky 
says' - and Nick beat it out, conducted it, in the weird overexcitement 
of the Strauss feud - '"I would like to admit all Strauss operas to 
whichever purgatory punishes triumphant banality. Their musical 
substance is cheap and poor; it cannot interest a musician today." ' 
 'What?' snorted Gerald. 'Well, I'd rather have Strauss than 
Stravinsky myself, any day! I'm afraid to say!' said Lady Tipper. 
 Sir Maurice looked at Nick, in the flush of his arcane triumph, 
with baffled distaste. At dinner Gerald was already pretty drunk. He 
seemed to have had an idea of taking Maurice Tipper with him, and 
making their first night a rush of high spirits, followed next morning 
by die rueful bond of a shared hangover. But Sir Maurice drank as 
suspiciously as he did business, covering his glass with a dwindling 
flicker of amusement each time Gerald leant over his shoulder with the 
bottle. Gerald's face leaning into the candlelight had a glow of 
obstinate merriment. He sat down and summarized for die second time 
the division of the Perigord into areas called green, white, black, and 
purple. 'And we're in the white,' said Maurice Tipper drily. 
 The talk came round, as it often did with die Feddens, to the 
Prime Minister. 
 Nick saw Catherine clench in annoyance when her grandmother 
said, 'She's put this country on its feet!' - clearly forgetting, in her 
fervour, which country she was now in. 'She showed them in the 
Falklands, didn't she?' 
 'You mean she's a hideous old battleaxe,' muttered Catherine. 
'She's certainly a manxome foe,' said Gerald. Sir Maurice looked blank. 
'One wouldn't want to be on the wrong side of her.' 
 'Indeed,' said Sir Maurice. 
 Wani somehow got people to look at him, and said, 'People say 
that, but you know, I've always seen a very different side of her. An 
immensely kind woman…'; he let them see him searching a fimd of 
heart-warming anecdote, but then said discreetly, 'She takes such 
extraordinary pains to help those she… cares about.' 
 Maurice Tipper expressed both respect and resentment in a dark 
throat-clearing, and Gerald said, 'Of course you know her as a family 
friend,' smiling resolutely as he conceded to Wani die thing, so clearly 
seen, that he hankered for himself. 'Well…' said Wani, 'yes…!' 
 'I love her!' exclaimed Sally Tipper, hoping perhaps they would 
take love to include friendship, as well as surpassing it. 
 'I know,' said Gerald. 'It's those blue eyes. Don't you just want to 
swim in them - what?' 
 Sir Maurice didn't seem ready to go quite diat far, and Rachel 
said, 'Not everyone's as infatuated as my husband,' lightly but 
meaningly. 
 Nick looked out over tlieir heads at die vast night landscape, 
where the lights of farms and roads invisible by day shone in 
mysterious prominence. He said very litde, holding on to the ignored 
romance of the place and the hour, the soft gusts in die trees, the stars 
that peeped in die grey above die silhouetted woods. It turned out to be 
Wani who saved the evening. He clearly admired Maurice Tipper, and 
tried to amuse him as well as impress him, neither an easy task. He 
had a significant lavatory break after the main course, and for the next 
half-hour supplied a sense of purpose and fun diat the others had 
been groping for. Even Catherine was laughing at his far-fetched 
imitation of Michael Foot, and Lady Partridge, who kept waking from 
brief sleeps with a cough and a furtive stare, laughed too. In the 
morning, before it was too hot, the Tippers went down to the pool, she 
with a clutch of sunscreens and a huge hat, he with the new Dick 
Francis in one hand as a decoy for the briefcase in the other. It was 
the time when Nick liked to do his fifty lengths - at least he invented 
this tradition to focus his resentment of the newcomers. When he went 
down a bit later, Lady Partridge, a keen but almost unmoving 
swimmer, was halfway across the shallow end, apparently unaware 
that Sally Tipper, beside her in the water, was asking her about her 
hip replacement: she glanced at her from time to time with mild 
apprehension. Maurice Tipper had got a table and chair fixed up under 
an umbrella and sat in tight biscuit-coloured shorts reading and 
annotating a sheaf of faxes. His lips quivered and pinched with the 
sarcastic alertness that was his own brand of happiness. Nick, 
dispossessed, went off to his favourite corner on a lower terrace and 
read A Small Boy and Others in the company of a lizard. 
 At noon there were calls and voices up above as a party was 
assembled for lunch. 
 Nick went to see them off. Toby had pulled up the spare seats in 
the back of the Range Rover and was checking they were safely bolted; 
he was taking the extra trouble that delays a departure and disguises 
the relief of the person left behind. 'We don't want you flying through 
the windscreen,' he said to Lady Tipper. 
 'I think you'll find this restaurant acceptable,' Gerald burbled 
facetiously, gesturing Maurice Tipper to the front seat beside him. 
 'He just can't have anything too rich,' said Sally. 'His wretched 
ulcers…' She twitched while she pulled a long face. 'I'm afraid last 
night's dinner rather did for him.' 
 'Oh, they'll look after you, they'll do anything for you,' said 
Rachel, with unflinching sweetness. Gerald, ruefully baffled by his new 
guests' failure to notice the beauties of the manoir, was i. iking them to 
Chez Claude in PeYigueux, normally the last-uight treat of the 
holidays, in the hope of cracking a word of praise out of them. 
 'See if you agree with us that it merits a third Michelin star,' lie 
said. 
 'We're not big lunchers,' said Sally Tipper. 
 Catherine and Jasper came out last, and Wani squashed in with 
them excitedly in the third row. Toby closed the doors like a guard and 
off they went, with a soft superior roar, perched and crammed, for 
what Nick pictured as a little outing in hell - not the starry Chez 
Claude or the turret-crowned countryside, but the atmosphere they 
carried with them. Toby put his arm round Nick's shoulder and they 
went into the silent house - both of them lightly excited and self-
conscious. 
 Toby made them sandwiches for lunch, in a deliberately 
enthusiastic way, heaping in cold chicken and lettuce and olives and 
tomato rings which the first bite would send squirting and dropping 
from the edges. It was a bit of a mess, a mishmash, lots of dressing 
was sploshed in - it was almost as though he was saying to Nick, who 
had once had a job in a sandwich shop, 'I'm not a poof, I haven't got 
style, I can't help it.' They took them down to the poolside and sat 
under an umbrella to eat them, with the dressing and tomatoes 
squirting out and the lettuce dropping into their laps. 'Mm, lovely and 
quiet, isn't it,' said Toby after a bit 'I know,' said Nick, and grinned. 
They were both wearing dark glasses, and had to search for each 
other's gaze. 'Fancy a beer?' said Toby. 
 'Why not,' said Nick. Toby went into the pool-house, and came 
back with a couple of Stellas from the fridge. It seemed to signal a 
desire to talk, but he didn't know how to start. Nick said, 'So when are 
Maurice and Sally going?' though he knew the answer. 
 'Funny you should say that,' said Toby. 'I was just thinking the 
same thing.' 
 'I can cope widi her, somehow.' 
 Toby looked at him almost reproachfully: 'You're being a hero 
with her. Of course, she's a great opera queen, isn't she.' Nick tried to 
work out, through their two pairs of sunglasses, if this was a joke - but 
it seemed to have been said in equal innocence of queens and opera. 
'He's a total philistine,' he said. 
 'Oh, he's a bastard,' said Toby, who, unlike his father, hardly 
ever swore. Nick did it for him. 'He's a cunt.' 
 'No, he really is.' 
 'I mean, why are they here actually?' 
 'Oh, business, of course…' Toby looked uneasy at hearing himself 
criticize his father: 'You know, I think Dad thought we were going to be 
one big happy family; but then there was… the Sophie thing, but - 
anyway, he's carrying on as if nothing had gone wrong.' 
 'Business as usual,' said Nick, reluctant to get into the Sophie 
thing all over again. 'I suppose Tipper's very powerful, isn't he?' 
 'Obviously he's one of the biggest.' 
 'What is it, exactly?' 
 'Nick, really…! You've heard of TipperCo, for Heaven's sake, it's a 
huge conglomerate.' 
 'No, of course…' 
 'It was a huge asset-stripping story in die 70s, he was very 
unpopular but he made millions.' 
 'Right…' 
 'Yeah, you were probably doing Chaucer that week.' Nick got as 
always a tiny amorous frisson from being teased by Toby; he coloured 
and giggled acceptingly. Of course, Toby knew about all this stuff, but 
you forgot that he did. It was as wonderful in its way that he'd written 
articles in newspapers as that his father should have something to do 
with immigration policy, or who went to prison. 'I had a look at a few of 
his faxes, but they were in some foreign language.' 
 'Oh, I wonder what that was.' 
 'You know, numbers and things.' 
 'Ha! Yeah, I had a look too, actually. There's a lot of property stuff 
going on now, which I guess is what Dad's interested in.' 
 'Sam Zeman says Gerald's doing awfully well.' 
 'Yah, he's plotting something.' 
 'I suppose he's a plotter…?' 
 'Oh, yes. Well, you know how bored he gets.' 
 'That's true, actually 'I mean, he's bored to death down here.' 
 'He always says how much he loves it.' 
 'He loves the idea of it. You know… ' This was an interesting idea 
itself, and came somehow formulated, like the sage things Toby used 
to say at Oxford, as if he'd got it off a family friend. 
 'He's probably missing London,' said Nick, just wondering if Toby 
had an inkling of what he meant. 'I diink he misses work,' said Toby. 
 Nick gave a hesitant laugh, but said nothing else. He stood up, 
and pulled off his T-shirt. 
 'Good idea,' said Toby, and did the same, and stood stretching 
needlessly. There was a little rise, for Nick, in the sexual charge of the 
afternoon. Toby was still beautiful, even though he was letting himself 
go. His beauty was held in an eerie balance with its own neglect. He 
tucked his chin in, the corners of his mouth twitched down as he 
looked down his body. It was a shame, but it was also oddly 
comforting, even lighdy arousing, how he grew plumper, while Wani, 
whose smooth sleekness had been part of his charm, seemed to Nick 
to grow leaner and ever more aquiline. Toby sat back down, looked at 
Nick, and took a couple of quick swigs from his bottle, shy about what 
he wanted to say. 'Yeah, you're in pretty good shape tliese days, Nick,' 
he said. 'I was noticing.' Nick pushed his chest out, flattened his 
stomach. 'Yeah,' he said, and had a quick proud suck on his own 
bottle. 'You're not seeing anyone at the moment, are you?' He was 
touched by these little steps into intimacy, the sense that talking 
frankly to a friend was a kind of experiment for Toby, a puzzling 
luxury. It was an echo of the Oxford days, when Nick had invented 
occasions, engineered conversations, and led Toby into solemn and 
slightly bewildered talk about his feelings and his family. It was a pity 
now to have to say, as carelessly as he could, 'No, not really.' He 
sighed. 'You're right, actually, why haven't I got someone! It's a 
scandal!' And then, incautiously, 'How about you, by the way? Have 
you got your sights set on someone new?' 
 'No,' said Toby, 'not yet.' He smiled grimly at Nick, and said, 'That 
bloody business with Sophie, you know…' He shook his head slowly, 
invoking die shock of it. 'I mean, what went wrong there, Nick? We 
were going to get married, and everything.' 
 'I know…' said Nick, 'I know…' scenting a chance to tell the truth, 
which was sometimes a questionable pleasure. 'I mean, to go off widi 
one of my own best mates.' 
 'I think eventually,' said Nick, conscious of having said this to 
Toby four or five times already, you'll come to see it as a fortunate 
escape.' 
 'Bloody Jamie,' said Toby. 'Of course she was a fool,' said Nick, 
with brotherly rectitude and secret tenderness. 'But just imagine, 
having all your summer holidays with Maurice and Sally.' 
 'Of course he blames me for not hanging on to her, Maurice docs. 
He thought it was a good match.' 
 'It was a good match, darling, for her: far too fucking good.' 
 'Mm, thanks, Nick.' Toby pulled on his beer and stared BOSS the 
wate"r. Nick's language seemed to set off a train of thought. He said, 'I 
suppose it wasn't all that great, you know, the sexual side of things.' 
He looked bitter and guilty too to be saying this. 'Oh…' You know, she 
called it "doings".' 
 'That's not very promising, I agree.' 
 'She was a bit… babyish. I don't think she liked it very much, 
actually.' Nick couldn't help saying, 'Surely…?' 
 Toby sighed. 'She used to say I hurt her, and… I don't know.' 
 There were various possible explanations of this: that Sophie, 
child of the chilly Tippers, was frigid herself; or of course that Toby's 
knob was too big, or that he didn't know what to do with it, or that he 
was just too big and heavy altogether for a slender young woman. Nick 
said, 'Well, if the sex was no good, that's another reason to think you 
had a lucky escape.' It struck him that the man who'd been the focus 
of his longings for three years or more, and performed untiringly in his 
fantasies, was perhaps after all not much good at sex, or not yet, was 
clumsy from inexperience or the choice of the wrong partner. He'd 
been so lucky, himself, to be shown the way by someone so practised 
and insatiably keen. And for a second or two, in the meridional heat, 
the thrill of that first I, ondon autumn touched him and shivered him. 
 Toby mulled the thing over, emptied his bottle, and then went to 
the pool-house to get a couple more. 
 Later they had a swim, never quite saying if they were racing or 
not. It pleased Nick to beat Toby in a race, and then made him feel 
sorry. He felt warmed and saddened by his drug secrets and his sex 
secrets, like an adulterous parent playing with an unsuspecting child. 
It struck him as a strange eventuality, when for years the idea of 
romping almost naked in the water with Toby would have been one of 
choking romance. He pulled himself up and sat on die half-submerged 
shelf, with the water slapping round his balls, and looked at the view, 
and then the other way, at die pool-house, die steps up under the fig 
tree, and the high end-wall of die manor house, the windows shuttered 
against the sun. Afternoon randiness, the mood of desertion, 
opportunity silent and wide - he watched Toby getting out with a 
magnificent jump and shake of his big unsuspecting backside. 
 They had another beer together, lying flat in die sun. 'I wonder 
how they're getting on,' said Toby. 
 'I'm so glad I'm not diere,' said Nick. 'I mean, I'm sure it's a lovely 
place…' 
 'It's been great just to spend some time widi you, old chap,' said 
Toby, as if they had really used the time. 'How are you getting on with 
Wani, by die way?' 
 'OK, actually,' said Nick. 'He's been very generous to me.' 
 'He told me he relies on you a lot.' 
 'Oh, did he…? Yes… He's quite a particular person.' 
 'He always has been. But you'll get used to that in time. I know 
him inside out by now.' 
 'Yes, you're very old friends, aren't you?' 
 'God, yes,' said Toby. 
 Nick smeared on some sunscreen, and Toby did his back for him, 
radier anxiously, and describing all die time what he was doing. Then 
Toby lay face down on his lounger, and Nick for the first time ever 
squatted over him, and squirted the thin cream across his shoulder 
blades, and set to working it in, briskly but thoroughly. He had the 
premonitory tingle of a headache from the sun and the beer, he felt 
parched and heavy-lidded, and he had a highly inconvenient erection. 
His hands moved sleekly over Toby's upper body, in weird practical 
mimicry of a thousand fantasies. His heart started beating hard when 
he dealt widi the curve of the lower back, he turned it into a bit of a 
massage, a bit of a method, as he moved towards the upward rise of 
his arse and the low loosish waistband of his trunks. And Toby just 
took it, leaving Nick with a haunting tumultuous sense of how he 
might have gone on. He finished, jumped away, and lay down quickly 
and uncomfortably on his front. For a few minutes the two boys said 
things, widely spaced, calling only for mumbled answers, like a couple 
in bed. 
 Nick woke to a strange tearing sound, like an engine that 
wouldn't start. Sharp vocalized breaths came in rhythm widi it. He 
turned over, looked blearily round, and saw that Toby had brought out 
the rowing machine from the pool-house. It had a sliding seat and 
stirrups and a hand-bar that pulled out a coiled and fiercely retracting 
white cord. Nick lay on his side and watched, with a suspicion that 
Toby was showing off to him, shooting forwards and backwards with 
each tug and each letting go. He was very powerful. The sun beat down 
on his back and sweat trickled from his armpits. His stomach muscles 
clenched and relaxed, clenched and relaxed. His breaths were keen 
and humourless, lips funnelled into a rigid kiss. It was surreal to be 
rowing so hard on dry land, beside a sheet of still blue water. The 
machine made its noise, like distant sawing or planing, a rhythmic nag 
and lull. And Nick remembered an evening in Oxford, drifting out 
through die Meadows to the Isis, and along by the boadiouses, the 
eights all in and stowed, but one or two rowers still about, as if held by 
the late light, the mood of freedom and discipline by die river. The wide 
gritty path was streaked and puddled where the dripping boats had 
been carried across it. He dawdled along, and then saw what he'd 
hoped to see, Toby out in a single scull, shirtless, glowing, moving with 
astonishing speed across the welling water. Nick was reading under 
the awning when he heard the slam of car doors and then tired, 
unsocial voices. For thirty seconds he was gripped by his old reflex of 
possession, resenting the real owners as intruders. The great glass jar 
was shattered, and the warm afternoon was spilt for ever. Catherine 
came clattering out, bent forward in a mime of exhaustion and nausea. 
'Good lunch?' said Nick. 
 'Oh! Nick! God…' She subsided into a mumble and groped for 
him, for the table edge. 'Sit down, darling, sit down.' 
 'The Tippers.' She dragged a chair over the flags and fell onto it. 
'You wouldn't believe. They're as ignorant as shit. And as mean as… 
as…' 
 'Shit…?'. 
 'They're as mean as shit! He let Gerald pay for the whole of 
lunch. It was over &#1032;500, I worked it out, you know… And not a 
single word of thanks.' 
 'I don't think they really wanted to go.' 
 'Then when we went into Podier afterwards, we went into the 
church-' 
 'Hello, Sally!' said Nick, getting up and smiling delightedly to 
annul what she might have heard. 'Have you had fun?' 
 It seemed to come as an unexpected and even slightly offensive 
question, and she twitched her hair back several times as she 
confronted it. Then she said severely, 'I suppose we have. Yes. Yes, we 
have!' 
 'Oh good. I believe it's a marvellous restaurant, isn't it. Well, 
you're back in time for drinks. Toby's just making a jug of Pimm's. We 
thought we might have it outside this evening.' 
 'Mm. OK. And what have you done all day?' She looked at him 
with a touch of criticism. He knew he was giving off the mischievous 
contentment of someone left behind for an afternoon, sleepy hints that 
he might have got up to something but in fact had done the more 
enviable and inexplicable nothing. 
 'I'm afraid we were very lazy,' he said, as Toby, red from dozing in 
the sun, came out with the jug. He saw that this was what he wanted 
her to understand, his deep and idle togetherness with die son of the 
house. 
 Gerald and Rachel didn't appear for a while, and so the Tippers 
sat down with the youngsters for a drink. Toby gave Sir Maurice a 
glass so thick with fruit and vegetables that he left it untested on the 
table. Catherine blinked a lot and put her head on one side 
ponderingly. 'You're really very rich, aren't you, Sir Maurice,' she said 
after a while. 'Yes, I am,' he said, with a snuffle of frankness. 'How 
much money have you got?' 
 His expression was sharp, but not entirely displeased. 'It's hard 
to say exactly.' 
 Sally said, 'You can never say exactly, can you - it goes up so fast 
all the time… these days.' 
 'Well, roughly,' said Catherine. 'If I died tomorrow.' 
 Sally looked solemn, but interested. 'My dear man…!' she 
murmured. 'Say, a hundred and fifty million.' 
 'Yep…' said Sally, nodding illusionlessly. 
 Catherine was blank with concealed astonishment. 'A hundred 
and fifty million pounds.' 
 'Well, not lire, young lady, I can assure you. Or Bolivian 
bolivianos, either.' 
 There was a pause while Catherine allowed diem to enjoy her 
confusion, and Toby said something smooth about die markets, which 
Sir Maurice merely shrugged at, to show he couldn't be expected to 
talk about such things at their level. 
 Cadierine poked at a segmental log of cucumber in her drink and 
said, 'I noticed you gave some money to the appeal at Podier church.' 
 'Oh, we give to endless churches and appeals,' said Sally. 'How 
much did you give?' 
 'I don't recall exactly.' 
 'Probably quite a lot, knowing Maurice!' Sir Maurice had the 
super-complacent look of someone being criticized. 
 'You gave five francs,' said Catherine. 'Which is about fifty new 
pence. But you could have given' - she raised her glass and swept it 
across the vista of hills and the far glimpse of river - 'a million francs, 
without noticing really, and single-handedly saved the Romanesque 
narthex!' 
 These were two terms Maurice Tipper had never had to deal with 
singly, much less together. 'I don't know about not noticing,' he said, 
rather leniendy. 
 'You simply can't give to everything,' said Sally. 'You know, we've 
got Covent Garden 'No, OK,' said Catherine, tactically, as if she'd been 
quite silly. 
 'What's all this…?' said Gerald, coming out in shorts and 
espadrilles, with a towel over his shoulder. 
 'The young lady was giving me some criticism. Apparently I'm 
rather mean.' 
 'Not in so many words,' said Cadierine. 
 'I'm afraid the fact is that some people just are very rich,' said 
Sally. 
 Gerald, clearly sick of his guests, and glancing tensely towards 
the steps to the pool, said, 'My daughter tends to think we should give 
everything we've worked for away.' 
 'Not everything, obviously. But it might be nice to help when you 
can.' She gave diem a toothy smile. 'Well, did you put something in die 
box?' said Sir Maurice. 'I didn't have any money widi me,' said 
Catherine. 
 Gerald went on, 'My daughter lives her life under the strange 
delusion that she's a pauper, rather than - well, what she is. I'm afraid 
she's impossible to argue with because she keeps saying the same 
thing.' 
 'It's not that,' said Catherine vaguely and irritably. 'I just don't 
see why, when you've got, say, forty million you absolutely have to turn 
it into eighty million.' 
 'Oh…!' said Sir Maurice, as if at an absurdly juvenile mistake. 'It 
sort of turns itself, actually,' said Toby. 
 'I mean who needs so much money? It's just like power, isn't it. 
Why do people want it? I mean, what's the point of having power?' 
 'The point of having power,' said Gerald, 'is that you can make 
the world a better place.' 
 'Quite so,' said Sir Maurice. 
 'So do you start off wanting to do particular things, or just to 
have the sensation of power, to know you can do things if you want 
to?' 
 'It's the chicken and the egg, isn't it,' said Sally with conviction. 
 'It's rather a good question,' said Toby, seeing that Maurice was 
getting fed up. 'If I had power,' said Catherine, 'which god forbid-' 
 'Amen to that,' murmured Gerald. 
 'I think I should stop people having a hundred and fifty million 
pounds.' 
 'There you are, then,' said Sir Maurice, you've answered your 
own question.' He laughed briefly. 'I must say, I hadn't expected to 
hear this kind of talk in a place like this.' 
 Gerald moved off, saying, 'It's art school, I'm afraid, Maurice,' but 
not looking sure that this routine disparagement would please his 
guest any more than the lunch at Chez Claude. (iv) During dinner that 
evening the phone rang. 
 Everyone out on the terrace looked ready for a call, and a self-
denying smirk spread along the table as tfiey listened to Liliane 
answering it. Nick was expecting nothing himself, but he saw the 
Tippers being called home by some opportune disaster. Liliane came 
out into the edge of the candlelight and said it was for Madame. The 
conversation at table continued thinly and with a vague humorous 
concern for the odd phrases of Rachel's that could be made out; then 
she must have closed the phone-room door. A few minutes later Nick 
saw her bedroom light go on; her half-eaten grilled trout arid 
untouched side plate of salad took on an air of crisis. When she came 
back out and said 'Yes, please,' with a gracious smile at Gerald's offer 
of more wine, she seemed both to encourage and prohibit questions. 
'Not bad news, I hope,' said Sally Tipper. 'We always get bad news 
when we're on holiday.' 
 Rachel sighed and hesitated, and held Catherine's gaze, which 
was alert and apprehensive. 'Awfully sad, darling,' she said. 'It's 
godfather Pat. I'm afraid he died this morning.' 
 Catherine, with her knife and fork held unthinkingly in the air, 
forgot to chew as she stared at her mother and tears slipped down her 
cheeks. 
 'Oh, I'm so sorry,' said Nick, moved by her instant distress more 
than by the news itself, and feeling the AIDS question rear up, sudden 
and undeflectable, and somehow his responsibility, as the only 
recognized gay man present. Still, there was a communal effort by the 
rest of the family to veil (he matter. 
 'Awfully sad,' said Gerald, and explained, 'Pat Grayson, you 
know, the TV actor…? Old, old friend of Rachel's…' Nick saw 
something distancing already in this and remembered how (ierald had 
called Pat a 'film star' at Hawkeswood three years earlier, when he was 
successful and well. 'Who was it, darling, on the phone?' 
 'Oh, it was Terry,' said Rachel, so tactfully and privately she was 
almost inaudible. 
 'We see so litde TV,' said Sally Tipper. 'We don't have the time! 
What with Maurice's work, and all our travelling… And really I don't 
think I miss it. What was he in, your friend?' 
 Toby, clearly moved, said, 'He starred in Sedley. He was bloody 
funny, actually.' 
 'Oh, sitcoms,' said Sally Tipper, with a twitch. 
 'Would you say, Nick?' said Gerald. 'Not a sitcom exactly 'It was 
sort of a comedy thriller,' said Nick, who wanted them to like Pat 
before they found out the truth. 'Sedley was the charming rogue who 
always got away with it.' 
 'Mm, quite a lady-killer,' said Gerald. 
 Wani said, 'I thought he was so charming when I mci him… at 
Lionel's house, it must have been… frightfully funny!' 
 'I know…' said Rachel distractedly, stroking Catherine's hand 
across the table, enabling and containing the little episode of grief. She 
had probably been crying herself in her room, and now drew a certain 
resolve from having her daughter to look after. • Gerald, with his 
frowning moping manner of comprehending the feelings of others while 
being quite untouched and even lightly repelled by them, made little 
sighs and rumbles from the head of the table. 'Poor old Puss,' he said. 
'Uncle Pat was her godfather. Not her real uncle, obviously…!' 
 'Madly left-wing,' said Lady Partridge, but with a chuckle of 
posthumous indulgence, as though that had been something else 
rather roguish about him. 
 'She had two - a true-blue one and a red-hot socialist. 
Godfathers.' 
 'Well, he might have been a red-hot socialist when Mum first met 
him,' said Toby. 'But you should have heard him on the Lady.' 
 'What…?' said Gerald. 'Loved the Lady!' 
 'Of course he did,' said Gerald warmly, not wanting to risk the 
old jokes about Rachel's left-wing pals in front of the Tippers. 'Her 
godmother, of course, is Sharon, um, Flintshire… you know, yup, the 
Duchess.' 
 'You and Pat were old friends,' said Wani, with his instinct for 
social connections. 'You were at Oxford together.' 
 'He was Benedick to my Beatrice,' said Rachel, with a beautiful 
smile which seemed conscious of the spodight of sympathy, 'and 
indeed Hector Hushabye to my Hesione!' 
 'Mm, jolly good!' said Gerald, outshone and subtly embarrassed. 
 This was enough to rouse Maurice Tipper, who said, in the airy 
unsurprisable way of a suspicious person, 'So how did he die?' 
 Gerald made a sort of panting noise, and Rachel said quietly, 'It 
was pneumonia, I'm afraid. But he hadn't been well, poor old Pat.' 
 'Oh,' said Maurice Tipper. 
 Rachel peered into the distance beneath the glazed earthenware 
salad bowl. 'He picked up some extraordinary bug in the Far East last 
year. No one knew what it was. It's thought to be some incredibly rare 
thing. It's just frightfully bad luck.' Nick felt a kind of relief that this 
sinister fiction was being maintained, and looked at ignorant little 
Jasper, who was nod-iling at it and not quite meeting his girlfriend's 
eye. Then he saw him wince in anticipation. 
 'Mum, for Christ's sake!' said Catherine. 'He had AIDS!' -with a 
phlegmy catch in her voice, which her anger fought with. 'He was gay… 
he liked anonymous sex… he liked…' 
 '. 
 'Darling, you don't know that…' said Rachel. It wasn't ilear how 
much of the story she hoped to throw doubt over. 
 'Of course he did,' said Catherine, whose view of gay sex was 
both tragic and cartoonlike. She grinned incredulously down the table. 
Nick felt himself included in her scorn. 
 'Anyway…!' said Gerald, with a smile and a deep breath, as if the 
nasty moment had passed, lifting and tilting the botde enquiringly 
towards his mother. 
 'Oh, it's pathetic!' shouted Catherine, with the rush and stare of 
someone hurded along by a strong new mix of emotions. 'I mean surely 
the least we can do is tell the truth about him?' - and she smacked the 
table hard, but still somehow childishly and comically; there were one 
or two nervous smiles. She jumped her chair back over the flags and 
hurried indoors. 'Um… should I…?' said Jasper, and sniggered. 'No, 
no, I'll go,' said Rachel. 'In a minute or two.' 
 'Experience suggests to wait a bit,' said Gerald, as if explaining 
some other local custom to his guests. 
 An emotional young lady,' said Maurice Tipper with a grin of 
displeasure. 
 'She's a very emotional young lady,' said Jasper, in a cowardly 
mixture of boasting and mockery. 
 'She's quite unbalanced,' Lady Partridge agreed confidentially. 
Gerald hesitated, peering over his raised wine glass, but took his 
daughter's part. 'I think I'd say she's just very softhearted,' he said; 
which it seemed to Nick was just what she wasn't. Rachel said, with a 
hint of frost, 'Does Sophie ever get upset?' 
 Sir Maurice seemed to think the question impertinent. His wife 
said, 'If she does, she doesn't let it show. Unless she's on stage, of 
course. Then she's all passion.' Nick tliought of her performance in 
Lady Windermere's Fan, where all she had had to say was 'Yes, 
mamma.' 
 After dinner the four boys were in die drawing room, though 
Jasper fidgeted and soon went upstairs to skulk around Catherine's 
door. Wani was reading Sir Maurice's Financial Times, and Toby was 
sitting in the puzzlement of bereavement, tilting a glass of cognac from 
side to side, and trying occasional rephrasings of the same idea to 
Nick: 'God it's awful, poor old Pat, I can't believe it.' 
 Nick lowered the book he had just started, smiled to suggest the 
book itself was a bore. 'I know,' he said. 'Isn't it awful. I'm so sorry' He 
thought of the two of them down by the pool after lunch, and the 
lustful tenderness he felt for Toby seemed to glow and fill the room. He 
was excited by Toby's grief, and tlie boyish need he seemed to feel for 
Nick's comfort, and for something wise Nick might say. Nick himself 
was impressed by Pat's death, and had a distantly acknowledged 
feeling of guilt, that he'd done notliing for Pat - though Pat, in another 
sense, had done notliing for him; Nick hadn't liked his brand of cagey 
camp, and had been snotty and even priggish with him: so that, more 
shamefully still, he felt subdy disembarrassed by the death, since it 
erased the memory of his own bad grace. 'I wonder how Terry's coping,' 
he said, to focus Toby's thoughts. 'Yah, poor guy. God it's awful, this 
bloody plague.' 
 'I know.' You'd bloody well better not get the fucking thing,' said 
Toby. 
 'I'll be all right,' said Nick. 'I've been taking very good care since - 
well, since we knew about it.' He glanced across at Wani, who was 
screened above the knees by the raised pink broadsheet with its 
headlines about record share prices, record house prices. From time to 
time he smacked the page flat. 'You don't have to worry about me,' 
Nick said. 
 Toby looked a bit shame-faced. 'I didn't know Pat, you know, 
slept around.' 
 'Well…' said Nick. He knew very well, because Catherine was 
indiscreet, that Pat had liked very rough sex. 'Don't believe everything 
Catherine says. She lives in a world of her own hyperbole.' 
 Yah, but she was pretty close to Pat, Nick - he took her out to 
dinner quite often. She stayed at Haslemere three or four times. If she 
says he liked anonymous sex-' 
 Nick saw that the Tippers had come in. They'd been up to their 
room and now they'd come down, tight-lipped and close together, as 
though they felt obliged to put in another half-hour. Maurice had 
clearly been very displeased by the scene at dinner, and a suspicion of 
deviancy seemed to hang for him now over the whole party. The boys 
all stood up, and Nick «'i his book, face down, on the arm of his chair. 
Sally Tippei peered at it, to deflect her discomfort on to a neutral 
object, and said, 'Ah, that's Maurices book, I see.' 
 'Um… oh,' said Nick, sure of himself but confused as to her 
reasoning; it was a study of the poetry of John Berryman. 'I don't think 
'Do you see diat, darling?' 
 Maurice brought his gleaming lenses to bear on it. 'What? Oh 
yes,' he said. He went towards Wani, who was quickly refolding the FT. 
'You're very welcome to read it,' Nick said, widi a frank little laugh, 'but 
it's actually mine - it was sent on to me this morning. I'm reviewing it 
for the THES.' 
 'Oh I see, no, no,' said Sally, with a coldly tactful smile. 'No, 
Maurice owns Pegasus - I just noticed they publish it.' 
 'I didn't know that.' 
 'I've bought it,' said Sir Maurice. 'I've bought the whole group. It's 
in the paper.' And he sat down and glared at the vase of thistles and 
dried honesty in the grate. 
 'I'm just going up to see if my sis is OK,' said Toby, as though all 
this had decided him. 
 Nick didn't feel he could go out after him. He sat down again, 
opposite Sally, but not quite in relation with her, like guests in a hotel 
lounge. He said, 'I'm afraid this news has rather spoilt the evening.' 
 'Yes,' said Sally, 'it's most unfortunate.' 
 'Awful losing an old friend,' said Nick. 
 'Mm,' said Sally, with a twitch, as if to say her meaning had been 
twisted. 'So you knew him too, did you, the man?' 
 'Pat - yes, a bit,' said Nick. 'He was a great charmer.' He smiled 
and the word seemed to linger and insist, like a piece of code. 
 Sally said, 'As I say, we never saw him.' She took up a copy of 
Country Life, and sat staring at the estate agents' advertisements. Her 
expression was tough, as if she was arguing the prices down; but also 
self-conscious, so that it seemed just possible she wanted to talk about 
what had happened. She looked up, and said with a great twitch, 'I 
mean, they must have seen it coming.' 
 'Oh…' said Nick, 'I see. I don't know. Perhaps. One always hopes 
that it won't be the case. And even if you know it's going to happen, it 
doesn't make it any less awful when it does.' It had become unclear to 
him whether she knew that he was gay; he'd always assumed it was 
the cause for her coldness, her way of not paying attention to him, but 
now he'd started 10 suspect she was blind to it. He felt the large 
subject massing, with its logic and momentum. There would be the 
social strain of coming out to such people in such a place, and the 
wider matter of AIDS concerning diem all, more or less. He said, 'I 
think I heard you say your mother had a long final illness.' 
 'That was utterly different,' Sir Maurice put in curdy. 'It was a 
blessed relief,' said Sally, 'when she finally went.' 
 'She hadn't brought it on herself,' said Sir Maurice. 
 'No, that's true,' Sally sighed. 'I mean, they're going to have ID 
learn, aren't they, the… homosexuals.' 
 'It's a hard way to have to learn,' said Nick, 'but yes, we are Ic-
arning to be safe.' Sally Tipper stared at him. 'Right…' she said. 
 Sir Maurice seemed not to notice this, but in her there was a 
little spectacle of ingestion. Nick tried to put it in her language, but 
couldn't think what the term would be. 'You know, diere are very 
simple things that need to be done. For instance, people have got to 
use protection… you know, when they're… when diey're humping.' 
 'I see,' said Sally, with another shake of the head. He wasn't sure 
she followed. Were such cheerful genteelisms any use? She had an air 
of being ready to take things on, and simultaneously an air of puzzled 
and frightened offence. 
 'That's what he'd been doing, had he, I suppose, your friend the 
actor? 
 Humping?' 
 'Almost undoubtedly,' said Nick. Sir Maurice made a rough, 
dyspeptic sound, as if chewing a mint. 'But as we all know,' Nick went 
on flatteringly, and with a sort of weary zeal now the moment had 
come, 'there are other things one can do. 
 I mean there's oral sex, which may be dangerous, but is certainly 
less so.' 
 Sally received this stoically. 'Kissing, you mean.' Sir Maurice 
looked at him sharply and said, 'I'm afraid what you're saying fills me 
with a physical revulsion,' and seemed to be laughing in his distaste. 'I 
just don't see why anyone's remotely surprised. The whole thing had 
got completely out of hand. 
 They had it coming to them.' 
 Sally, enlightened for a minute by her unusual talk with Nick, 
said wildly, 'Oh, Maurice is medieval on this one, he's like Queen 
Victoria!' It was a little shot at freedom, her silliness of tone almost 
invited correction. 'I'm not ashamed of what I think,' said Sir Maurice. 
'Of course you're not, darling,' said Sally. 
 'No, well nor am I, as a matter of fact,' said Nick. 
 'What do you think, Wani,' said Sally, 'as a younger person, you 
know, on the other side of die picture?' 
 Wani had been watching Nick with mischievous patience. 'I 
suppose Nick must be right, you know… everyone's going to have to be 
more careful. There's really no excuse for getting the thing now.' He 
smiled wisely. 'I think it's so sad with little children having it - babies 
born witii it, even.' 
 'That is awfully sad,' said Sally. 
 'I'm probably just old-fashioned on these things, but actually I 
was brought up to believe in no sex before marriage.' 
 'My own view entirely,' said Sir Maurice, as fiercely as if he was 
contradicting him. 
 Nick, tingling with ironies and astonishment, said merely, 'But if 
we're never going to get married…' 
 'Sort of sex-mad, isn't it, the world we live in,' said Sally, as if 
that was their general conclusion. 'I know…' said Wani. (v) Next 
morning there was a brief bit of shouting between Gerald and 
Catherine, down by the pool. Nick couldn't quite hear what it was 
about. He was surprised by it, so soon after Pat's death, when Gerald 
might have bothered to tread carefully; but it seemed also to make a 
kind of sense, as an awkward aftershock of that event. Nothing more 
was said about it in die day. 
 When Nick went upstairs in the afternoon Catherine came too, a 
litde behind him, so that it wasn't clear if she was following him; he 
glanced back in the long passageway and saw her plotting expression. 
He left his door open, and a few moments later she came wandering in. 
'Hello, darling,' said Nick. 
 'Mm, hello again, darling,' said Catherine, looking quickly at him, 
and then peering mysteriously around the room. 'Are you OK?' 
 'Oh, yes… fine. I'm fine.' 
 Nick smiled tenderly, but she seemed almost irritated by the 
question, and he thought perhaps she'd got over Pat, with her odd 
emotional economy, of feelings fiercely inhabited and then discarded. 
She was wearing tight white shorts and a grey tank top of Jasper's, in 
which her small breasts moved alertly. No one had come to his room 
before, and it felt intimate, and pleasantly tense, like a first date. She 
sat on the bed and tested the springs. 'Poor old Nick, you always get 
the worst room.' 
 'I love my room,' said Nick, gazing to left and right. 
 'This used to be my room. It's where they put the children. God, I 
remember those creepy pictures.' 
 'They are a bit spooky, aren't they.' They were the little-German 
paintings on glass: Autumn, where a woman with an aigrette filled a 
girl's apron with easily reached fruit, and Winter, where men in red 
coats shot and skated and a bird sang on a bare branch. It was hard 
to put your finger on it, but they had a sort of sinister geniality. 'Still, 
you're nice and near your friend.' 
 'I can hear old Ouradi snoring, yes,' said Nick, rather heartily, 
and sat down at the table. 'Actually I don't mind old Ouradi,' said 
Catherine. 'He's all right, isn't he.' 
 'I always thought he was just a spoilt little ponce, but there's a 
wee bit more to him than that. He can even be quite funny' 
 'I know…' said Nick, who thought of himself as much funnier 
than Wani. 
 'I mean he's bloody moody. Sometimes he's just not there, he's 
like a shop dummy going charming… duchess… et cetera; and 
sometimes he's the life and soul.' 
 'I know what you mean,' said Nick, with a wary laugh at her 
mimicry. 'You get used to that.' 
 Catherine leaned back on her arms and swung her legs. 'I'm 
quite glad I'm not his fiancee, I must say.' 
 'I think she's probably used to that too.' 
 'She's certainly had time to get used to it…' 
 Nick looked down, realigned the books on his table, his 
notebooks, Henry James's memoirs covering the Spartacus gay guide 
to the world. He assumed Catherine had come here with a purpose. 
She glanced round, and then got up and closed the door, in the 
abstracted way of someone already working on the next thing. 
 'I must say I'm beginning to wonder about old Wani,' she said. 
'How do you mean…?' 
 'He's rather brilliant, actually' 
 'Oh…?' 
 'He's completely pulled the wool over your blue eyes.' 
 Nick smiled dimly, with anxiety and a vague sense of a 
compliment. 'Quite probably,' he said. Catherine sat down and said, 
'My little Jaz has got a theory' 
 'Oh, yes?' said Nick. 'I wouldn't automatically credit a theory of 
little Jaz's.' 
 Catherine carried on as if she didn't mind him sounding like her 
father. 
 'Perhaps not, but… Jasper's very observant, you know, well, you 
probably don't believe me… anyway, he thinks he's a fag.' 
 'Oh!' Nick tutted disappointedly. 'Yeah, people are always saying 
that. It's just because he baths so often and wears see-through 
trousers.' The odd thing, Nick thought, was that people said it so 
rarely. 
 'Jasper says he follows him round all the time trying to get a look 
at his knob.' 
 'Mm… It sounds to me a bit like vanity, darling. Jasper's always 
following me round trying to show mc his knob.' Perhaps this was too 
frank. 'You must admit, he can lie a bit of a flirt.' Nick was surprised 
by his own presence of mind, but still he sniggered, and crossed his 
legs in complex discomfort. 
 'Wani hasn't said anything at all, then? About Jaz? I suppose he 
would be extra careful to keep it from you, wouldn't he -in case you got 
the wrong idea! 
 Wouldn't do at all!' said Catherine, perhaps not convinced by her 
own theory. 
 Nick was blushing, but he looked at her levelly 'I don't know, 
darling,' he said, and bit his lower lip. Aren't they alone together down 
at the pool right now? Who knows what might be happening?' At least 
he's not wearing his thong today,' said Catherine. 
 'No, quite…' Nick pushed on defensively with his rough joke. 
'Though once they get into die pool-house together…' 
 Catherine gave him a bodiered stare, and coloured a little herself. 
She knew of course that Nick knew that Jasper fucked her in the pool-
house, it was a silent brag; but of course she didn't know that Nick 
had fucked Wani there last night, after the awful dinner, in a storm of 
pent-up anger. She said, 'Oh, god, don't mention the pool-house.' 
 'What…?' 
 'Gerald was on to me about it this morning, and behaving 
broadly like an ape, I must say.' 
 'Oh, darling… I saw something was going on': and the image of 
Gerald standing by the pool, head down, shoulders rounded in 
accusing disappointment, was somehow ape-like, it was true. 
 'Apparently her ladyship found a rubber johnny floating in the 
lav. She was frightfully upset, as you can imagine. It quite ruined her 
early-morning bathe.' 
 'Hoorah!' said Nick, and grinned at her, while his mind raced 
round a series of right-angled bends. 
 'I thought he'd flushed it, but Gerald came snooping round, and 
we only escaped by a hare's breath' 
 'I'm surprised she knew what it was.' 
 'It's too pathetic,' said Catherine, who of course had missed last 
night's sexeducation class. 'We're all adults, for god's sake.' 
 'I know…' 
 'You can't do it in the house, because the noise carries.' 
 'That can be a problem.' 
 'Actually, god, fuck, that's really weird…!' Catherine stared at 
him in excited self-doubt, whilst Nick felt his disguise grow eerily 
thinner. He smiled, not knowing if he'd been recognized, or if, by 
sitting still, he could avoid detection. 'Because I'm sure we didn't use 
one yesterday.' 
 'You must always use a rubber,' said Nick. 'There's no point in 
sometimes using one and sometimes not. You don't know where he's 
been.' 
 'Oh, Nick, he's a total innocent. He's never been with anyone 
else.' 
 'No, well…' 
 Catherine gaped. 'So if it wasn't us.' 
 'It might have been there from the day before, I suppose,' said 
Nick, with doomed insouciance, watching Catherine as she went on an 
Agatha Christie-like tour of the possible and frankly impossible 
suspects. He thought that perhaps like Poirot she had known the 
answer before she came into the room; but when she stood up, walked 
to the window, and turned he saw the shock, the disgust even, of 
discovery in her face. 'God, I've been stupid,' she said. 
 Nick looked at her, and she looked at him. He felt the painful 
stupidity of detection himself, and also a kind of pride, lurking still, 
waiting for permission to smile. She couldn't deny the scale and*class 
of the deception. He thought he saw her quick recovery, her feel for 
anything salacious. He said,,'Perhaps he is rather brilliant, yes.' 
 Catherine came and sat down again, as dignified as she could be. 
'I don't think he's brilliant any more,' she said. 
 Nick said carefully, 'You mean he was brilliant when you thought 
he was tricking me, but not when it turns out he's tricking you.' He 
felt, without time to work it out, that there could be a brilliance of 
concealment, over something simple and even sordid; and there could 
be a simple, dumb concealment of something glitteringly unexpected. 
Caught up in it, inured to it, he didn't know which was more nearly 
the case with himself and Wani. 'Of course, it's all for him,' he said. 'I 
mean how can he bear it?' 
 'The secrecy, you mean? Or me?' 
 'Ha, ha.' 
 'Well, the secrecy…' Often in life Nick felt he hadn'i mastered the 
arguments, and could hardly present his own case, let alone someone 
else's; but on this particular matter he was watertight, if only from the 
regular need to convince himself. He checked off the points on his 
fingers: 'He's a millionaire, he's Lebanese, he's the only child, he's 
engaged to be married, his father's a psychopath.' 
 'I mean how did it start?' said Catherine, finding these points 
either too obvious or too involved to take up. 'How long's it been going 
on? I mean - god, really, Nick!' 
 'Ooh, about six months.' 
 'Six months!' - and again Nick couldn't tell if this was too long or 
not long enough. She stared at him. 'I'm going to write that poor long-
suffering French girl a letter!' 
 'You're to do nothing of die kind. A year from now that poor 
French girl will be blissfully married.' 
 'To a Lebanese poofter with a psychopath for a father…' 
 'No, darling, to a very beautiful and very rich young man, who 
will make her very happy and give her lots of beautiful rich children.' It 
was a tiringly ample prospect. 'And what about you?' 
 'Oh, I'll be all right.' 
 'You're not going to carry on bumshoving him when he's married 
to the poor little French girl, I hope?' 
 'Of course not,' said Nick, with a glassy smile at the one thing he 
didn't want to tliink about. 'No - I shall move on!' 
 Catherine shook her head at him, she had the moral she wanted: 
'God, men!' she said. Nick laughed uneasily, as an object of both 
sympathy and attack. 'But really, swear not to say a word to anybody.' 
 She weighed this up, teasingly, and teasing meant more to her 
than to Nick. She was on the side of dissidence and sex, but she was 
still huffy widi her discovery, with having been tricked and not trusted. 
In the pause that followed they heard the faint scratch of footsteps on 
the stairs and then the clip of hard-soled slippers, which Nick knew at 
once, along the tiled hallway. He bit his lip, winced, and curled his 
head forward as if he was praying, to enjoin silence. Wani was coming 
up to his room, to change probably, which he did more often than 
anyone else, as if strictly observing an etiquette the others had let 
slide. And for another reason too, so that his reappearance in pressed 
white linen trousers or bright silk shirt was a cover and almost an 
explanation for his new liveliness; as if he sprang back to noiseless. 
ipplan. se. He went into his room, and they could see him hesitate, the 
shadow on the gleam of the tiles under Nick's door, which wasn't 
normally closed. Then he closed his own door, and seconds later the 
catch jumped and settled. The door catches here had a life of their 
own, and kicked and rattled with stored energy, in accusing jumps. 
 As they sat there, compromised, staring attentively, but not at 
each other, waiting for Wani to be done, Nick pictured him having a 
line, "his air of cleverness and superiority, and almost hoped that they 
would hear him, and that that secret would come out too. To hear it, 
like a lovers' rendezvous, a rhythm, a ritual: evidence of the other great 
affair in Wani's life. But he-was probably in his bathroom. A light 
aircraft droned and throbbed in the heights, a summer sound, that 
came and went on the mind. 
 When he'd gone downstairs again, Catherine said, 'Of course 
switchers are a nightmare. Everyone knows that.' 
 'I don't suppose everyone knows it,' said Nick. 
 'God, you remember Roger?' 
 'He was Drip-Dry, wasn't he?' Nick felt annoyed, slighted, but 
undeniably relieved that Catherine had decided to show him up with 
talk about her own boyfriends. Always something just a little bit funny 
about the sex - as if he wished you had a hairy chest… you know. And 
the feeling that you never had his absolutely undivided attention.' 
 'I'm not sure one wants that, does one,' said Nick, not quite 
meaning it, but seeing as he said it that it could be a helpful kind of 
wisdom, if you shared your lover with a woman as well as a drug. 
 'They say they love you, but diere's more reason than usual to 
disbelieve them.' 
 In fact Wani had never said that, and Nick had stopped saying it, 
because of die discomforting silence that followed when he did. 'I'm 
surprised, actually, I wouldn't have thought he was your type.' 
 'Oh!' said Nick, and gasped at the thought of him. 'I mean, he's 
not black, really, he's been to university.' 
 Nick smiled disparagingly at this sketch of his tastes. He felt 
embarrassed - not at sex talk, which was always an enjoyable 
surrender, a game of risked and relished blushes, but at the exposure 
of something more private than sex and weirdly chivalrous. He said, 'I 
just think he's the most beautiful man I've ever met.' 
 'Darling,' said Catherine, in a protesting murmur, as if he'd said 
something very childish and untenable. 'You can't really?' Nick looked 
at his desk and flinched irritably. 'I can sort of see what you mean,' 
Catherine said. 'He's like a parody of a good-looking person, isn't he.' 
She smiled. 'Give me your pen': and on the top of Nick's notepad she 
made a quick drawing, a few curves, cheekbones, lips, lashes, heavily 
inked squiggles of hair. 'There! No, I must sign it' - and she scrawled 
'Wonnie by Cath' underneath. Nick saw how accurate it was, and said, 
'He doesn't look like that at all.' 
 'Hmm?' said Catherine teasingly, feeling she'd made a point but 
not knowing where it had got her. 
 'All I can say is, when he comes into the room - like when he got 
back late for lunch the other day, when we'd been gossiping about 
him, and I was playing along with you, sort of agreeing, actually - 
when he came in, I just thought, yes, I'm in the right place, this is 
enough.' 
 Catherine said, 'I think that's awfully dangerous, Nick. Actually I 
think it's mad.' 
 "Well, you're an artist,' said Nick, 'surely?' Whenever he'd 
imagined telling someone this, the story, the idea, had met with a 
thrilled concurrence and a sense of revelation. He had never expected 
to be contested on every point of his own beliefs. He said, 'Well, I'm 
sorry, that's how I am, you should know dul by now.' 
 'You'd fall in love with someone just because they were beautiful, 
as you call it.' 
 'Not anyone, obviously. That would be mad.' He resented her 
way, now she'd gained access to his fantasy, of belittling the view. It 
was like her attitude to the room they were sitting in. 'It's not 
something we can argue about, it's a fact of life.' 
 Catherine cast her mind back helpfully. 'I mean, no one could 
have called Denton beautiful, could tliey?' 
 'Denny had a beautiful bottom,' Nick said primly. 'That was what 
mattered at the time. I wasn't in love with him.' 
 And what about little thing? Leo? He wasn't beautiful exactly, I 
wouldn't have thought. You were crazy about him.' She looked at him 
interestedly to see if she'd gone too far. 
 Nick said solemnly but feebly, 'Well, he was beautiful to me.' 
 'Exacdy!' said Catherine. Teople are lovely because we love them, 
not the other way round.' 
 'Hmm.' 
 'Did you hear anything more from him, by the way?' 
 'No, not since spring of last year,' said Nick, and got up to go to 
the lavatory. 
 The bathroom window looked out across the forecourt and the 
lane at the other, unmentioned view, northwards: over rising pastures 
towards a white horizon - and beyond that, in the mind's distance, 
northern France, the Channel, Kngl. mil, London, lying in the same 
sunlight, the gate opening from the garden to the gravel walk, and the 
plane trees, and the groundsmen's compound with the barrow and the 
compost heap. It came to Nick in a flash of acute nostalgia, as though 
he could never visit that scene of happiness again. He waited a minute 
longer, in the heightened singleness of someone who has slipped out 
for a minute from a class, a meeting, ears still ringing, face still 
solemn, into another world of quiet corridors, the neutral gleam of the 
day. He couldn't unwind the line of beauty for Catherine, because it 
explained almost everything, and to her it would seem a trivial 
delusion, it would seem mad, as she said. He wouldn't be here in this 
room, in this country, if he hadn't seen Toby that morning in the 
college lodge, if Toby hadn't burnt in five seconds onto the eager blank 
of his mind. How he chased Toby, the covert pursuit, the unguessed 
courage, the laughable timidity (it seemed to him now), the inch or two 
gained by pressure on Toby's unsuspecting good nature, the sudden 
furlongs of dreamlike advance when Toby asked him up to town - he 
could never tell her that. Her own view was that Toby was a 'vacuous 
lump'. 
 When he went back into the room she had found the Spartacus 
guide, and was looking at it, and then over it at him, with a mocking 
gape, as if this was the silliest thing of all. 'It's too hysterical,' she said. 
 'Marvellous, isn't it,' said Nick, slightly prickly, but glad of the 
distraction. 
 'Hang on… Paris… I'm just looking up Paraquat. I don't believe 
this book.' She studied the page, in her illiterate excitable way. 
 'I shouldn't think there's much there,' said Nick, who had already 
looked it up and imagined with mingled longing and satire the one 
disco and the designated park. 
 "Well, there's a disco, darling. Wed to Sat, n to 3. L'An des Roys,' 
she said, in her plonking French accent. 'We must go! How hilarious! 
'I'm glad you find it so amusing.' 
 'We'll suggest it to Ouradi, and see what he says… God, there's 
everything in here.' 
 'Yes, it's very useful,' said Nick. 
 'Cruising areas, my god! Look at this, rue St Front - we went 
there widi die Tippers yesterday. If only they'd known… What does 
AYOR mean?' 
 'AYOR? At Your Own Risk.' 
 'Oh… right… Right… And it's the whole world!' 
 'Look up Afghanistan,' said Nick, because there was a famous 
warning about the roughness of Afghan sex. But she carried on 
flicking through. Nick disguised his interest, the vague comical 
rakishness he seemed to admit by having the book, and went and sat 
on die bed. 'I'm just locking up Lebanon,' she said, after a minute. 'Oh 
yes…' said Nick. 
 'It sounds marvellous. Mediterranean climate, well we knew that, 
and it says homosexuality is a delight.' 
 'Really,' said Nick. 
 'It does. "L'homosexualite est un delit",' she read, sounding like 
General de Gaulle. 'Yes, dilit is a crime, unfortunately.' 
 'Oh, is it?' 
 'Delight is Mice, Mit'is a misdemeanour.' 
 'Well, it's bloody close…' 
 'Well, they often are,' said Nick, and felt rather pleased with 
himself. 
 Catherine was bored with the book. She held Nick's eye, and 
said, 'So what's he into, old Ouradi?' 
 'He's into me.' 
 'Well, yes,' said Catherine, as if she could see round this. 
 'OK, he likes to get fucked,' said Nick briskly, and got up as if 
that was really all she was going to get out of him. 
 'I always thought he must be into some pretty weird sort of gay 
stuff.' 
 'You didn't even know he was gay till ten minutes ago.' 
 'I knew deep down.' 
 Nick smiled reproachfully. Telling the story for the first time he 
saw its news value, already wearing off on Catherine, the quick fade of 
a shock, and felt the old requirement not to disappoint her. It was their 
original game of talking about men, boasting and mocking, and he 
knew its compulsion, the quickened pulse of rivalry and the risk of 
trust. There were phrases about Wani that he'd carried and polished 
for some occasion like this and he imagined saying them now, and the 
effect on himself as much as on her, mere reluctant admission melting 
into the relief of confession. There was nothing, exactly, to confess. 
 The secrecy of the past six mondis was not to be mistaken for die 
squeeze of guilt. He thought, I won't tell her about die hotel porn. He 
sat down again, to mark a wary transition to frankness. 'Well, he's 
quite into threesomes,' he said. 'Mm, not my cup of tea,' said 
Catherine. 'OK, we won't ask you.' 
 She gave a tart smile. 'So who do you have threesomes with?' 
 'Oh, just with strangers. He gets me to pick people up for him. Or 
we get a rent boy in, you know. A Strieker! A what?' 
 'That's what they call them in Munich.' 
 'I see,' said Catherine. 'Isn't that a bit risky, if he's so into 
secrecy?' 
 'Oh, I think the risk's quite the thing,' said Nick. 'He likes the 
danger. And he likes to submit. I don't quite understand it myself, but 
he likes having a witness. He likes everything that's the opposite of 
what he seems.' 
 'It all sounds rather pathetic, somehow,' said Catherine. 
 Nick went on, not knowing if it was evidence for the defence or 
the prosecution, 'He's quite a screamer, actually.' A screaming queen, 
you mean?' 
 'I mean he makes a lot of noise.' It would probably be better not 
to tell her about that morning in Munich. 'It was hilarious one morning 
in Munich,' he said. 
 'He made so much noise in the room, I don't think he noticed, 
but the chambermaids were all laughing about us in the corridor 
outside.' Catherine snuffled. 'Russell always liked me to shout a lot,' 
she said. 
 Again Nick allowed the allusion; he smiled thinly through it, and 
thought and said with a wince, 'He's got this rather awful thing for 
porn, actually' 
 'Oh…?' 
 'I mean, nothing wrong with porn, but you sometimes feel it's the 
real de"ep template for his life.' 
 Catherine raised her eyebrows and gave a deep sigh. 'Oh dear…' 
she said. 
 Nick looked away, at the open window, and the closed door. 'It 
just got a bit out of hand, actually, in Germany. You know, there's 
endless porn on the hotel TV.' 
 'Oh…' said Catherine, to whom porn was a blankly masculine 
mystery. 
 'He lay there all evening watching it - straight stuff, of course, 
which he likes just as much, if not more. One night, I'm afraid, I had 
to go off to dinner by myself. He just wouldn't turn it off.' 
 Catherine laughed, and so did Nick, though the image was a sad 
one, was pathetic, as she said: of Wani with his pants round his 
ankles, too crammed with coke to get an erection, in slavish subjection 
to the orgy on screen, whilst Nick, in the. sitting room of their stuffy 
little suite, made a bed for himself on the sofa. He could hear Wani, 
through the door, talking to the people in the film. Catherine said, 'He 
sounds a nightmare, actually, darling.' 
 'He's very exciting too, but…' 
 'I mean, I rather worry about you, if you're loving him so much as 
you say, and he's treating you like this. Actually, I wonder if you do 
really love him, you see.' 
 He saw this was her usual hyperbole, and her usual solicitous 
undermining of his affairs. 'No, no,' he said, with a disparaging 
chuckle. It wasn't that she'd shown him the truth of die matter, but 
that telling her these few amusing details he'd told himself something 
he couldn't now retract. He had a witness too. 'Anyway,' he said, 'I 
probably shouldn't have told you all this.' (vi) The Tippers left the 
following day. Secret smiles of relief admitted also a dim sense of guilt, 
and a resultant hardening and defiance. Gerald was gloomily 
preoccupied, and seemed to carry the blame round with him, not 
knowing where to put it down. Wani was the only one who expressed 
real regret and surprise; he'd felt at home with the Tippers, they were 
the sort of people he'd been brought up to respect. It was Rachel who 
tried hardest to be diplomatic; her supple good manners struggled to 
contain the awkward turn of events, which she minded entirely for 
Gerald's sake. 
 The departure was handled very briskly. Sir Maurice was 
offended, active, in a surprising way fulfilled - this was what he looked 
for, a clarified antipathy, a somehow reassuring trusdessness. 'We're 
not enjoying it much here,' he said; and his wife took her usual 
strange pleasure in his hardness and roughness; they were her 
animating cause, his feelings were as unanswerable as his ulcers… 
Toby loaded up the luggage, with the straight-faced satisfaction of a 
porter. 
 After they'd gone, Wani, watchful and charming, suggested a 
game of boules to Gerald, and they went out and started playing in the 
bald space where the Tippers' car had stood. The day for once was 
overcast, and Nick sat in the drawing room with his book. The tingle of 
freedom made it a little hard to concentrate: he felt aware of the 
pleasure, the primacy of reading, but the content seemed to glint from 
a distance, as if through mist. Then Lady Partridge tottered in in her 
sun- dress, clearly pleased, repossessing the place, but also at a loose 
end without the irritant of Sally at her ear. The Tippers had been a 
subject for her, they'd annoyed her and they'd excited her with the raw 
fascination of money. She sat down in an armchair. She didn't say 
anything, but Nick knew that she was jealous of his book. From 
outside, through the open front door, came the cracks and clicks and 
yelps of the boules game. 'Mm, what are you reading?' said Lady 
Partridge. 
 'Oh…' said Nick, disowning the book with a shake of the head, 
'it's just something I'm reviewing.' She turned her ear enquiringly. 'It's 
a study of John Berryman.' 
 Ah…!' said Lady Partridge, sitting back with the mocking 
contentment of the non-reader. 'The poet… Funny man.' 
 'Oh - um…!' Nick gasped. 'Yes, he was rather funny, I suppose… 
in a way.' 
 'I always thought.' 
 Nick smiled at her narrowly, and went on, to test the ground, 'It's 
a sad life, of course. He suffered from these terrible depressions.' 
 Lady Partridge smacked her lips illusionlcssly, and rolled her 
eyes back - a more terrible effect than she realized. 'Like… er, young 
madam,' she said. 
 'Well, quite,' said Nick, 'though we hope it won't end die same 
way! He drank a tremendous lot, you know.' 
 'I wouldn't be at all surprised if he drank a lot,' said Lady 
Partridge, with a hint of solidarity. 
 And then, of course,' said Nick clinchingly, but with a sad loll of 
the head, 'he jumped off a bridge into the Mississippi.' 
 Lady Partridge reflected on this, as if she thought it unlikely. 'I 
always rather liked him on the telly. Came over awfully well. Perhaps 
you never saw those… He went to the seaside. Or, you know, poking 
round old churches and what-not. Even those weren't too bad. He had 
what I'd call an infectious laugh. 
 I think I'm right in saying he became the Poet Laureate.' 
 'Ah… No,' said Nick. 
 'No, actually-' 
 'Fuck? came a howl from the forecourt, hardly recognizable as 
Gerald's voice. 
 Lady Partridge's gaze slid uncertainly away. Nick got up with a 
soft laugh and went out into the hall to see what had happened. 
Gerald was coming in from outside, his face in a spasm of emotion that 
might have been rage or glee, and veered away from Nick into the 
kitchen, where Toby was sitting having coffee with Rachel. Nick 
glanced out of the front door, and saw Wani collecting up the boules 
with a dutiful but unrepentant expression. 
 'Darling…?' said Rachel, with a note of anger, but looking him 
over quickly, to see if he was hurt. 'Dad,' said Toby, and shook his 
head disappointedly. 
 Gerald stood staring at them, and then hunched and grinned. He 
said, 'I'm on holiday!' 
 'Yes, darling, you are,' said Rachel. 'You ought to calm down.' 
She was solicitous, but firm: her own calm was a reproof. Nick stood in 
the doorway and looked at them, bright-eyed. There was a collective 
sense that they could tame Gerald. 
 'Beaten at boules by a bloody A-rab!' said Gerald, and gasped at 
his own candour, and as if it might be a joke. 'For god's sake, Dad,' 
said Toby. 
 'What…?' said Gerald. 'You'll be calling me a bloody Jew-boy 
next.' 
 'I would never do that,' said Gerald. 'Don't be monstrous.' 
 'Well, I hope not,' said Toby, and coloured at his own emotion. 
'Wani's my friend,' he said, with an effect of simple decency, so that 
Gerald stared and thought and then went out of the room. They heard 
him calling out, 'Wani! Wani, my apologies! OK…? Yup! So sorry…' 
with improper cheerfulness, and tailing off as he turned indoors, as if 
it was a mere routine. He came back into the kitchen with a twitch of a 
smile, since Wani hadn't heard the thing he should really have been 
apologizing for. He drifted absent-mindedly into the larder and 
emerged with a dusty botde of claret. 
 'Why don't you go and have a swim, Gerald. Or find Jasper, and 
take him for a walk,' recommended Rachel. 
 'Jasper isn'f a cocker spaniel, you know,' said Gerald, amusingly 
but with a bit of a snap. 'Well, no,' said Rachel. 
 Gerald turned the little wooden-handled corkscrew with furtive 
keenness. 'Well, roll on Sunday, and Lionel's visit!' he said, to please 
Rachel and cover the exuberant pop of the cork. 'It's a bit early for 
that, isn't it Gerald?' said Rachel. 'For god's sake, Dad,' said Toby 
again. 
 'He wants to let it breathe,' said Nick with an anxious laugh. 
 Gerald looked at them all, and there was an odd charge of 
unhappiness, a family instinct, communicated, not quite understood. 'I 
just feel like a fucking drink, OK?' he said, and went off to the end 
room with the botde. 
 Just before lunch, in the shade of the awning, he was more 
cheerful, but also more freely in touch with his troubles. 'The fucking 
Tippers!' he said, counting carelessly on his modit-r's deafness. 'God 
knows what the consequences of this little episode will be - for the 
business, I mean.' 
 'I'm sure you can do brilliantly without him,' said Rachel. 'You've 
been doing brilliandy without him so far.' 
 'True,' said Gerald. 'True.' He looked wryly along the table that he 
ruled. 'I'm afraid they didn't fit in here, exactly, did they?' 
 'They didn't quite get the hang of it,' said Rachel. 'Yah, why did 
they go?' said Jasper. 'Oh, who knows!' said Rachel. 'Now, Judy, 
asparagus!' 
 Gerald snuffled and seemed to ponder the question, like some 
undecidable conflict of loyalties, some inescapable regret. Nick couldn't 
help noticing that his own remarks were received very coolly that day, 
and sometimes he was ignored and talked over. 
 At the end of lunch Gerald took up his grievances again; it was 
clear that he was in the grip of his own schemes, and living only half 
attentively, after a bottle and a half of wine, in the chatter and family 
teasing at the table. There was something rehearsed and implausible 
in his tone. He went on about work, and the 'important papers' he had 
to deal with. 'You don't know what it's like,' he said. 'It may be 
vacation for you, it may be the recess for me, but actually the work 
simply doesn't let up. Well, you've seen the number of faxes coming 
through. And I'm terribly behind with the diary.' 
 He waited, sighing but vigilant, till Rachel said, 'Well, why don't 
you have some help?' 
 Gerald puffed and slumped, as if to say that was hardly possible; 
but then said, 'I do rather wonder whether we won't have to send for 
Penny.' 
 'Not Penny Dreadful,' said Catherine. Anyway, she can't go in the 
sun.' 
 Rachel didn't contradict this, but gave her enabling shrug. 'If you 
really need Penny, darling, by all means ask her out.' 
 'Do you think…?' 
 'I mean, she's perfecdy pleasant company. If she didn't mind 'Oh, 
she's not pleasant company,' said Catherine. 'She's a humourless 
white bug.' 
 'Or what about Eileen?' said Toby. 'I'm sure she'd come just like 
that. You know how she adores Dad!' 
 Gerald gave a short distracted laugh at this absurd alternative. 
Nick looked at him with a tense smile, an awful feeling of collusion. 
He'd said nothing, he'd dissimulated much more cleverly than Gerald 
himself: he felt that he'd been, all passively and peace-lovingly, the real 
enabler. 'Yes, I'm not so sure about Eileen,' said Rachel. 
 'OK, then…' said Gerald, as though conceding to a general wish. 
There was a complicated shame-in-triumph which perhaps only Nick 
could see. The party pushed back their chairs, giving hazy thought to 
the matter of the afternoon, and Gerald went m to the phone room, 
with a look of tense reluctance, as if about to break bad news. 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
 
For their twenty-fifth wedding anniversary, Lionel Kessler gave Gerald 
and Rachel two presents. The first came round in the morning, on the 
back seat of his Bentley, and the chauffeur himself brought the stout 
wooden box into the kitchen. 
 'Darling old Lionel,' said Toby, before they knew what was in it. 
 'Silver, I expect,' said Gerald, getting a screwdriver, and sounding 
both greedy and slightly bored. 
 Inside, held in a metal brace by foam-rubber collars, was a 
rococo silver ewer. 
 The body of the thing was in the form of a shell, and the spout 
was supported by a bearded triton. 'Goodness, Nick,' said Gerald, so 
that Nick fell into his role as interpreter - he said he thought it might 
be by one of the Huguenot silversmiths working in London in the mid-
eighteenth century, perhaps by Paul de Lamerie, since the greatest 
name was also the only one he could think of, and with Lionel 
anything seemed possible. 'Marvellous,' said Gerald: 'a work of rare 
device.' He looked in the box to see if there was a note, like the 
watering instructions that come with some worrying plant, but there 
wasn't. Nick explained that the tiny scene in relief, of Eros playing with 
the sword of Justice, meant 'Omnia Vincit Amor'. Ah, thoroughly apt,' 
said Gerald, with shy pomp, putting his arm briefly round Rachel. He 
perhaps suspected that it was something Lionel had had knocking 
round at Hawkeswood anyway. Nick carried on smiling at it, half-
conscious of how his father would have stooped and turned it, holding 
it with a cloth; remembering their long-ago visits to Monksbury, where 
the silver had a brassy iridescent colour, since the servants were 
forbidden to clean it and scratch it. 'We'll have to get tliat looked at for 
the insurance,' said Gerald. 
 Toby and Catherine's present was also a bit of silver, a 
scollopedged Georgian salver, on which they had had 'Gerald and 
Rachel - 5 November 1986' engraved in a curly script. It couldn't help 
but look dull, and even vaguely satirical, beside the ewer, and Gerald 
gazed into it with a falsely modest expression, as though he was 
retiring, or had won a local golf tournament. 'It's perfectly lovely,' said 
Rachel. They both seemed gratified, but not excited, and clearly felt no 
one could actually want an object of this kind. 
 A little later they were having a glass of champagne when Nick 
looked down from the drawing-room window and saw the Bentley 
pulling up a second time. Now it was Lionel himself who climbed out of 
it, and who carried across the pavement the small flat packing case. 
He glanced up and made a shooshing sign, half frown, half kiss. Nick, 
his champagne working nicely with a first short line of charlie, smiled 
secretly back. The subtle bachelor sympathy between himself and the 
little bald peer brought a tear to the corner of his eye he leli quite silly 
for a moment at being so 'in love' with the family, and with this 
member of it in particular. A minute later Lionel was shown into the 
room amid groans of gratitude. He kissed his sister and her children, 
and shook hands with Gerald and Nick, who felt for the fervour in his 
briskness. The ewer was on the mantelpiece, crowded today with white 
lilies and white mop-headed chrysanths..'Well, you had to have silver,' 
Lionel said, 'but I wanted you to have this as well. It came up in Paris 
last week, and since we're all feeling a little light-headed…' Something 
called die Big Bang had just happened, Nick didn't fully understand 
what it meant, but everyone with money seemed highly exhilarated, 
and he had a suspicion he was going to benefit from it too. Here was 
Lord Kessler, witii a box under his arm, to give it his own superior 
licence. 
 It was Rachel who took and opened the box, with Nick standing 
by as if it was his present, as if he was giving it and perhaps also 
receiving it - he felt generous and possessive all at once. He kept 
himself from exclaiming when she lifted out a small oil painting. He 
determinedly said nothing. 'My dear…' said Rachel, fascinated, 
hesitant, but controlled, as though to be surprised would be to have 
some vulgar advantage taken of her. She held it up, so that everyone 
could see it. 'It's perfectly lovely,' she said. 
 'Mm…' said Lionel, with the canny little smile of someone who 
has made a good decision. 
 Gerald said, 'You're too kind, really…' and stared earnestly at die 
picture, hoping someone would say what it was. It was a landscape, 
about nine inches wide by twelve high, painted entirely in vertical dabs 
of a fine brush, so that the birch trees and meadow seemed to quiver 
in the breeze and warmth of a spring morning. A black-and-white cow 
lay under a bank at die front; a white-shawled woman talked to a 
brown-hatted man on the path in the near distance. It was in a plain 
dull-gilt frame. 'Hah, jolly nice,' said Toby. 
 Catherine, looking comically from side to side as though 
detecting a trick, said, 'It's a Gauguin, isn't it,' and Nick, who after all 
couldn't bear not to say, said, 'It's a Gauguin' at the same time. 
 'It's a nice one, isn't it,' said Lionel. 'Le Matin aux Champs - it's a 
study, or a little version, of the picture in Brussels. I snatched it from 
die teeth of the head of Sony. Actually, I think it was a bit small for 
him. Not quite the ideally expensive picture' - and he chuckled with 
Nick as if they both knew just what to expect from the head of Sony. 
 'Really… Lionel…' Gerald was saying, shaking his head slowly 
and blinking to disguise his calculations as another kind "I wonder. 
'That and the silver… um…' 
 Catherine shook her head too, and said, 'God…!' in? iimiltaneous 
glee and scorn of her rich family. 
 The picture was handed round, and diey each smiled and Milled, 
and turned it to the light, and passed it on with a little shudder, as if 
they'd been oblivious for a moment, in the spell of sheer physical 
possession. 'Where on earth shall we put it?' s. i id Gerald, when it 
came back to him; Nick laughed to cover I lis graceless tone. 
 Just then the front door slammed and Rachel went to look over 
the banisters; it was a day of incessant arrivals. 'Oh, come up, dear,' 
she said. 'It's Penny.' 
 Ah, she can give us het thoughts about the picture,' said (It-raid, 
as if from a view of her general usefulness. He got rid ol the picture by 
propping it against Liszt's nose on the piano. 
 'Penny!' said Catherine. 'Why? I mean, she wouldn't have a clue,' 
and then laughed submissively, since it wasn't her day. 
 'Well,' said Gerald, beaming and blustering, 'well, her lather's a 
painter.' And he turned away to see to the champagne; he had a fresh 
glass in his hand when Penny came into the room. 'Hello, Penny,' said 
Rachel, in her coolly maternal way. 
 'Congratulations to you both,' said Penny, coming forward with 
her curious bossy diffidence, her air, that was almost maternal in 
itself, of putting her duty to forgetful, forgivable (ierald before any 
thought of her own pleasure. 'I really came to do the diary.' 
 'The diary can wait,' said Gerald, with a note of reckless 
permissiveness, passing her the glass. 'Have a look at what lord 
Kessler's just given us.' It struck Nick that he was avoiding any chance 
of a kiss. 'It's by Gauguin,' said Gerald. 'Le Rencontre aux Champs - 
giving it already his own, more anecdotal tide. They all peered at it 
politely again. 'I can't help thinking of our lovely walks in France,' 
Gerald said, looking round for agreement. 'Oh… I see,' said Rachel. 'It's 
nothing like that,' said Catherine. 
 'I don't know,' said Gerald. 'That could be your mother going 
down to Podier, and bumping into… ooh… Nick on the way' 
 Nick, pleased to have been put in the picture, said, 'I seem to 
have borrowed Sally Tipper's hat.' 
 Catherine smiled impatiently. 'Yeah, but the point is, they're 
peasants, isn't it, Uncle Lionel. You know, this was when he went to 
Brittany, what was it called, to get as far away as possible from the city 
and the corruption of bourgeois life. It's about hardship and poverty.' 
 'You're absolutely right, darling,' said Lionel, who never stood for 
cant about money. 'Though I expect he sent it to bourgeois old Paris to 
be sold.' 
 'Exactly,' said Gerald. 
 'It's funny, it looks like a Hereford cow,' said Toby. 'Though I 
don't suppose it can be.' 
 'Probably a Charolais,' said Gerald. 'Charolais are a completely 
different colour,' said Toby. 
 'Anyway, it's very nice,' said Penny, for whom being the daughter 
of Norman Kent had worked as a perfect inoculation against art. 'We 
were wondering where to hang it,' said Rachel. 
 They spent five minutes trying the picture in different places, 
Toby holding it up while the others pursed their lips and said, 'You 
see, / think it needs to go there…' Toby became a boy again, in a 
family game, pulling faces and then clearly thinking about something 
else. 'Over 'ere, guv'nor?' he kept saying, in a hopeless cockney accent 
which he found funny. He took down one or two things and replaced 
them with the Gauguin. The trouble was that the shapes of the other 
pictures showed on the wallpaper behind. Rachel didn't seem to mind 
too much, but Gerald said, 'We can't have the Lady seeing that.' 
 'Oh…' said Rachel, with a little tut. 
 'No, I'm Serious,' said Gerald. 'She's finally agreed to honour us 
with her company, and everything must be perfect.' 
 'I'd be highly surprised if the Lady noticed,' Lionel said candidly. 
But Gerald shot back, 'Believe me, she notices everything,' and gave a 
rather grim laugh. 
 'We'll decide later,' said Rachel. 'We just might be awlully selfish 
and have it in our bedroom.' 
 'Though he'll probably get the Lady in there,' said Catherine 
under her breath; After lunch two men from Special Branch came, to 
check on matters of security for the PM's visit. They passed through 
the house like a pair of unusually discreet bailiffs, noting and 
evaluating. Nick heard them coming up the top stairs and sat smiling 
at his desk with his heart pounding and ten grams of coke in the top 
drawer while they peered out onto the leads. Their main concern was 
with the back gate and they told him a policeman would be on duty all 
night in the communal gardens. This made everything look a bit more 
risky, and when they'd gone down again he had a small line just to 
steady his nerves. 
 Later he went downstairs and when he looked out at the front of 
the house he saw Gerald and Geoffrey Titchfield talking on the 
pavement. They both had a look of contained exaltation, like marshals 
before some great ceremony, not admitting their own feelings, almost 
languid with unspoken nerves. Whenever someone walked past, Gerald 
gave them a nod and a smile, as if they knew who he was. He had 
made a very successful speech at Conference last month, since when 
he'd adopted a manner of approachable greatness. 
 Geoffrey was pointing at the front door, the eternally green front 
door, which Gerald had just had repainted a fierce Tory blue. It was 
the moment when Nick had first caught the pitch of Gerald's mania. 
Catherine, in a vein of wild but focused fantasy, had said that the PM 
would be shocked by a green door and that she'd read an article which 
said all Cabinet ministers had blue ones; even Geoffrey Titchfield, who 
was only the chairman of the local association, had a blue front door. 
Gerald scoffed at this, but a little later strolled out to the Mira Foodhall 
for some water biscuits and came back looking troubled. 'What do you 
think about this, Nick?' he said. 'The Titchfields have only got the 
garden flat, but their front door is unquestionably blue.' Nick said he 
doubted it mattered, as drolly as possible, and feeling his own 
nostalgic fervour for the grand dull green. But the following day Gerald 
came back to it. 'You know, I wonder if the Cat's right about that door,' 
he said. 'The Lady might very well think it's a bit off. She might think 
we're trying to save the fucking rainforest or something!' He laughed 
nervily. 'She might think she's been taken to Greenham Common, by 
mistake,' he went on, in a tone somewhere between lampoon and 
genuine derangement. At which point Nick knew, since the colour of 
the door had become a token of Gerald's success, that Mr Duke would 
be set to work with a can of conference-blue gloss. 
 Now Penny came out, with her briefcase of papers, and Nick 
watched from his window seat as she spoke to the two men. She had 
been typing up the diary which Gerald dictated each day onto tape, 
and which the family resented even more since her busy week with 
them in France, when she'd made it quite plain that none of them was 
in it: it was strictly the record of his political life, a kind ol 'archive', 
she said, 'an important historical resource'. Penny carried out die diary 
duty with a smug devotion which only added to their annoyance. 
 Catherine drifted into the drawing room, and came to sit with 
Nick behind the roped-back curtains. 'I hate it when we have everyone 
in,' she said. There was something invalidish, semi-secret, about the 
window seats, the houses of children's games, spying on the room and 
the street. 'I know, isn't it awful,' said Nick absent-mindedly. 'Look, 
there's Gerald showing off outside.' 
 'I think he's just having a chat with old Titch. You know it's his 
big day.' 
 'It's always his big day these days. He hardly has a small one. 
Anyway, it's also Ma's big day. And she's got to spend it with a whole 
lot of empees,' said Catherine, for whom the two syllables were now a 
mantra of tedium and absurdity. 
 'Plus she's got to play hostess to the Other Woman in her own 
house, to cap it all. You can tell he's longing to put up a big sign, 
"Tonight! Special Appearance!" ' 
 ' "One Night Only"…' 
 'God I hope so. That Titch man worships Gerald. Have you 
noticed, every time he walks past the house he sort of smirks at it 
fondly, just in case someone's looking out.' 
 'Does he…?' said Nick, not quite forgetting that he had once done 
the same. He said, 'I thought the party was originally going to be at 
Hawkeswood.' 
 'Oh, well that was Gerald's idea, you bet. But of course Uncle 
Lionel won't have the Other Woman there.' 
 'Right 'It's rather funny,' said Catherine coldly. 'He's had this 
dream of getting her there. It's almost what's kept him going. And it's 
the one thing which simply can't happen.' 
 'I don't quite see why Lionel…' 
 'Oh, it's all the vandalism she's done to everything. Anyway, 
that's why he's having this rewiring done, so that no one can get in the 
house.' 
 Nick laughed protestingly, because he knew Catherine's neat 
deep readings of the family narrative, but she said, 'Oh, god, yes - why 
do you think he gave them that painting.' 
 'I don't know. You mean, to make up for it,' said Nick, 
considering the idea, which did make sense of his earlier rough 
impression, that Gerald hadn't liked being given the Gauguin. Perhaps 
he saw it as the confirmation of a mysterious snub. 
 'God, that Miss Moneypenny's a pain,' said Catherine, for whom 
the lens of the drawing-room window, seemed to focus a world of 
irritants. Penny was now taking some impromptu dictation from 
Gerald, while clutching her briefcase between her knees. 'I suppose 
she must be madly in love with him, mustn't she?' 
 'Oh, in the noblest, purest way,' said Nick. 'She'd have to be, 
darling, to type all that tripe.' 
 'Some people just live for their work. Norman's an obsessive 
worker, as we know all too well, and she's got it from him. They're 
happiest when they're hard at it.' Catherine snorted. 'God, the idea…' 
 'Mm…?' 
 'Well - Gerald and Penny hard at it.' 
 'Oh…' Nick tutted and coloured. 'Now I've shocked you,' 
Cadierine said. 
 'Hardly,' said Nick. 'Actually, she's got herself a boyfriend, you 
know.' 
 'Really?' murmured Nick, with a dart of treacherous sympathy for 
Gerald, the doomed older man. 'Have you met him?' 
 'No, but she told me all about him.' Ah, I see…' Geoffrey Titchfield 
moved off, and as Gerald called some friendly command to him he 
looked back and gave a half-serious salute. Penny and Gerald were left 
alone. It was a moment when Nick saw they might do something 
incautious - kiss, or touch in a light but revealing way that would give 
Catherine's scurrilous joke the chill of reality. It was another of the 
secrets of the house that he kept, like a sleepy conscience. Gerald 
looked up as he talked, from floor to floor, and Nick waved to show him 
they were being watched. 
 In the hours before the party the atmosphere thickened 
uncomfortably. The caterers had taken over the kitchen, and made 
faces behind Elena's back as she went stubbornly about her business; 
loud squawks and whines came out of the marquee in the garden, 
where the sound system was being tested; in the dining room the 
chairs were clustered knee to knee, waiting for orders. Gerald's 
manner became bright and fixed, and he mocked odiers for their 
nervousness. Catherine said she couldn't bear the sight of a cardboard 
box in a room, and went out to 'look at properties' with Jasper. Even 
Pvachel, who delegated with aristocratic confidence, was biting her 
cheek as Gerald described to her where the Lady would sit, whom she 
would talk to, and how much she would have to drink. He almost let it 
seem that the climax of the evening would be when he danced with the 
Prime Minister. Rachel said, 'But you and I will lead off the dancing, 
won't we, Gerald,' so that he said to her, from a rapidly covered 
distance, 'But my love of course we will!' and gave her a blushing hug, 
and stumbled her through a few unexpected steps. 
 About six Nick slipped out for a walk. The evening was gloomy 
and damp. Wet leaves smeared the pavement. He was infected with the 
house nerves about the PM, wondering what to say to her, and already 
imagining tomorrow morning, when i he party was over, and the 
enjoyable phase of remembering it and analysing it could begin. The 
shrieks and bangs of fireworks sounded from the neighbourhood 
gardens. Sometimes a rocket streaked up over the housetops and shed 
its stars into the low-hanging cloud. Duffel-coated children were 
hurried through the murk. Nick's route was an improvised zigzag, an 
intention glimpsed and disowned; no one watching him could have 
guessed it, and when he turned the corner and trotted down the steps 
into the station Gents he wore a frown as if the whole thing was a 
surprise and a nuisance even to himself. 
 Walking briskly back down Kensington Park Road he was 
frowning again, at having done something so vulgar and unsafe - it 
was suddenly late, the waiting and wondering and then the intent 
speechless action swallowed up time; his lateness accused him… 
Nothing 'unsafe' in the new sense, of course; but reckless and illegal. It 
would have made a bad start to the evening to be caught. Simon at the 
office had said 'Rudi' Nureyev used to cruise that particular lav, long 
ago no doubt, but the prospect of some starry pas de deux seemed to 
Nick to haunt and redeem the place, every time he went in. Now he 
was sour and practical, the warmth of a secret naughtiness faded in 
the November air. He went quickly upstairs, his haste was his apology, 
and the house had a brilliant quietness to it, a genuine brilliance, 
planned and paid for and brought to the point. 
 When he came down there was still a bit of time before the guests 
arrived. He went out into the dance tent and circled the creaky square 
of parquet, where suspended burners made pools of heat in the empty 
chill. The tent was a dreamlike extension to the house-plan. He came 
back in, across the improvised bridge, through the garlanded and 
lanterned back passage, and wandered from room to room, among the 
lights and candles and smell of lilies, with a sense almost of being in 
church, or at least of the memory of a ceremony. In the hall mirror he 
was lustre and shadow in his new evening suit and shiny shoes. He 
greeted Rachel and Catherine in the drawing room, and they chatted 
as if they were all guests, happily denatured, transformed by silk and 
velvet, jewels and makeup, into drawing-room creatures. The bangs of 
fireworks made them skittish. From downstairs came repeated stifled 
explosions of champagne corks, as the waiters got ready. 'Shall I get us 
a drink?' said Nick. 'Yes, do. And you might find my husband,' said 
Rachel. 
 He looked into the dining room, crowded like a restaurant with 
separate tables, where Toby was standing with a card in his hand. He 
was silently rehearsing his speech. 'Keep it short, darling,' Nick said. 
 'Nick… Fuck…!' said Toby, with a worried grin. 'You know it's one 
thing making a speech to your aunts and uncles and, you know, your 
mates, but it's quite another making a speech to the fucking Prime" 
Minister.' 
 'Don't panic,' said Nick. 'We'll all shout, "Hear, hear!" ' 
 Toby laughed gloomily. 'You don't suppose she might have to go 
to a summit or something at the last moment?' 
 'This is the summit, I'm afraid. It certainly is for your papa.' Nick 
edged between the tables, each place with its mitred napkin and black-
inked card. No titles, of course. He leant on the chair-to-be of Sharon 
Flintshire. 'I love these pictures of the happy couple.' 
 'I know,' said Toby. 'The Cat's done a bit of art.' 
 Catherine had propped up on the sideboard a thing like a school 
project, where blown-up photographs of Gerald and Rachel before they 
were married flanked a formal wedding photo, with later family pics 
below. It looked rather like the placards of the cast outside a long-
running West End farce. 'Your mother was so beautiful,' Nick said. 'I 
know. And Dad.' 
 'They're so young.' 
 'Yeah, Dad's not that keen on it actually. He doesn't want the 
Lady seeing him in his hippy phase.' To judge from the photos Gerald's 
hippy phase had reached its counter-cultural extreme in a pair of 
mutton-chop whiskers and a floral tie. 
 'I can't work out how old they were.' 
 'Well, Dad'll be fifty next year, so he was… twenty-four; and Ma's 
a couple of years older, of course.' 
 'They're our age,' said Nick. 
 'They didn't waste any time,' said Toby with a sad little smile. 
 'They certainly didn't waste any time having you, dear,' Nick said, 
making the amusing calculation. 'You must have been conceived on 
the honeymoon.' 
 'I think I was,' said Toby, both proud and embarrassed. 
'Somewhere in South Africa. Ma was a virgin when she was married, I 
know tiiat, and tliree weeks later she was pregnant. No playing around 
tJiere.' 
 'No, indeed,' said Nick, thinking of the years his parents had 
taken to have him, and with an inward smile at his own freedoms. 
 Toby looked at his speech again, and bit his lip. Nick watched 
him affectionately: unbuttoned jacket over crimson cummerbund, 
heavy black shoes, hair cut short so that he looked fatter-faced, like an 
embarrassed approximation of his father, but his father as he was 
now, not when he was twenty-four. On a slow impulse Nick said, 'I 
may have just what you need. If you'd like a little, er, chemical help.' 
 'Have you…?' said Toby, startled but interested. 
 And Nick murmured to him that he'd managed to get hold of a bit 
of charlie. 
 'God, amazing, thanks a lot!' said Toby, and then smiled round 
guiltily. 
 They sent a waiter to the drawing room with champagne, and 
went on up, with a little flutter about 'rehearsing'. For Nick the flutter 
was that of sharing die secret. They went into Toby's old bedroom, and 
locked the door. 'The place is crawling with fuzz,' Toby said. 
 'So what are you going to say in your speech?' said Nick, tipping 
out some powder on the bedside table. The room had a special mood of 
desertion, not the mute patience of a spare bedroom but the stillness 
of a place a boy has grown up in'and abandoned, with everything 
settling into silence just as it was. There was a chest of drawers in 
mahogany and a gilt-framed mirror, very nice pieces, and Toby's school 
and team photos, a young unguarded class sense to everything; and 
the wardrobe of clothes Nick had once daringly dressed up in, which 
had lost their meaning, even to him. 
 'I thought I might make a joke about the Conference,' said Toby. 
'You know, the Next Move Forward, and Mum and Dad going on for 
ever, like die Lady.' 
 'Mm.' Nick frowned over the busy credit card. 'I think the thing 
is, darling, you should make the speech just as if the Lady wasn't 
there. And everything you say should be about… your father and your 
mother. It's their day, not hers, and not just Gerald's.' 
 'Oh,' said Toby. 'You might even make it more about Rachel.' 
 'Right… God, I wish you'd write it.' Ibby slouched anxiously 
about the room. 
 From downstairs the doorbell was heard and the first guests 
arriving. 'I mean, what can you say about the old girl?' 
 'You could say what a lot she's had to put up with in Gerald,' 
said Nick, with a dark sense of her not knowing the half of it. Actually, 
don't, say that,' he added prudently; 'just keep it short.' He pictured 
Toby standing and speaking, his anxiety grinning through to a crowd 
that would be warmed with drink into roughness as well as affection. 
'Remember, everyone loves you,' he said, to help him overlook the 
various monsters who were coming. Toby stooped and sniffed up his 
line and stood back; Nick waited and watched for the amorous 
dissolve, not knowing quite what colour it would take in him. 'Haven't 
done this for yonks,' 
 Toby said, half protest, half apology. Then, 'Mm, that's very 
nice…' And a minute later, in beaming surrender, 'This is great stuff, 
Nick, I must say. 
 Where the hell did you get it?' Nick snorted briskly and wiped the 
table with the flat of his finger. 'Oh, I got it off Ouradi, actually' 
 'Right,' said Toby. 
 'Yah, Ouradi always gets great stuff' 
 'You used to do it with him in the old days.' 
 'I know, we did once or twice. I didn't know you ever did it, 
though.' 
 Toby pranced towards him, and it was all Nick could do not to 
kiss him and feel for his dick, as he would have done with Wani 
himself. Instead he said, 'Here, why don't you take the rest of this.' It 
was about a third of a gram. 
 'God, no, I couldn't,' said Toby, with the gleam of possession at 
once in his face. 'Yeah, go on,' said Nick. 'I've had enough, but you 
might need some more.' 
 He held out the tiny billet-doux, which as always with Ronnie 
was made from a page of a girlie mag; a magnified nipple covered it like 
a seal. Toby took it and put it, after a moment's thought, deep in his 
breast pocket. 'God, that's fantastic!' he said. 'Yah, I think tonight'U be 
all right, you know, I'm just going to keep it short,' and he went 
prattling on in the simple high spirits of a first hit of cocaine. On the 
way downstairs he said, 'Of course, darling, tell me if you want some 
more -1 won't use all this.' 
 'I'll be fine,' said Nick. 
 They sashayed into the drawing room, where Lady Partridge was 
asking a man from the Treasury about muggers, and Badger Brogan 
was flirting gingerly with Greta Timms, pregnant with her seventh 
child. Nick circled through the room, smiling and almost immune to 
the anxiety he noticed in others, the booming joviality, the glancing 
inattentiveness, the sense of a lack that was waiting to be filled by the 
famous arrival. He looked round for a drink. The coke trickle in his 
throat made him doubly thirsty. Two waiters came in with laden trays, 
which made him laugh: they were just the answer to a double thirst. 
He chose, on grounds of beauty, the dark, full-lipped one, 'Thanks - 
oh, hello,' Nick said, over his raised glass, knowing the waiter before 
he knew who he was - just for a second, while everything was shining 
and suspended, their eyes engaged, the bubbles sailing upwards in a 
dozen tall glasses. 'I remember you,' he said then, rather drily, as if he 
were a waiter who had memorably dropped something. 
 'Oh… good evenin,' the waiter said, pleasandy, so that Nick felt 
forgiven; and then, 'Where do I see you before?' - so that he guessed he 
was in fact forgotten. 
 There was a commotion at the window, and Geoffrey Titchfield 
said, Ah, the Prime Minister's car has arrived,' like an old flunkey, 
steeped in the grandeur of his masters. He moved towards the door, 
too exalted by his own words to share in the fuss that they had 
triggered. Guests glanced into each other's faces for reassurance, one 
or two seemed already to give up, and withdrew into corners, and 
among the men there was some thinly amiable jostling. Nick followed 
through onto the landing, with the sense that the PM was beyond 
discretion, she'd be piqued if there wasn't a throng, a popular 
demonstration. He was pressed against the banister at the first turn of 
the stair, smiling down like an eye-catching unnamed attendant in a 
history painting. The door was standing open and the damp chill from 
outside gave an edge to the excitement. The women shivered with 
happy discomfort. The night was the fractious element they had 
triumphed against. The Mordant Analyst scurried in, almost tripped, 
amid laughs and tuts. Gerald was already in die street, in humble 
alignment witli die Special Branch boys. Rachel stood just inside, 
haloed by the drizzly light and the diaphanous silver sheath of her 
dress. The well-known voice was heard, there was a funny intent 
silence of a second or two, and then diere she was. 
 She came in at her gracious scutde, with its hint of a long-
suppressed embarrassment, of clumsiness transmuted into power. She 
looked ahead, into the unknown house, and everything she saw was a 
confirmation. The high hall mirror welcomed her, and in it the faces of 
the welcomers, some of whom, grand though they were, had a look 
beyond pride, a kind of rapture, that was bold and shy at once. She 
seemed pleased by the attention, and countered it cheerfully and 
practically, like modern royalty. She gave no sign of noticing the colour 
of the front door. 
 Upstairs, calm was reestablished, but of a special kind, the 
engaged calm of progress once the overture has finished and the 
curtain has gone up. People recollected themselves. There was a sort of 
unplanned receiving line when die Lady came into the room (her 
husband, behind her, slipped modesdy towards a drink and an old 
friend). Barry Groom, bouncing back from a low point with a call girl in 
the spring, dropped his head with horrible humility as the PM took his 
hand; it was later claimed diat he had even said hello. Wani she 
greeted humorously, as someone she had seen recently elsewhere - he 
won the glow of recognition but surrendered the claim to need to speak 
to her so soon again; though he held on to her hand and it wasn't clear 
for a moment if he was going to kiss her. Gerald steered her jealously 
on, murmuring names. Nick watched with primitive interest as she 
approached; again she was beyond manners, however courdy and 
jewelled. Her hair was so perfect that he started to picture it wet and 
hanging over her face. She was wearing a long black skirt and a wide-
shouldered white-and-gold jacket, amazingly embroidered, like a 
Ruritanian uniform, and cut low at the front to display a magnificent 
pearl necklace. Nick peered at the necklace, and i he large square 
bosom, and the motherly fatness of the neck. 'Isn't she beautiful,' said 
Trudi Titchfield, in unselfconscious reverie. Nick was briskly 
presented, elided almost, in the rhythm of the long social sentence, but 
with a surprising detail, or fib, 'Nick Guest… a great friend of our 
children… I young don,'» so that he saw himself enhanced and also 
compromised, since dons were not the PM's favourite people. He 
nodded and smiled and felt her blue eyes briefly but unconfidently 
focus on him before she seized the initiative and called out, 'John, 
hullo…!' to John Timms, who was suddenly right next to him. 'Prime 
Minister…' said John Timms, not shaking her hand but clasping her 
somehow with the fervour and humour of his tone. At the end of the 
row were the children themselves; a goggling unmatched pair, Toby 
still marvellously cheerful and Catherine, who could have sulked or 
asked an awkward question, shaking hands with a bright 'Hello!' and 
gazing at the PM like a child at a conjuror. 'Oh, and this is my 
boyfriend,' she said, producing Jasper but forgetting to name him. 
'Hello,' said die Prime Minister, in a tone just dry enough to suggest 
that by now she deserved a drink: which Tristao, with his doe eyes and 
nerveless smile, was at hand to provide. Nick trotted downstairs from a 
quick refresher and caught Wani coming out of Gerald and Rachel's 
bedroom. 'God, careful, darling,' he said. 'I was just using the lav,' said 
Wani. 
 'Mm,' said Nick. He was too drunk and high himself to take the 
danger at all seriously. 'Do use my lav if you need to.' 
 'The stairs,' said Wani. 
 Nick loved the way the coke took off the blur of champagne, 
claret, Sauternes, and more champagne. It totted up the points and 
carried them over as credit in a new account of pleasure. It brought 
clarity, like a cure - almost, at first, like sobriety. He put an arm round 
Wani's shoulders, and asked him if he was having a good time. 'We see 
so litde of each other,' he said. They started to go downstairs and 
something caught Nick's eye at tlie third or fourth step, someone else 
moving in the great white bedroom that Wani had come out of. His 
instinct as guardian of the house, preventer of trouble, quickened. 
Jasper came out, businesslike, as if he had the keys and was showing 
the place to a buyer. He gave Nick a nod and a wink. 'Just going up to 
Cat's room,' he said. 
 'So,' said Nick, as he and Wani went on down, with a pensive 
hesitation each step or two, as diough they might stop completely in 
the charm of a shared thought, you've been running the house tart up 
the hill…' 
 'It's got to be climbed, old chap, it's got to be climbed.' 
 'Yeah,' said Nick, with a sniff and a sour turning down of the 
moutli. He looked for guilt in Wani's oddly rosy face; he glimpsed, like 
shuffled cards, the two of them together in the bathroom, Wani's love 
of corruption, all the licence that went with the latest line. 'So it's not 
our secret any more,' he said. Wani gave him a look tJiat was scornful 
but not aggressive. Nick might be in the clear, clever phase, but Wani 
was much further on, in the phase where high spirits reel and stall 
and blink at a barely recognized room or friend. Nick let him go, and 
the high heartbeat of the coke became a short sprint of panic. He 
smiled defensively, and the smile seemed to search and find a happier 
subject, in the opening bloom of die drug. 
 It was hard to know what mattered. There was certainly no point 
in thinking about it now. Out in die marquee die music had started, 
and everything had the air of an escapade. 
 He found Catherine in a corner of the drawing room being 
chatted up by tootliy old Jonty Stafford, die retired ambassador, who 
stooped over her like a convivial Jabberwock. 'No, I think you'd like 
Dubrovnik,' he was saying, with a suggestive hooding of the eyes. 'The 
Hotel Diocletian, enormous charm.' 
 'Oh,' said Catherine. 
 'They always gave us the bridal suite, you know… which has the 
most enormous bed. You could have had an orgy in there.' 
 'Not on your wedding night, presumably' 
 'Hello, Sir Jonty.' 
 'Ah, now here's your handsome young beau, now I'm for it, now 
I'm done for!' said Sir Jonty, and lurched off after another passing 
female bottom, which happened to be that of the PM. He looked back 
for a moment with a shake of the head: 'Marvellous, you know… the 
Prime Minister…' 
 'I think you've just been propositioned by a very drunk old man,' 
said Nick. 
 'Well, it's nice to be noticed by someone,' said Catherine, 
dropping onto a sofa. 'Sit here. Do you know where Jaz is?' 
 'Haven't seen him,' said Nick. 
 The photographer was at large, and his flash gleamed in die 
mirrors. He slipped and lingered among the guests, approached with a 
smile, like a vaguely remembered bore, in his bow tie and dinner 
jacket, and dien pouf! - he'd got diem. Later he came back, he came 
around, because most shots catch a bleary blink or a turned shoulder, 
and got them again. Now they bunched and faced him, or they 
pretended they hadn't seen him and acted themselves with careless 
magnificence. Nick dropped onto the sofa beside Catherine, lounged 
with one leg curled under him and a grin on his face at his own 
elegance. He felt he could act himself all night. He felt fabulous, he 
loved these nights, and whilst it would have been good to top the thing 
off with sex it seemed hardly to matter if he didn't. It made the 
absolute best of not having sex. 'Mm, you smell nice,' said Catherine. 
 'Oh, it's just the old "Je Promets",' said Nick, and shook his 
cufflinks at her. 
 'Have you had your twelve seconds witli the PM yet?' 
 'I was just about to, but Gerald put a stop to it.' 
 'I heard a bit of her talk at dinner. She does that Great Person 
thing of being very homely and self-indulgent.' 
 'Greedy,' said Catherine. 'They all love it, they breathe sighs of 
relief, they'd talk about marge versus butter all night, and then 
suddenly she's on them with the Common Agricultural Policy.' 
 'You've not given her your own thoughts on it.' 
 'Not yet…' said Nick. 'She's quite closely managed, isn't she? 
She's in charge, but she goes where she's told.' 
 'Well, she's not in charge here,' said Catherine, beckoning boldly 
to Tristao. 
 'What do you want to drink?' 
 'What do I want?' said Nick, matching Tristao s formal smile with 
a sly one, and running his eyes up the waiter's body. 'What would I 
like best?' 
 'Champagne, sir? Or something stronger?' 
 'Champagne for now,' Nick drawled, 'and something stronger 
later.' The view of pleasure deepened in front of him, the lovely 
teamwork of drugs and drink, the sense of risk nonsensically 
heightening the sense of security, the new conviction he could do what 
he wanted with Tristao, after all these years. Tristao himself merely 
nodded, but as he stooped to reach an empty glass he leant quickly 
and heavily on Nick's knee. Nick watched him going away through the 
crowded room and for several long seconds it was all one perspective, 
here and Hawkeswood, the gilt, the mirrors, room after room, the 
glimpsed coat-tails of a fugitive idea: which then came to you, by itself, 
and it was what you wanted. The pursuit was nothing but a resdess 
way of waiting. 
 All shall have prizes: Gerald was right. When Tristao came back 
and bowed the drinks on their tray towards them, Nick plucked up his 
glass in a toast that was both general and secret. 'To us,' he said. 'To 
us,' said Catherine. 'Do stop flirting with that waiter.' 
 A minute later she said, 'Fedden seems pretty lively tonight. Most 
unlike himself, I must say.' They looked across to where Toby was 
sprawled on die PM's sofa and telling some unimaginable joke. Just 
beside the PM the wide dented seat cushion* was a reception zone on 
which supplicants perched for an audience of a minute or two before 
being amicably dislodged - though Toby, trading perhaps on the 
triumph of his speech after dinner, had been tliere rather longer. 
 'I wouldn't be surprised,' said Nick, 'if Wani hadn't given him a 
bit of laughing powder to get him through.' 
 'Oh, god,' said Catherine disparagingly, before smiling at the idea 
of it. 'You know what he's like, he'll offer her a poke or whatever it's 
called.' 
 'She's had a lot to drink, hasn't she. But it doesn't seem to have 
any effect.' 
 'It's so funny watching the men with her. They come up with 
their wives but you can see they're an embarrassment - look at that 
one now, yes, shakes hands, "Yes, Prime Minister, yes, yes," can't quite 
get round to introducing his wife… obviously longing for her to get lost 
so he can have a hot date with the Lady himself - now she's got to sit 
on the sofa, he's furious… but yes! she's got him - he's squatting 
down… he's kneeling on the carpet 'Maybe she'll make him kiss her, 
um…' 
 'Oh, surely not…' 
 'Her ring, darling!' 
 'Oh, maybe. It's a very big one.' 
 'Well, she's quite queenly, isn't she, in that outfit.' 
 ' Queenly?… Darling, she looks like a country and western 
singer.' 
 Catherine gave a brief screech, so that people turned round with 
varying degrees of humour and irritation. She had a look of running on 
quite fast inside. She held her trembling glass in front of her face. 
'These champagne flutes are simply enormous!' she said. 
 'I know, they're sort of champagne tubas, aren't they,' said Nick. 
 Some very loud fireworks started going off in the communal 
gardens, mortars and thunderclaps. The windows rattled and the 
bangs echoed off the houses. People shouted cheerfully and flinched, 
but the Prime Minister didn't flinch, she fortified her voice with a firm 
diapason as if rising to the challenge of a rowdy Chamber. Around her 
her courtiers started like pheasants. 
 'Actually what amazes me,' Nick said, 'is the fantastic queenery of 
the men. The heterosexual queenery.' 
 'I sort of expect that,' said Catherine. 'You know, having Gerald 
'Darling, Gerald's like a navvy in overalls, he's a miner on a picket line 
compared to some of these people. Look at old, um, the Minister for… 
what is he the Minister for?' 
 'I don't know, he's the Monster for something. With the pink face. 
I've seen him on telly.' 
 It was one of the men standing directly behind the PM, like a 
showman, both protecting and exhibiting her. From time to time he 
cast covetous glances at her hair. His own grey curls were oiled back 
in deep crinkly waves, over which he passed a hand that barely 
touched. He was one of the few men who were wearing a white tuxedo, 
and his posture was a superb denial of a possible gaffe. The jacket had 
swooping lapels, with cream silk facings; a line of flashing blue dress 
studs climbed to a lolling, surely purple, velvet bow tie. His wing collar 
kept his head framed at a haughty angle, and a tight silk cummerbund 
kept him erect and deepened the dyspeptic flush on his face. Catherine 
said, 'I can see no self-respecting homosexual would dress like that.' 
 'Oh, I wouldn't go that far,' said Nick, uncertain which of i hem 
was being more ironic. 'It's just the licensed vanity…' 
 'He's the Monster of Vanity, darling!' said Catherine with another 
whoop. 
 He went to the first-floor lavatory and had a quick line there. It 
seemed a bit unnecessary to go all furtively upstairs. He snorted with a 
thumb against each nostril in turn, and smirked back at Gerald 
shaking hands with Ronald Reagan. 
 You never felt the old boy knew who Gerald was - he had that 
look of medium-level benevolence. From outside the music was 
thumping, it had been Big Band jazz and now it was earlyish rock 'n' 
roll, such as Rachel and Gerald might conceivably have danced to 
twenty-five years ago. Fireworks popped and screeched. Beyond the 
locked door the collective boom of the party could be heard, with its 
undertone of secret opportunities: there were two men here that he 
wanted. The door handle rattled, he tidied, checked, flushed, tweaked 
his bow tie in the mirror, and sauntered out, hardly seeing the 
policeman waiting. 
 The Duchess had taken his place next to Catherine, so he looked 
about. The crowded drawing room was his playground. He found 
himself lounging intently towards the PM's sofa. Toby came away like 
an actor into the wings, still smiling; he couldn't say what she'd said. 
Lady Partridge had been hovering, and bent and clasped the Prime 
Minister's hand. She seemed nearly as speechless as Nick would have 
been on meeting a revered writer. 'I love your work' was really all one 
could say. But in this case, as Lady Partridge was an old woman, a 
crinkle of wisdom and maternal pride could be seen beside the 
childlike awe and submission. Nick couldn't quite hear what she was 
saying… something about the litter problem?… and he was pretty sure 
that she herself couldn't hear the PM - but it didn't matter, they hung 
on to each other's hands, in an act of homage or even of healing which 
for Judy was a thrilling novelty and for the PM a deeply familiar 
routine. They were both fairly sozzled, and might almost have been 
having an argument as they tugged their hands backwards and 
forwards and raised their voices. There was something in the PM that 
seemed to say she'd have preferred an argument, it was what she was 
best at, and as Judy withdrew, crouching blindly backwards, she 
picked up her empty whisky glass and banged it against the leg of the 
Monster of Vanity. 
 It was the simplest thing to do - Nick came forward and sat, half-
kneeling, on the sofa's edge, like someone proposing in a play. He 
gazed delightedly at the Prime Ministers face, at her whole head, 
beaked and crowned, which he saw was a fine if improbable fusion of 
the Vbrticist and the Baroque. She smiled back with a certain animal 
quickness, a bright blue challenge. There was the soft glare of the flash 
- twice - three times - a gleaming sense of occasion, the gleam floating 
in the eye as a blot of shadow, his heart running fast with no 
particular need of courage as he grinned and said, 'Prime Minister, 
would you like to dance?' 
 'You know, I'd like that very much,' said the PM, in her chest 
tones, the contralto of conviction. Around her the men sniggered and 
recoiled at an audacity that had been beyond them. Nick heard the 
whole episode already accruing its commentary, its history, as he went 
out with her among twitches of surprise, the sudden shifting of the 
centre of gravity, an effect that none of them could have caused and 
none could resist. He himself smiled down at an angle, ignoring them 
all, intimately held in what the PM was saying and the brilliant 
boldness of his replies. Others followed them down the stone stairs 
and through the lantern-lit passage, to watch, and to play their 
subsidiary parts. 'One's not often asked to dance,' said the PM, 'by a 
don.' And Nick saw that Gerald hadn't got it quite right: she moved in 
her own accelerated element, her own garlanded perspective, she 
didn't give a damn about squares on the wallpaper or blue front doors 
- she noticed nothing, and yet she remembered everything. 
 There was sparse but hectic activity on the parquet when they 
stepped on to it, to the thump of'Get Off Of My Cloud'. Gerald was 
bopping with a tight-lipped Jenny Groom whilst Barry pushed Penny 
round the floor in a lurching embrace. 
 Rachel, sedately jiving with Jonty Stafford, had a look of 
exhausted good manners. And then Gerald saw the PM, his idol, who 
had said before that she wouldn't dance, but who now, a couple of 
whiskies on, was getting down rather sexily with Nick. All Nick's 
training with Miss Avison came back, available as the twelve-times 
table, the nimble footwork, the light grasp of the upper arm; though 
with it there came a deeper liveliness, a sense he could caper all over 
the floor with the PM breathless in his grip. Anyway, Gerald put a stop 
to that. 
 They were up in Nick's bathroom, the three of them, Wani 
chewing and sniffing, almost shivering, like someone who is ill. He had 
a look of wide-eyed gloom, racing and lost. He said he was fine, never 
better. He concentrated on unfolding the square of Forum magazine, 
and then scraping the girl's dark pubic mound clear of powder. Nick 
sat on the edge of the bath, sat in the bath, crossways, with his legs 
hanging out, and watched Tristao taking a hugely protracted piss. 
 'Don't put that away,' said Wani, which was one of his litde jokes. 
Tristao clucked and said, 'He likes that.' 
 'I know,' said Nick. 
 'I know where I see you now,' Tristao said, putting it away none 
die less, and flushing the lavatory. He washed his hands and talked 
into the mirror. 'Is Mr Toby birthday party. In the big big house. Long 
time ago.' 
 'That's right,' said Nick, struggling up and taking off his jacket. 
Tristao took his tail-coat off too, as though it were agreed what they 
were going to do. The instinctive certainty made Nick smile. 
 'You come lookin for me, in the kitchen. I think you was very 
pissed.' 
 'Was I?' said Nick vaguely. 
 'Then I feel very bad because I say I meet you later, and I never 
come.' 
 'We know why,' said Wani. 'Don't worry,' said Nick. 'I'm sure I 
forgot too.' 
 Tristao put a hand on Nick's shoulder, and Nick understood and 
got out his wallet and gave him &#1032;20. Tristao tilted his face and 
stuck his long fat tongue into Nick's mouth, kissed him systematically 
for ten seconds, then pulled out and turned away. Wani hadn't 
noticed, busy with the hill of coke. Tristao went and peered over his 
shoulder. 'I get in big trouble for this,' he said. 
 'No trouble,' said Wani. 'Couldn't be safer. House under police 
guard.' 
 'Yeah, I mean with my boss. Just a short break, yeah?' 
 'See how you like it,' said Wani, groping back at the waiter's 
crotch without looking round. 'I mean, do you need more money?' said 
Nick. 
 'I've just given him fifty fucking quid,' said Wani in a loud drawl. 
 Tristao mooched about and looked in the mirror again. He said, 
'So you no bring your wife with you to the party?' 
 'She's not my fucking wife, you slut,' said Wani cheerfully. 
Tristao grinned at Nick. 'I see you dancin with the big lady tonight,' he 
said. 'Jumpin around. I think she likes you.' Wani's head reared in a 
single laugh. 'I'm going to ask her just what she thinks of Nick the next 
time I see her.' 
 'You a good friend of hers then, are you?' said Tristao, and 
grinned at Nick again. 
 'A fucking good friend,' said Wani, tapping and peering at his 
work. 'An exceedingly good friend… There…' He turned and stared. 
'No, don't you love her? 
 
 
 
Isn't she just beautiful?' • 
 
Tristao made a little moue. 'Yeah, she OK. OK for me, anyway. Lots of 
parties, lots of money. Lots of tips. Hundred pound. Two hundred 
pound…' 
 'God, you slut,' said Wani. 
 Nick went to the basin and drank two glasses of water. 'I need a 
li-ine,' he crooned. They were all wired up now and desperate to go on, 
with the great, almost numbing reassurance of having packets more 
stuff. It was beyond pleasure, it was its own motor, pure compulsion, 
though it gave them the delusion of choice, and of wit in making it. 
 Tristao bent to snort his line, and Wani felt his cock and Nick felt 
his arse. 
 'Is good stuff? So where you get this stuff?' he said, stepping 
back, escaping for a moment, sniffing sharply. 
 'I get it from Ronnie,' said Wani. 'That's his name. Ah, that's 
better' - pinching his nostrils. 'I love Ronnie. He's my best friend. He's 
really my only friend.' Apart from the Prime Minister,' said Nick. 
 Tristao had the big first smirk on his face. A dozen decisions were 
already being made for him. He said, 'I thought he's your best friend. 
Him, Nick. No?' 
 'Nick? He's just a slut,' said Wani. 'He takes my money.' 
 Nick looked round from the first half of his line. 'What he means 
is he's my employer,' he said, with necessary pedantry. 'Not that he 
does any fucking work,' said Wani. Actually that's one kind of work I 
do do,' said Nick pertly. 
 'What - fuckin work?' said Tristao, and laughed like an idiot. 
'Anyway,' said Nick, 'he's a millionaire, so…' 
 'I'm a multi-millionaire,' said Wani, with a sort of airy scowl. 'I 
want you to do your trick now.' 
 'What is his trick?' said Nick. 'You'll see,' said Wani. 'I hope this 
drugs don't make my dicky go soft,' said Tristao. 'If your dicky go soft 
I'm having my fucking money back,' said Wani. 
 Tristao dropped his trousers and pants round his knees and sat 
on the edge of the little cane-seated chair. His dark heavy dick hung 
down. He put his hands up inside his shirt, pushed his shirt up over 
his ribs, and twisted his nipples. 
 'You want to help me?' he said. Wani tutted and went to stand 
behind him, leaned over to watch as he pinched and coaxed the 
waiter's nipples between forefinger and thumb. Tristao sighed, smiled, 
and bit his parched lip. He looked down intently, as if it was always a 
marvel to him, as his cock stirred, and thickened, twitched its way 
languorously up across his thigh before floating free with a pink smile 
of its own as the skin slid back a little. 'That's what it's all about,' said 
Wani. 'Is that it?' said Nick. 'You like?' said Tristao, whose face seemed 
to Nick suddenly greedy and strange. Of course his penis was the 
latent idea of the night, of this strange little scene, an idea trailed and 
discounted and lifting at die end as a large stupid fact. Nick said, 'So 
you've seen this before?' 
 'Oh, he always want it,' said Tristao. Wani was down on his 
knees, trying clumsily to do justice to the thing he always wanted. His 
pants were undone, but his own little penis, depressed by the blitz or 
blizzard of coke, was puckered up, almost in hiding. He was lost, 
beyond humiliation - it was what you paid for. He sniffed as he licked 
and sucked, and gleaming mucus, flecked with blood and undissolved 
powder, trailed out of his famous nose into the waiter's lap. Obviously 
the waiter never got like this himself, he'd learnt the danger from 
Wani's example. Now he was chatty, like someone among friends. 
 He nodded down at Wani and said, 'That's when I see him first. 
Mr Toby party. He give me coke and P fuck him in die hass.' 
 'In the house…? Oh, in the arse, I see.' Nick smiled with a funny 
mixture of coldness and hilarity, a certain respect for mischief, 
however painful. He watched him pushing his hands through his 
lover's black curls: which he did in a carefree, patient, familiar way, 
almost as if Wani wasn't sucking him off, as if he was some beautiful 
pampered child who'd run in among the adults, hungry for praise and 
confident of it. Tristao stroked his hair, and grinned and praised him. 
'He always pay the best.' 
 'I'm sure!' said Nick, and took a condom out of his pocket. 'Here 
we go,' said Tristao. 
 Downstairs the Prime Minister was leaving. Gerald had danced 
with her for almost ten minutes. He had the glow of intimacy and 
lightness of success about him as he saw her to her car, careless of the 
rain. Late fireworks were still going off, like bombs and rifles, and they 
glanced upwards. Rachel stood in the doorway, with Penny behind her, 
whilst Gerald, usurping the secret policeman, leant forward and 
slammed the car door in a happy involuntary bow. The rain gleamed 
and needled in the street lamps as the Daimler pulled away with a 
noise like a brusque sigh. 
 
 
 
THE END OF THE STREET 
 
(1987) 
 
 
 
 
 
13 
 
 
Nick went out to vote early, and took Catherine with him in the car. 
She had been up since six to catch Gerald on Good Morning Britain. In 
the long month of the election t am paign she had refused to watch TV, 
but now that (lerald and Rachel had both gone up to Barwick she 
seemed able to do little else. 'How was he?' Nick said. 
 'He was only on for a minute. He said die Tories had brought 
down unemployment.' 
 'That is a bit rich.' 
 'It's like Lady Tipper saying the 80s are a marvellous decade for 
staff' 
 'Well, it'll soon be over.' 
 'What? Oh, the election, yes.' Catherine stared out into the 
drizzle. 'The 80s are going on for ever.' 
 In die long tree-tunnel of Holland Park Avenue it was as if die 
dawn had been deferred, though it was high summer, and hours after 
sunrise. It was just the discouraging sort of weather that campaigners 
dreaded. 
 'Gerald's bound to get back in, isn't he?' said Nick. At Kensington 
Park Gardens no one had been able to put this simple question. 
 Catherine seemed to look up from the depths of her gloom at an 
impossible consolation. 'It would be just so wonderful if he didn't.' 
 At the polling station they gave in their cards and the woman 
smiled and blushed when she saw die name Fedden and the address. 
Nick felt she was being unduly confident. In '83 Catherine had fouled 
her paper, and this time she promised to vote for the Anti-Yuppie 
Visionary Vegetarian candidate. Nick stood in the plywood booth and 
turned the thick hexagonal stub of pencil in his fingers. 
 Voting always gave him a heightened sense of irresponsibility. 
They were in the big classroom of a primary school, with children's 
drawings and a large and unusual alphabet (N was for Nanny, K for 
Kiwi-fruit) running round tlie walls. 
 Today was an unearned holiday. Nick had a moment's glimpse of 
the hundred little rules and routines of the place, and a mood of 
truancy came over him. Besides, what happened in the booth was an 
eternal secret. His pencil twitched above the Labour and Alliance 
candidates, and then he made his cross very frowningly for the Green 
man. He knew the Conservative was bound to get back in. 
 There were doubts, though, in some quarters, and Labour was 
thought to have had a very good campaign. Nick himself found their 
press advertisements much wittier than the Tories'. 'In Britain the poor 
have got poorer and the rich have got… well, they've got die 
Conservatives' was one that even Gerald had laughed at. In general, 
Gerald's view was that campaigning was over-rated at the national 
level, and irksome, even counterproductive, in the constituencies. 'You 
know, the best thing I could have done on May 11, when the election 
was called, would have been to push off for a month's holiday 
somewhere,' he said to Catherine. 
 'Quite possibly on safari.' He got'fed up with Catherine saying it 
was a 'TV election'. 'I don't know why. you go on about it, Puss,' he 
said, looking in the hall mirror before a 'photo-opportunity' for the 
local news. 'All elections are TV elections. And a bloody good thing too. 
It means you don't have to go and talk to the voters yourself. In fact if 
you do try and talk to them they're bored to death because they've 
heard it all already on TV' ('Mm, that may be why,' said Catherine.) 
 He was surprised that he hadn't been asked to appear in more of 
the major broadcasts and televised press conferences, where the Lady 
herself had retained a tireless dominance. His personal highlight had 
been a Question Time on BBCi, where he stood in "for the indisposed 
Home Secretary at the last moment but very much took his own line. 
He did a lot of smarmy joshing with Robin Day, whom he knew 
socially, and this irritated the Labour defence spokesman, who was 
fighting an uphill battle on nuclear disarmament. Nick and Rachel 
watched it at home. 
 Caught on die TV screen in his own drawing room Gerald looked 
distinctly alien, fattened and sharpened by the studio lights. He played 
sulkily with his fountain pen while the other panellists were speaking. 
His breast-pocket handkerchief billowed upwards like the flame of a 
torch. He came out in favour of Europe, having as he said a house in 
France where he spent the summer. He said he believed there were 
tens of thousands of jobs available if only people would get out and 
look for them (cries, which he relished, of'Shame'). Lively rudeness and 
childish antagonism were the point of the programme, and also its 
limitation. 
 Rachel laughed in fond disparagement once or twice. (icraM's 
special mixture of laziness and ambition seemed to crystallize under 
the camera into brutal bumptiousness. A questioner from the floor, 
who looked like Cecil, die Barwick wclly-whanger, accused him of 
being too rich to care about ordinary people; and while Gerald 
boomingly deplored the statement you could see it sinking and settling 
in his flushed features as a kind of acclaim. 
 When it came to canvassing in Barwick, Gerald felt there was 
less need than ever to put oneself out. He pooh-poohed die polls. All 
the Northamptonshire seats were Tory strongholds, even Corby, with 
its closed-down steelworks. 'Even the unemployed know diey're better 
off with us,' Gerald said. 'Anyway, they've got a computer in die office 
up there now, and if they can find out how to work it they'll be able to 
pinpoint any dodgy waverers and bombard them with stuff.' 
 'What?' Catherine wanted to know. 'Well, pictures of me!' said 
Gerald. Nick wondered if his cavalier tone was a way of preparing for 
possible defeat. In the final week tfiere was something called Wobbly 
Thursday, when everyone at Central Office panicked. The polls showed 
Labour barging ahead. Toby remarked that his father seemed very 
unconcerned. 'One has merely to cultivate,' replied Gerald, 'the quality 
that M. Mitterrand has attributed to the Prime Minister, and which he 
sees as the supreme political virtue.' 
 'Oh yes, what's that?' said Toby. 
 'Indifference,' said Gerald, almost inaudibly. 
 'Right…' said Toby; and then, witli a certain canny persistence, 
'But I thought she was climbing up the wall.' 
 'Climbing up the wall, nonsense.' 
 'It's like the adverb game,' said Catherine. 'Task: Climb up the 
wall. Manner: Indifferently.' At which Gerald went off with a pitying 
smile to correct his diary. At the office Nick looked through the mail 
and dictated a couple of letters to Melanie. In Wani's absence he'd 
grown fond of dictating, and found himself able to improvise long 
supple sentences rich in suggestion and syntactic shock, rather as the 
older Henry James, pacing and declaiming to a typist, had produced 
his most difficult novels. Melanie, who was used to Wani's costive 
memos, and even to dressing up the gist of a letter in her own words, 
stuck out her tongue with concentration as she took down Nick's old-
fashioned periods and perplexing semicolons. Today he was answering 
a couple of rich American queens who had a film-production company 
per- haps as fanciful, as nominal, as Ogee was, and who were show-r 
nig interest in the Spoils ofPoynton project - though with certain 
strong reservations about die plot. They felt tfiat it needed. in injection 
of sex - smooching and action as Lord Ouradi luil put it. The queens 
themselves sounded rather like porn? i ors, being called Treat Rush 
and Brad Craft. 'Dear Treat and Hrad,' Nick began: 'It was with no 
small interest that we read your newest proposals comma with their 
comma to us comma so very open brackets indeed comma so 
startlingly close brackets novel vision of the open quotes sex-life close 
quotes of italics capital S Spoils semicolon-' 
 A small commotion at the door, Simon looking up, going over, 
Melanie setting down her pad. A crop-headed black girl, like a busty 
little boy, and a skinny white woman with her… ii was usually a 
mistake, or they were market kids trotting round cheap Walkmans, 
cheap CDs. No one much, sad to say, arrived by design at the Ogee 
office. Melanie came back. 'Oh, Nick, it's a, um, Rosemary Charles to 
see you. Sorry…' Melanie twitched with her own snobbery, part 
apology, part reproach - she stood in die way, box-shouldered, high-
heeled, so that Nick leant back in his chair to look round her, down 
the length of the office, and with a view of the two words Rosemary 
Charles bobbing on the air, weightless signifiers, that took on, over 
several strange seconds, their own darkness and gravity. He stood up 
and went towards her, her and die other woman, who seemed to be 
here as a witness of his confusion. It was a momentary vertigo, a 
railing withdrawn. He gave diem a smile that was welcoming and 
showed a proper unfrivolous regard for the occasion, and well… he was 
afraid he knew why diey'd come, more or less. He felt something like 
guilt showed in his pretence tliat he didn't. He grasped Rosemary's 
hand and looked at her with allowable pleasure and curiosity - she 
was still coming clear to him, from four years back, when she was 
pretty and fluffy and her eyes were sly: and now she was beautiful, 
revealed, the drizzle silvering the fuzz of her crown, her jaw forward in 
the tense half-smile of surprise that her brother had had when he'd 
called for Nick one morning, unannounced, and changed his life. 'Yes, 
hello,' she said, witli a hint of hostility, perhaps just die hard note of 
the resolve that had brought her here. Of course she was looking for 
him too, down this four-year tunnel: how he used to be and how he'd 
changed. 'This is Gemma.' 
 'Hi,' said Nick warmly. 
 'Nick.' 
 'I hope you don't mind,' said Rosemary. 'We went to your house. 
The woman diere told us where you were.' 
 'It's wonderful to see you!' said Nick, and saw the phrase register 
with them like some expected annoyance. They had sometiiing 
dreadful about them, with their undeclared purpose and dieir look of 
supporting each other for some much bigger challenge than Nick was 
ever going to offer them. 'Come in, come in.' 
 Gemma peered round the room. 'Is there somewhere private 
where we could talk?' she said. She was Yorkshire, older, blue-eyed, 
hair dyed black, black T-shirt and black jeans and Doc Martens. 'Of 
course,' said Nick. 'Why don't you come upstairs.' 
 He took them out and in again and up to the flat, with a 
responsible smile tliat threatened to warp into a smirk, as if he was 
proud of this kitsch apartment and its possible effect on the two 
women. He saw it all with fresh eyes himself. 
 They sat down in the 'Georgian-revival'-revival library. 'Look at all 
these books…' said Gemma. 
 On the low table all die papers were laid out, as in the reading 
room of a club. 
 CHUCK HER OUT, begged the Mirror. THREE TIMES A LADY, 
bawled the Sun. Rosemary said, 'It's about Leo.' 
 'Well, I thought She looked down, she wasn't settled in die room, 
on die sofa's edge; then she stared at him for a second or two. She 
said, 'Well, you know, my brodier died, three weeks ago.' Nick listened 
to the words, and heard how the West Indian colour and exactness in 
her tone claimed it as a private tiling. It had been one of Leo's tones 
too: die cockney for defence, die Jamaican crackle and burn for 
pleasure, just sometimes, rare and beautiful'like his black blush. 
 'Nearly four weeks now, pet,' said Gemma, with her own note of 
bleak solidarity. 
 'Yes, May the sixteenth.' She looked at Nick as tliough the extra 
days made him more culpable, or useless. 'I'm so sorry,' Nick said. 
'We're trying to contact all his friends.' 
 'Well, because, you know…' said Gemma. 
 All his lovers,' said Rosemary firmly. Nick remembered that she 
was, or had been, a doctors' receptionist; she was used to die facts. 
She unzipped her shoulder bag and delved into it. He found it screened 
them both, this angular attention to business - he was flinching at the 
frighteningly solemn thing she had just told him, and she twitched too 
at the power of her words, even if (as he thought he saw) they had a 
certain softness or drabness for her now from use, from their assertion 
of something that was shifting day by day from the new into die 
known. He said, with a sense of good manners that took him back to 
their long-ago meeting, 'How is your mother?' 
 'OK,' said Rosemary. 'OK…' 
 'She has her faith,' said Gemma. 'She's got the church,' said 
Nick; 'and she's also got you.' 
 'Well…' said Rosemary. Yes, she has.' 
 The first tiling she passed him was a small cream-coloured 
envelope addressed to Leo in green capitals. He felt he knew it and he 
didn't know it, like a letter found in an old book. It had a postmark of 
August 2,1983. She nodded, and he opened it, while they watched 
him; it was like learning a new game and having to be a good sport as 
he lost. He unfolded a little letter in his own best handwriting, and the 
photo slipped out into his lap. 'That's how we knew where to find you,' 
Rosemary said. He had sent it in the blank envelope to Gay Times, 
doubting how it could survive, how his own wish could take on form 
and direction, and someone there with a green biro had sent it on - he 
was seeing the history of his action, and seeing it as Leo himself had 
seen it, but distant and complete. He picked up the photo with the 
guarded curiosity he had for his earlier self. It was an Oxford picture, a 
passport-size square cut out from a larger group: the face of a boy at a 
party who somehow confides his secret to the camera. He only glanced 
at what he'd written, on the Feddens' embossed letterhead - the small 
size, meant for social thank-yous, because he hadn't had much to say. 
The writing itself looked quaint and studied, though he remembered 
Leo had praised it: 'Hello!' he'd begun, since of course he hadn't yet 
known Leo's name. The cross-stroke of the H curled back under the 
uprights like a dog's tail. He saw he'd mentioned Bruckner, Henry 
James, all his Interests - very artlessly, but it hadn't mattered, and 
indeed they had never been mentioned again, when the two of them 
were together. At the top there was Leo's annotation in pencil: Pretty. 
Rich? Too young:'This had been struck through later by a firm red tick. 
 Nick folded it away and peeped at the two women. It was 
Gemma's presence, the stranger in the room, that brought it home to 
him; for a minute she seemed like the fact of the death itself. She 
didn't know him, but she knew about the letter, the affair, the tender 
young Nick of four years ago, and his shyness and resentment went for 
nothing in the new moral atmosphere, like that of a hospital, where 
everything was found out and fears were justified as diagnoses. 
 He said, 'I wish I'd seen him again.' 
 'He didn't want people seeing him,' said Rosemary. 'Not later on.' 
 'Right…' said Nick. 
 'You know how vain he was!' - it was a little test for her grief, an 
indulgent gibe with a twist of true vexation, at Leo's troublesomeness, 
alive or dead. 
 'Yes,' said Nick, picturing him wearing her shirt. And wondering 
if the man's shirt she had on now was one of his. 'He always had to 
look his best.' 
 'He always looked beautiful,' said Nick, and the exaggeration 
released his feelings suddenly. He tried to smile but felt the corners of 
his mouth pulled downwards. He mastered himself with a rough sigh 
and said, 'Of course I hadn't seen him for a couple of years.' 
 'OK…' said Rosemary thoughtfully. 'You know we never knew 
who he was seeing.' 
 'No,' said Gemma. 
 'You and old Pete were the only ones who got asked to the house. 
Until Bradley, of course.' 
 'I don't know about Bradley,' said Nick. 
 'My brother shared a flat with him,' said Rosemary. 'You knew he 
moved out.' 
 'Well, I knew he wanted to. That was about the time he… I'm not 
sure what happened. We stopped seeing each other.' He couldn't say 
the usual accusing phrase he dumped me, it was petty and nearly 
meaningless in the face of his death. 'I think I thought he was seeing 
someone else.' Though this itself wasn't the whole truth: it was the 
painful story he'd told himself at the time, to screen a glimpse he'd had 
of a much worse story, that Leo was ill. But Bradley had been there. 
He sounded like a square-shouldered practical man, not a twit like 
Nick. 'Bradley's not well, is he?' said Gemma. 'You knew old Pete 
died…' said Rosemary. 'Yes, I did,' said Nick, and cleared his throat. 
'Anyway, you're all right, pet,' said Gemma. 
 'Yes, I'm all right,' said Nick. 'I'm fine.' They looked at him like 
police officers awaiting a confession or change of heart. 'I was lucky. 
And then I was… careful.' He put the letter on the table, and stood up. 
'Would you like some coffee? Can I get you anything?' Gemma and 
Rosemary pondered this and for a moment seemed reluctant to accept. 
 In die kitchen he gazed out of the window as the kettle boiled. 
The rain fell thin and silvery against the dark bushes of the garden 
and the brick backs of the houses in the next street. He gazed at the 
familiar but unknown windows. In a bright drawing room a maid was 
hoovering. At the edge of hearing an ambulance wailed. Then the ketde 
throbbed and clicked off. 
 He took the coffee tray through. 'This is so sad,' he said. He had 
always thought of this as a slight word, but its effect now was larger 
than mere tactful understatement. It seemed to surround the awful 
fact with a shadowing of foreknowledge and thus of acceptance. 
 Rosemary raised her eyebrows and pursed her lips. There was 
something stubborn about her, and Nick thought perhaps it was only 
a brave hard form of shyness, unlike his own shyness, which ran off 
into flattery and evasion. She said, 'So you met Leo through a lonely 
hearts?' 
 'Yes, that's right,' said Nick, since she obviously knew this. He 
had never been sure if it was a shameful or a witty way to meet 
someone. He didn't know what the women would think either (Gemma 
gave him a sighing smile). 'It was such a wonderful piece of luck he 
chose me,' he said. 'Right…' said Rosemary, with a look of sisterly 
sarcasm; which maybe wasn't that, but a hint th. u In- shouldn't keep 
boasting about his luck.. 'I mean he had hundreds of replies.' 
 'Well, he had a lot.' She reached into her bag again, and brought 
out a bundle of letters, pinched in a thick rubber band. 'Oh,' said Nick. 
 She pulled ftff the rubber band and rolled it back over her hand. 
For a moment he was at the doctors - or the doctor was visiting him, 
with the bundled case notes of all her calls. Both brother and sister 
were orderly and discreet. 'I thought some of them might mean 
something to you.' 
 'Oh, I don't know.' 
 'So that we can tell them.' 
 'What did he do?' said Gemma. 'He went out and tried them all?' 
 Rosemary sorted the letters into two piles. 'I don't want to go 
chasing people up if they're dead,' she said. 'That's the thing!' said 
Gemma. 
 'I don't expect I'll know anyone,' said Nick. 'It's very unlikely…' It 
was all too bleakly businesslike for him - he'd only just heard the 
news. 
 The funny thing was that all the envelopes were addressed in the 
same hand, in green or sometimes purple capitals. It was like one 
crazed adorer laying siege to Leo. The name came up at him 
relendessly off the sheaf of letters. 'It must have looked odd, these 
arriving all the time,' he said. A lot of them had the special-issue army 
stamps of that summer. 
 'He told us it was all to do with some cycling thing, a cycling 
club,' said Rosemary. 
 'His bike was his first love,' said Nick, unsure if this was merely a 
quip or the painful truth. 'It was clever of him.' 
 'These ones I think he didn't see. 
 They've got a cross on.' 
 'There's even a woman wrote to him,' said Gemma. 
 So Nick started going through the letters, knowing it was 
poindess, but trapped by the need to honour or humour Rosemary. He 
saw her as a stickler for procedure, however unwelcome. He didn't 
need to read them in detail, but the first two or three were eerily 
interesting - as the private efforts of his unknown rivals. He concealed 
his interest behind a dull pout of consideration, and slow shakes of the 
head. The terms of the ad were still clear to him, and the broad-
minded age-range, '18 to 40'. 'Hi there!' wrote Sandy from Enfield, 'I'm 
early 40s, but saw that little old ad of yours and thought I'd write in 
anyway! I'm in the crazy world of stationery!' A snap of a solidly built 
man of fifty was attached to the page with a pink paper clip. Leo had 
written, House/Car. Age? And then, presumably after he'd seen him, 
Too inexperienced. 
 Glenn, 'late 20s', from Barons Court, was a travel agent, and sent 
a Polaroid of himself in swimming trunks in his flat. He said, 'I love to 
party! And sexpecially in bed! (Or on the floor! Or halfway up a ladder!! 
Whoops -!)' Too much? wondered Leo, before making the discovery: 
Invisible dick. 'Dear Friend,' wrote serious-looking black Ambrose from 
Forest Hill, 'I like the sound of you. 
 I think we have some love to share.' The exclamation marks, 
which gave the other letters their air of inane self-consciousness, were 
resisted by Ambrose until his final 'Peace!' Nick liked the look of him, 
but Leo had written, Bottom. 
 Boring. Nick made a stealthy attempt to remember the address. 
 When he'd read a letter he passed it back to Rosemary, who put 
it face down on the table, by the coffee pot. The sense of a game ebbed 
very quickly with his lack of success. The fact was these were all men 
who'd wanted his boyfriend, who'd applied for what Nick had gone on 
to get. Some of them were pushy and explicit, but there was always the 
vulnerable note of courtship: they were asking an unknown man to 
like them, or want them, or find them equal to their self-descriptions. 
He recognized one of the men from his photo and murmured, 'Ah…!' 
but then let it go with a shrug and a throat-clearing. It was a Spanish 
guy who'd turned up everywhere, who'd been a nice dark thread in the 
pattern of Nick's early gym days and bar nights, almost an emblem of 
the scene for him, its routine and compulsion, and he knew he must 
be dead - he'd seen him a year ago at the Ponds, defying his own fear 
and others' fear of him. Javier, he was called. He was thirty-four. He 
worked for a building society, and lived in West Hampstead. The mere 
facts in his letter of seduction had the air of an obituary. 
 Nick stopped and drank some coffee. 'Was he ill for a long time?' 
he asked. 
 'He had pneumonia last November, he nearly died; but he came 
through it. Then things got, well, a lot worse in the spring. He was in 
hospital for about ten days at the end.' 
 'He went blind, didn't he,' said Gemma, in the way people 
clumsily handle and offer facts which they can neither accept nor 
forget. 
 'Poor Leo,' said Nick. Relief at not having witnessed this was 
mixed with regret at not having been called on to do so. 'Did you bring 
the photos?' said Gemma. 
 'If you want to see…' said Rosemary, after a pause. 
 'I don't know,' said Nick, embarrassed. It was a challenge; and 
then he felt powerless in the flow of the moment, as he had on his first 
date with Leo, he met it as something that was going to happen, and 
took the Kodak wallet. He looked at a couple of the pictures and then 
handed them back. 'You can have one if you like,' said Rosemary. 'No,' 
said Nick; 'thank you.' He sat, rather hard-faced, over his coffee. After 
a bit Gemma said, 'This is proper coffee, isn't it.' 
 'Oh…!' said Nick, 'do you like it. It's Kenyan Rich, medium 
roast… It comes from Myers' in Kensington Church Street. They import 
their own. One pays more, but I think it's worth it.' 
 'Mm, it's lovely and rich,' said Gemma. 'I'd rather not look at the 
other letters now,' Nick said. 
 Rosemary nodded. 'OK,' she said, as if skimming forward for 
another appointment, a cancellation. 'I can leave them with you…?' 
 'No, please don't,' said Nick. He felt he was being pressed very 
hard very fast, as in some experiment on his emotions. 
 Gemma went to the lavatory - she murmured the directions to 
herself as she tried the door, and then slipped in as if she'd met a 
friend. There was silence for a while between Nick and Rosemary. The 
extremity of events excused anything, of course, but her hardness 
towards him was another shock to get used to: it added puzzlingly to 
the misery of the day. She was his lover's sister, and he thought of her 
naturally as a friend, and with spontaneous fondness and fresh 
sympathy on top of mere politeness. But it seemed it didn't work the 
other way round. He smiled tentatively. There was such a physical 
likeness now that he might have been asking Leo himself to be nice to 
him, after some row. But she'd decided against the note of tenderness, 
even towards Leo himself. 'So you hadn't seen him for a year or two?' 
she said. 'That's right…' 
 She looked up at him warily, as though starting to concede his 
own, homosexual claim on her brother and wondering where such a 
shift might lead her. 'Did you miss him?' she said. 'Yes… I did. I 
certainly did.' 
 'Do you remember the last time you saw him?' 
 'Well, yes,' said Nick, and stared at the floor. The questions were 
sentimental, but the manner was detached, almost bored. 'It was all 
very difficult.' She said, 'He hadn't made a will.' 
 'Oh, well… he was so young!' said Nick, frowning because he 
found himself on the edge of tears again, at the thought that she was 
going to offer him something ol I. eo's - of course she was cold because 
she found it all so difficult herself. 
 'We had him cremated,' Rosemary said. 'I think it's what he 
would have wanted, though we didn't ask him. We didn't like to.' 
 'Hm,' said'Nick, and found he was crying anyway. 
 When Gemma came back she said, 'You must see the toilet.' 
Rosemary gave a loyal but repressive smile. 'Or is that trick 
photography?' 
 'Oh…!' said Nick. 'No… no, it's real, I'm afraid.' He was glad of the 
absurd change of subject. 'There's a picture of him dancing with 
Maggie!' 
 It was one of the photos from the Silver Wedding, Nick red-faced 
and staring, the Prime Minister with a look of caution he hadn't been 
aware of at the time. 
 He wasn't sure Gemma would get the special self-irony of the 
lavatory gallery. 
 It was something he'd learnt from his public-school friends. 'Do 
you know her, then?' she said. 
 'No, no,' said Nick, 'I just got drunk at a party…' as if it could 
happen to anyone. 
 'Go on, I bet you voted for her, didn't you?' Gemma wanted to 
know. 
 'I did not,' said Nick, quite sternly. Rosemary showed no interest 
in this, and he said, 'I remember I promised to tell your mother if I ever 
met her.' 
 'Oh…?' 
 He smiled apprehensively. 'I mean, how has she coped with all 
this?' 
 'You remember what she's like,' said Rosemary. 
 'I'll write to her,' said Nick. 'Or I could drive over and see her.' He 
pictured her at home with her pamphlets and her hat on the chair. He 
had a sense of his charm not having worked on her years ago and was 
ready to do something now to make good. I'm sure she's been 
wonderful.' 
 Rosemary gave him a pinched look, and as she stood up and 
collected her things she seemed to decide to say, 'That's what you said 
before, wasn't it? When you came to see us?' 
 'What…?' 
 'Leo told us, you said we were wonderful.' 
 'Did I?' said Nick, who remembered it painfully. 'Well, that's not 
such a bad thing to be.' He paused, unsure if he'd been accused of 
something. He felt there was a mood of imminent blame, for everything 
that had happened: they had hoped to pin it on him, and had failed, 
and were somehow more annoyed with him as a result. 'Of course, she 
didn't know, did she, that Leo was gay? She was talking about getting 
him to the altar.' 
 'Well, he's been to the altar now,' said Rosemary with a harsh 
litde laugh, as though it was her mother's fault. 'Almost, anyway.' 
 'It's a terrible way to find out,' said Nick. 'She doesn't accept it.' 
 'She doesn't accept the death…' 
 'She doesn't accept he was gay. It's a mortal sin, you see,' said 
Rosemary, and now the Jamaican stress was satirical. 'And her son 
was no sinner.' 
 'Yes, I've never understood about sin,' said Nick, in a tone they 
didn't catch. 
 'Oh, the mortal ones are the worst,' said Gemma. 'So she doesn't 
think AIDS is a punishment, at least.' 
 'No, it can be,' said Rosemary. 'But Leo got it off a toilet seat at 
the office, which is full of godless socialists, of course.' 
 'Or a sandwich,' prompted Gemma. 
 There was something very unseemly in their mockery. Nick tried 
to imagine the house surprised by guilt and blame, the helpless 
harshness of the bereaved… he didn't know. Rosemary said, 'She's got 
him back at the house.' 
 'How do you mean?' 
 'She's got the ashes in a jar, on the mantelpiece.' 
 'Oh!' Nick was so disturbed by this that he said, rather drolly, 
'Yes, I remember, there's a shelf, isn't there, over the gas fire, with 
figures of Jesus and Mary and so on-' 
 'There's Jesus, and the Virgin Mary, and St Antony of Padua… 
arid Leo.' 
 'Well, he's in very good company!' said Nick. 
 'I know,' said Gemma, shaking her head and laughing grimly. 'I 
can't stand it, I can't go in there!' 
 'She says she likes to feel he's still there.' 
 Nick shivered but said, 'I suppose you can't begrudge her her 
fantasies, can you, when she's lost her son.' 
 'They don't really help, though,' said Rosemary. 
 'Well, they don't help us, pet, do they?' said Gemma, and rubbed 
Rosemary's back vigorously. 
 Rosemarys eyes were hooded for a moment, just like her 
mother's, with the family stubbornness. She said, 'She won't accept it 
about him, and she won't accept it about us.' And then almost at once 
she shouldered her bag to go. 
 Nick blushed at his slowness, and then was mortified that they 
might think he was blushing about them. When the women had gone, 
he went back upstairs, but in the remorseless glare of the news, so 
that the flat looked even more tawdry and pretentious. He was puzzled 
to think he had spent so much time in it so happily and conceitedly. 
The pelmets and mirrors, the spotlights and blinds, seemed rich in 
criticism. It was what you did if you had millions but no particular 
taste: you made your private space like a swanky hotel; just as such 
hotels flattered their customers by being vulgar simulacra of lavish 
private homes. A year ago it had at least the glamour of newness. Now 
it bore signs of occupation by a rich boy who had lost the knack of 
looking after himself. The piping on the sofa cushions was rubbed 
through where Wani had sprawled incessantly in front of the video. 
The crimson damask was blotted with his own and other boys' fluids. 
He wondered if Gemma had noticed as she sat there, making her 
inanely upsetting remarks. He wasn't letting her in here again, in her 
black boots. Nick felt furious witli Wani for fucking up the cushions. 
The Georgian desk was marked with drink stains and razor etchings 
that even the optimistic Don Guest would have found it hard to 
disguise. 'That's beyond cosmetic repair, old boy,' Don would say. Nick 
fingered at the little abrasions and found himself gasping and 
whooping with grief. 
 He sat on the sofa and started reading the Telegraph, as if it was 
known to be a good thing to do. He was sick of the election, but excited 
to think it was happening today. There was something primitive and 
festive about it. He heard Rosemary saying, 'Well, he died, you know…' 
or 'Well, you know, he died…' in recurrent, almost overlapping runs 
and pounces -his heart thumped at the dull detonation of the phrase. 
He was horrified by the thought of his ashes in the house, and kept 
picturing them, in an unlikely rococo urn. The last photo she had 
shown him was terrible: a Leo with his life behind him. Nick 
remembered making jokes, early on, in the first unguarded liberty of a 
first affair, about their shared old age, Leo being sixty when Nick was 
fifty. And there he was already; or he'd been sixty for a week before he 
died. He was in bed, in a sky-blue hospital gown; his face was hard to 
read, since AIDS had taken it and written its message of terror and 
exhaustion on it; against which Leo seemed frailly to assert his own 
character in a doubtful half smile. His vanity had become a kind of 
fear, that he would frighten the people he smiled at. It was the loneliest 
thing Nick had ever seen. 
 He thought he should write a letter and sat down at the desk. He 
felt a need to console Leo's mother, or to put himself right with her. 
Some deep convolution of feelings about his own mother, as die one 
person who really suffered for his homosexuality, made him see Mrs 
Charles as a figure to be appeased as well as comforted. 'Dear Mrs 
Charles,' he wrote, 'I was so terribly sorry to learn about Leo's death': 
there, it existed, he'd hesitated, but written it, and it couldn't be 
unwritten. He had a feeling, an anxious refinement of tact, that he 
shouldn't actually mention the death. 'Your sad news,' 
 'recent sad events'…: 'Leo's death' was brutal. Then he worried 
that 'I was so terribly sorry' might sound like gush to her, like calling 
her wonderful. He knew his own forms of truth could look like 
insincerity to others. He was frightened of her, as a grieving woman, 
and uncertain what feelings to attribute to her. It seemed she had 
taken it all in her own way, perhaps even with a touch of zealous 
cheerfulness. He could see her being impressed by his educated form 
of words and best handwriting. Then he saw her looking mistrustfully 
at what he'd written. He felt the limits of his connoisseurship of tone. 
It was what he was working on, and yet… He stared out of the window, 
and after a minute found Henry James's phrase about the deadi of Poe 
peering back at him. What was it? The extremity of personal absence 
had just overtaken him. The words, which once sounded arch and 
even facetious, were suddenly terrible to him, capacious, wise, and 
hard. He understood for the first time that they'd been written by 
someone whose life had been walked through, time and again, by 
death. And dien he saw himself, in six months' time perhaps, sitting 
down to write a similar letter to the denizens of Lowndes Square. 
 
 
 
H 
 
When he got back to Kensington Park Gardens he didn't tell Catherine 
about Leo straight away. To himself he seemed to gleam with his news, 
to be both the pale bereaved and the otherworldly messenger. He 
found himself lengthening his natural sighs and stares to provoke a 
question. But after ten minutes he accepted that she hadn't noticed. 
She was slumped in an armchair, with newspapers all around her, and 
half-empty glasses of water and mugs of tea on the table beside her. 
He looked down on her from behind, and she seemed as small and 
passive as a sick child. She looked up and said, with an effort at 
brightness, 'Oh, Nick, it's Election Special after the news,' as though it 
had taken great effort to find this out, as though it was itself a piece of 
good news. 
 'OK, darling,' said Nick. 'Great, we'll watch that.' He gazed round 
the room, feeling for the precedence, the protocol of their relative 
afflictions. 'Urn… yes… OK!' It didn't seem right to land her with the 
news of a death. He felt that like all news it had its own momentum, 
and it would somehow go stale and unsayable if it was left too long. 
 He went up to his room with a slight mental stoop from the 
burden of Catherine's condition. It was hard work living with someone 
so helpless and negative, and much worse if you'd known them critical 
and funny. Well, sometimes, perhaps, it made your own problems look 
light; at others it amplified them, by a troubling sympathetic gloom. He 
had borrowed a book of Rachel's by Dr Edelman, who was treating 
Catherine, A Path Through the Mountains: Clinical Responses to 
Manic Depression. He had groaned over Dr Edelman's style, and 
corrected his grammar to protect himself from a superstitious fear that 
the book awoke in him: of finding the symptoms in himself, now he 
knew what they were. They certainly seemed to be present in all the 
more volatile, the more irascible, or oddly lethargic people he knew. 
 The book had helpful facts in it, but it left Nick with an 
imaginative uncertainty, as to where Catherine was when he looked at 
her and spoke to her: not in the black and shiny place of her old 
depressions, but in some other unfeatured place, policed by Dr 
Edelman's heavy new dosage of lithium. She lacked the energy and 
motivation to describe it herself. She said she couldn't concentrate on 
a book, or even an article. Sometimes she acted in her quick pert way, 
but it was a reflex: she observed it herself with bewilderment and a 
kind of longing. Mostly she sat and waited, but without any colour of 
expectation. 
 Nick found himself talking with awful brightness of purpose, as if 
to someone old and deaf; and it was more awful because she didn't 
find it condescending. 
 There were various phone calls that evening. Nick's mother rang 
and talked excitedly about the election, which she seized on as a 
chance to share in Nick's London life. He was cool and humourless 
with her, and saw himself, as so often, almost blaming her for not 
knowing the important thing he was incapable of telling her. She had 
never heard of Leo, and he thought if he did try to tell her they would 
work each other up into a state of mutual resentment at the fact. 
 She gave an account of Gerald's performance on the local radio, 
as if Nick needed to hear praise of him. 'He said we don't want these, 
you know, lesbian workshops,' she said, not unaware of her own 
bravery in using the word. Then Gerald himself was on the other line, 
and she rang off as if she'd been caught. 
 'All well?' said Gerald airily, obviously wanting to talk about 
himself. It was the long evenings wait for the results, when his 
confidence was the most stretched, and he was fishing for sympathy, 
almost as though he'd lost. 'How did your speech go?' said Nick. 'Went 
down like dinner,' Gerald said. 'Which is more than I can say for 
dinner itself- what? God these provincial hotels.' Nick felt a punitive 
urge to make Gerald listen to his problem, since he'd met Leo and had 
even been gingerly in favour of him; but he knew he wouldn't get his 
attention, it was the wrong moment, the wrong week, and actually the 
wrong death. 
 Elena had prepared some cannelloni, which Nick and Catherine 
ate in the kitchen, under the family gallery of photographs and 
cartoons; this had now spread over the pantry door and down the 
other side, where Marc's caricature of Gerald had pride of place. 
Gerald had still not received the accolade of a Spitting Image puppet in 
his likeness, but it was one of his main hopes for the new Parliament. 
 Catherine stared at her food as she worked through it, like 
someone performing a meaningless task as a punishment, and Nick 
found himself contrasting her to her eager six-year-old self, with only 
half her big teeth, and a grin of excitement so intense it was almost 
painful; and to a feature from Harper's ten years later, where rich 
people's children modelled evening clothes, and white gloves covered 
the first scars on her arms. Really, diough, it was Gerald's wall, and 
his wife and children appeared as decorative adjuncts to the hero's life, 
unfolding in a sequence of handshakes with the famous. The 
Gorbachev was the latest trophy, not a handshake, but a moment of 
conversation, the Soviet leader's smile just hinting at the tedium of 
hearing English puns explained by an interpreter. Nick said, 'Can you 
remember when that picture of you was taken?' and Catherine said, 
'No, I can't. I can only remember the picture.' She glanced up over her 
shoulder with an apolo- getic cringe. It was as if all die pictures might 
come bashing down about her ears. 
 He said, 'Mum says there's a cartoon of Gerald in the Northants 
Standard; she's sending it down for possible inclusion.' 
 'Oh…' said Catherine. She looked at him steadily. 'I don't know 
about cartoons.' 
 'You love satire, darling, especially if it's of Gerald.' 
 'I know. Just imagine if people did look like that, though. 
Hydrocephalous is the word. Monstrous teeth of Gerald and her hand 
shook. She seemed startled to recall these words. 
 Afterwards they went up to the drawing room, and Nick, 
suddenly shaky too, poured himself a large Scotch. They sat side by 
side on the sofa, in the heavy but unselfconscious silence she 
generated. He remembered the one time Leo had come to this room, 
and surprised him, moved him, and slighdy ratded him by playing 
Mozart on the piano. They'd both had a glass of whisky dien, die only 
time he'd known Leo to drink. He caught the beautiful rawness of 
those days again, the life of instinct opening in front of him, the 
pleasure of the streets and London itself unfolding in the autumn chill; 
everything tingling with newness and risk, glitter of frost and glow of 
body heat, the shock of finding and holding what he wanted among 
millions of strangers. His sense of the scandalous originality of making 
love to a man had faded week by week into the commonplace triumph 
of a love affair. He saw Leo crossing this room, the scene brilliant and 
dwindling, as if watched in a convex mirror. It was the night he had 
stepped warily, with many ironic looks, into Nick's deeper fantasy of 
possession: his lover in his house, Nick owning them both by right of 
taste and longing. 
 Now the rain had stopped, and the sky brightened a little just as 
the dusk was falling. Pale neutral light stretched in through the front 
windows, seemed to search and fail and then probe again. Nick 
formulated the tiling, 'I had some terribly sad news today, I heard that 
Leo's died, you remember…'; but it stayed shut in his head, like a 
difficult confession. 
 He listened to the birdsong from the gardens, with a more 
analytical ear than usual for the notes of warning and protest and 
ruffled submission. The long neutral light grew more tender and 
burning as it touched die gilt handles of the fire irons and the white-
marble vines beneath the mantelpiece. Then it reached the turned legs 
of an old wooden chair and made them glow with new and 
unsuspected presence, like little people, skittle-people, with bellies and 
collars and Punchinello hats, shining fiercely and stoically with their 
one truth, that they would last for centuries longer than die young live 
people who were looking at them. 
 On the nine o'clock news they were talking already about a Tory 
landslide. Nick had another huge whisky, and felt a familiar relief 
begin to smooth down the bleak edges of the day. He felt he was 
missing the regard that was due to the bereaved, the indulgence, like a 
special sad prize, that was given to boys at school when the news came 
through. He even wondered for a while about a toot, but he knew he 
didn't want the irrelevant high spirits of coke. Drink showed more 
respect for the night, and seemed ready to mediate, for three or four 
hours, between the demands of grief and current affairs. 
 The election unrolled at its own unsatisfactory tempo. For ages 
the pundits sat in the studio, waiting for results to process and 
pronounce on. The tedium of die four long weeks of the election 
reached its purest form in their attempts to summarize and predict. 
Various old maxims and traditions were rehearsed, with a consoling 
effect of pantomime. Reporters were seen, perched in a dozen town 
halls with notliing as yet to report. Below them, out of focus, the tellers 
at their long tables were racing to finish, so that another game seemed 
to flourish on the back of the main contest. They were going to show 
the Barwick declaration later on, and for five seconds Nick saw the 
council room in the Market Hall and the not quite familiar figures at 
work; then there was a film clip showing the main candidates 
canvassing. Gerald's style was one of crisp confidence, striding 
through the square with glancing 'Good morning's, like a boss coming 
into an office, and not listening to anything that was being said. The 
inexperienced Alliance woman, by contrast, got snagged in well-
meaning debate with Tracey Weeks, who she was slow to realize, and 
on camera was reluctant to acknowledge, wasn't all there. It was sad 
that the Barwick electorate should be exemplified to the nation by old 
Tracey; Nick distanced himself from his home town with a cagey laugh, 
though he was very curious to see it on TV. It had a steady provincial 
look to it, surprised but not overwhelmed to have been noticed by the 
outside world. It wasn't exacdy the place he knew. 
 Later Nick was downstairs when Catherine called out, 'It's Polly 
Thing!' and he rushed back up and leant over the back of the sofa - the 
returning officer was already speaking. Polly Tompkins was standing 
for Pershore, traditionally Tory but with a strong SDP vote in '83; he 
couldn't be sure of getting in, and Gerald, who admired Polly, warned 
that his age might tell against him. Nick had read an article about 
young candidates - of the hundred and fifty or so under thirty the dry 
expectation was that half a dozen would get elected. Standing in the 
middle of the stage, fat and hot in a double-breasted suit, Polly could 
have passed for forty-five; he seemed camouflaged in his own elected 
future. Nick couldn't decide if he wanted him to win or not. It was a 
spectacle, and he looked at it with untroubled cruelty, like a boxing 
match. It would be good to see him smacked down. Nick supposed the 
candidates must know the result by now, since they'd been at the 
count; but perhaps not, if it was very close. Now Polly was staring out 
into the challenge of the lights, the invisible millions who suddenly had 
their eyes on him. The tiny Labour vote was announced, and he gave a 
heardess wince of commiseration. And now his own name was being 
said, 'Tompkins, Paul Frederick Gervase - ('Conservative' in murmured 
parenthesis) - 'seventeen thousand, two hundred and diirty-eight 
votes': the word votes shouted over a roar of triumph so quick that 
Polly himself seemed not to have worked it out - there was a moment's 
blankness in his face, and then you saw him give in to the roar and 
grin like a boy and raise two fists in the air - he was monstrous, 
Catherine said 'God…' in her dullest tone, but Nick felt his grin turn 
wistful with unexpected pleasure as the returning officer fought on 
against the noise, 'And I therefore declare the said Paul Frederick 
Gervase Tompkins duly elected…' 
 'Paul Tompkins,' said tJie reporter briskly, showing in his 
equable tone that he hadn't known Polly as the nightmare queen of the 
Worcester MCR, 'only twenty-eight years old…' as Polly shook hands 
crushingly with die losers, and then stepped backwards, peered round 
widi a kind of cunning confusion, using the crowd's indulgence, his 
first thrill of popularity, and stretched out an arm to call a woman 
forward from the back of the stage. She strode up to him, nudged 
against him, their fingers fumbled together, and then he jerked their 
hands upwards in die air. A great night for Paul Tompkins's wife, too,' 
said the commentator: 'only married last month - Morgan Stevens, one 
of the guiding lights at Conservative Central Office - I know she's been 
working tirelessly behind the scenes on this campaign…' Polly carried 
on shaking their awkwardly linked fists above their heads, his lapel 
dragged up against his jowls, and something he couldn't disguise in 
his face, something deeper than scorn, the madness of self-belief. It 
was already time for him to make a speech, but he milked the acclaim 
crudely - he looked a bit of a buffoon. He stepped forward, still loosely 
holding Morgan's hand, and then dodged back and kissed her, not 
wedding-style, but as one might kiss an aunt. He had hardly started to 
speak when ilie viewers were abruptly returned to die studio. 'Is 
Morgan really a woman?' said Catherine. 'Very fair question,' said 
Nick; 'but I think so.' 
 'She's got a man's name.' 
 'Well, there was Morgan Le Fay, wasn't there, the famous witch.' 
 'Was there?' 
 Anyway, she's married to a man called Polly, so it's probably all 
right.' 
 Now the results were coming in too fast to be sure of individual 
notice. The talk of a landslide took shape in vertiginous diagrams. 'I 
thought it was a landslide last time,' said Catherine. 'We had that book 
about it.' 
 'Yes, it was,' said Nick. 
 She stared at the screen, where the famous swingometer was 
virtually at rest. 
 'But nodiing's changing,' she said. 'I mean there's two more 
Labour seats. 
 That's not a landslide.' 
 'Oh, I see,' said Nick. 'I mean a landslide's a disaster, it changes 
everything.' 
 'So you thought…' Nick thought he saw that Catherine, in her 
inattentive but literal way, had convinced herself it was a Labour 
landslide. 'It's a dead metaphor, darling. It just means a crushing 
victory.' 
 'Oh god,' said Catherine, almost tearfully. 
 'I mean, the land did slide once, as we all know. And it looks very 
much as though it's going to stay slidden.' 
 Barwick came up half an hour later. There was a buzz in the 
studio, as if they knew something was about to happen. Nick and 
Catherine sat forward on the sofa. 
 'Welcome to Barwick,' said the bearded young reporter: 'where 
we're in the splendid Market Hall built by Sir Christopher Wren.' ('No, 
you are not,' said Nick.) 'We're expecting the declaration in the next 
minute. Barwick of course held by (IcniU 1-'widen since the last 
election - a minister in the Home Office - something of a maverick, but 
could be looking at a Cabinet post in the next government - he had a 
majority of over eight thousand in '83, but we're expecting to see a big 
increase in the Alliance vote here - Muriel Day, a very popular figure 
locally…' The camera found the two rivals, each in discussion with 
their people, Gerald chaffing as if nothing was going on, Muriel Day 
already rehearsing tiie smile of a good loser. The Labour man, perhaps 
under a delusion about die outcome, was running over a three-page 
speech. 
 Nick flopped back in the sofa with a laugh, to break the mood. 
Staring at the screen he felt awkwardly responsible, as if the place he'd 
come from, die very room that he'd measured and drawn as a 
schoolboy, was about to deliver its verdict on the room he was sitting 
in now. It was embarrassing, but there was nothing he could do. He 
watched the event quickly clarify, die intent activity was finished, the 
people redeployed themselves, officials were briefly in conference, and 
out of the toil of the day, metal boxes and rented tables, pure process 
without poetry, a kind of theatre emerged, so thick with precedent that 
it looked instinctual. 
 Old Arthur State was saying, extremely slowly, 'I, Arthur Henry 
State, being the returning officer for the parliamentary constituency of 
Barwick in. the county of Northamptonshire…' and surely expanding 
his text widi various quaint heraldic clauses, while Catherine eyed her 
father on the podium behind him. Nick glanced at her in profile. She 
had a look of exhaustion, as at an object constandy but inexplicably in 
her way; but a twitch of excitement too: she was powerless, but tonight 
there were other powers stirring. Something might happen. The Labour 
man was called Brown and so came first - he'd got eight thousand, 
three hundred and twenty-one votes ('that's more than three thousand 
up on last time'), and was cheered defiantly. Next was Muriel Day, and 
her vote too was well up on that of her predecessor, two and a half 
thousand up, 11 eleven thousand, five hundred and seven. She took 
the applause with a grateful but distracted smile, almost hushing her 
supporters to let them hear the rest - since Arthur always waited for 
total silence, and went back to the start of any sentence that was 
interrupted. It was a serious figure, and Gerald had a look Nick knew 
well, the condescending simper that covered a process of mental 
arithmetic. The suspense was made worse by the unignorable but 
somehow forgotten figure of Ethelred Egg ('Monster Raving Loony 
Party'), who'd only polled thirty-one votes but seemed to have a hall-
full of supporters. He plucked off and waved his green top hat and 
capered about in his clown's suit. You couldn't help seeing some slight 
kinship between him and Gerald, whose white collar and pink tie were 
half hidden by a vast blue rosette with long tabs or streamers below 
and the breast-pocket handkerchief struggling above. 'Oh lose, lose…' 
muttered Catherine. 'Fedden,' said Arthur State, 'Gerald John' 
('Conservative…'), and because there was a klaxon squawk he repeated 
it, the strange momentary levelling and exposure of the cited second 
name, 'eleven thousand, eight hundred and ninety-three' - so that 
Gerald grinned and coloured for a second, and perhaps thought he'd 
lost after all. The cheer that followed was a funny sound, because it 
had a loud 'Woo-00' mixed in with it, at the luck of a man who had 
just got away with something. 
 Nick topped up his drink and went out onto the balcony. He 
rallied to the surprising chill out there. Gerald's close shave at the 
ballot box was a drama and an embarrassment, and it was going to be 
hard to know what to say when he got home. Congratulations might 
sound sarcastic or unduly blithe, even to Gerald. Anyway, he was in, 
and everything could go on as planned. His gleaming grin floated 
against the dark trees for a while, and then faded, as perishable as all 
news. Slowly the trees themselves took on shape and detail in the light 
from the houses and from the softly reflecting night clouds. Nick loved 
the gardens; when he strolled between the house and the gardens 
through the private gate he seemed to glance up at his own good luck, 
in the towering planes on one side and the white-stuccoed cliff on the 
other. It would be good to be out there now; but it was too dripping 
and cold. There were wonderful expanses of summer ahead, no need to 
panic. 
 He remembered taking Leo there, in a jitter of nerves and 
shadows, the night they'd finally met; and quite a few other men too, 
the summer before last, on the sand path behind the workmen's hut - 
it had been his trick, done confidently, dwindling a little in charm and 
danger. Something basic and unsocial about it, no giving them a drink 
or a shower: it was good. And perhaps it had been a secret tribute to 
Leo, a memory honoured and scuffed over in each careless encounter. 
Leo never knew how much Nick had imagined him, before he'd met 
him; or how the first kiss, the first feel of his body, had staggered a boy 
who till then had lived all in his mind. Leo wasn't imaginative: that was 
part of the point and the beauty of him. But he had a kind of genius, 
as far as Nick was concerned. That big red tick on his letter had 
bounced him into life. 
 He swilled round the whisky in his glass and shivered. There was 
a mood of homage and forgiveness: how could you begrudge the dead? 
And there was something else, a need to be forgiven himself, though he 
frowned the thought away. When Rosemary had asked him about the 
last time he'd seen her brother, he had blinked at her through the 
bleak little image of a parting on Oxford Street. The dense blind crowd, 
which could hide all kinds of intimacy in its rush, had this time made 
things impossible. Leo pushed away on his bike, crept through the red 
light and round the corner, without looking back. In fact the crowd 
almost hid the thing that Nick was remembering - the latest of several 
unhappy goodbyes not marked in *ny way as the last of all. In the 
following weeks he'd had to if*cue that routine sequence of actions, 
and clarify it in the light of what it had turned out to be. At the time it 
was just. HI impatient escape into the traffic. 
 But then, far more recently, three or four months ago, on a wri 
late February night, something else had happened, which he hadn't 
quite thought of this morning. Wani must already have been in Paris, 
and Nick had gone into the Shaftesbury on A sudden urge to pick up, 
the glow in his chest and the ache in his thighs. He went in through 
the little back bar, with its gas lire and non-combatant atmosphere, 
where you got served quicker. He noticed a couple of friends in his first 
half-sociable push through the crowd, and took in, while he waited to 
be served, the little black guy in a woolly hat, with his back to him, 
talking to a middle-aged white man. He saw how his beltless jeans 
stood away from his waist to give a glimpse of blue underwear, and 
had a moment's sharp unexpected recall of Leo, the double curve of his 
lower back and muscular bottom. There was sadness in the likeness, 
but the image lay quiet; it had more of the warmth of a blessing than 
the chill of a loss. Nick was pleased at that. 
 The pub was all potential - he gazed busily over the counter into 
the main bar, which was jostling with sexy self-regard. This little guy 
was much too skinny, really, to excite him, and too odd: he had a 
beard that was so bushy you could see it from behind, the black 
touched with grey beside the ears. Still, Nick looked at the chap he was 
talking to, caught his eye for a second, with a tiny smile of collusion. 
Then instead of ordering the usual practical pint, he asked for a rum 
and Coke. 
 He moved away with it, spoke to someone he knew, glancing off 
to check his own looks in one of the pub's many mirrors, and saw the 
black man in profile, turning briefly, unconsciously, to full face, and 
turning back again to answer his friend. Even then, the nostalgic idea 
that he was like Leo held off for a second or two die recognition that he 
was Leo. The greying beard hid the gauntness of his features, and the 
hat was rolled down to his eyebrows. Even after that Nick shunned the 
possibility, looked away, in case the man should meet his eye in die 
mirror with an answering slide into shock, and then glanced back, 
already hardened in the fiction that he hadn't recognized him. He 
pressed through into die other room. There was a party of French 
boys, there was a man he'd fancied at the Y, the whole bar was a fierce 
collective roar, and he edged and smiled politely through it like a sober 
late arrival at a wild party. His heart was thumping, and the expectant 
glow in his chest had become some neighbouring sensation, a clench 
of guilt and regret. It was simply an instinct, a reflex, that had made 
him turn away. A minute later he saw it could just as easily have 
thrown him towards Leo; but he was a coward. He was frightened of 
him - afraid of being rebuffed and full of grim doubts about what was 
happening to him. Perhaps he should go back in and check that it 
really was him - he was suddenly happy at the thought that it couldn't 
have been. He shouldered back through die crowd, sensing their vague 
annoyance at moving for him again; but stopped and got talking to the 
man from the Y, boldly but inattentively. He knew he had a bluebird 
tattooed on his left buttock, and he'd seen him with a sensible erection 
in the showers, but these cute memories seemed steadily more 
meaningless. He knocked back his drink in distracted gulps. Then he 
went downstairs to the Gents, and found, when he peeped sideways 
along the reeking trough, that the man had followed him; so diey stood 
there for a bit, in a tense delay whilst other people came and went, 
until the man nodded towards the empty lock-up. Nick said it was too 
risky, felt almost annoyed that this was happening, yet curiously timid 
and grateful too. The man said he lived in Soho, diey could go there, 
five minutes' walk, and Nick said OK. It was a kind of shield. Actually 
it was a bril- liant quick success, a fantasy granted, but Nick couldn't 
feel it. 'We'll go out the side way,' said the man, who also gave his 
name, Joe. 'Oh, OK,' said Nick. They went through the back bar, Nick 
with his hand on Joe's broad shoulder, sticking cheerfully close to him 
and turning a blank gaze across the room to find the little woolly-
hatted figure, utterly unknown to Joe, who had once been his lover. 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
'Oh my!' said Treat. 'Pansy salad!' 
 'It's really rather good,' said Nick. Treat watched him, over his 
cocktail glass, to see if he was joking. 'Is it all pansies?' 
 'What's that?' said Brad. 
 'It's mostly rather butch lettuce,' said Nick. 'They just put one or 
two pansies on top.' 
 'Butch lettuce…!' said Treat, full of flirty reproach. 'They're token 
pansies,' said Nick. 'I'm going to have to try it,' said Treat. 'You should 
certainly have it once,' said Nick. 'What's that?' said Brad. 'Treat wants 
to try the pansy salad,' said Nick. 'Oh… oh, I see, "pansy salad": oh 
my!' 
 'I just said that,' said Treat. 
 Nick smiled round the restaurant, relieved to see two famous 
writers at one table, and a famous actress at another. Brad Craft and 
Treat Rush, till now mere muscular spondees of American suggestion, 
had turned out to be a socially hungry pair. Brad was indeed big and 
muscular, handsome and pleasant, if rather slow on the uptake. Treat 
was the talker, about Nick's height, with a shiny blond fringe tfiat he 
kept in line with a pointed little finger. They had come over for Nat 
11.miner's wedding, and were spending the whole of October in 
l.iipjaud ('Anything to escape the New England fall!' said Treat). Today 
there was the film to talk about, but they were i learly working, with 
one eye always on the square beyond, at a thorough penetration of 
London, and were full of slapdash questions about people and tides. 
The point seemed to be to usk questions; they didn't bother much with 
the answers. They held out the threat of being easily bored. Nick hoped 
Gusto would amuse them. He saw Treat watching the kitchen through 
the blue glass wall, which turned the chef and his sweating minions 
into a faintly erotic cabaret of hard work. 'Do you know this guy Julius 
Money?' said Brad. 'Well, I've met him,' said Nick. 
 'Isn't that a great name? And kind of appropriate, I guess, right?' 
 'Oh yes,' said Nick. 'They have this huge Jacobean house in 
Norfolk, with a fabulous collection of paintings. Actually, I've always 
thought-' 
 'Oh, what about Pomona Brinkley!' said Treat. 'We met her. Now 
what's she all about?' 
 'I don't know her,' said Nick. 'She was great,' said Treat. 
 'Oh, yeah, we met this guy Lord John… Fanshaui' said Brad. 'He 
knows all about you! He said you were the most charming man in 
London.' 
 'Yeah,' said Treat, and looked lingeringly at Nick again. 
 'I feel he must have been thinking of someone else,' said Nick 
coyly, and didn't come clean that he'd never heard of his lordship. 'You 
know Nat really well, right?' said Treat. 
 'Oh yes,' said Nick, with suaver confidence. 'We were at Oxford 
together. Though these days I suppose I see more of his mother than 
him. She's a great friend of my friend Rachel Fedden.' He watched the 
name make its frail bid for recognition. 'He's so sweet.' 
 'No, he's lovely. He's had, you know, he's had a lot of problems.' 
 'Yeah…?' said Treat. 'It's such a shame he's not family.' 
 'Well…' said Nick. 'Where did you two meet him?' 
 'Oh, we met him at the Rosenheims' last fall, in East Hampton? 
Which of course is when we also met… Antoine.' 
 'And Martina,' said Brad. 'Yes, Martine,' said Nick. 
 'Yes, Brad loved Antoine,' said Treat. He put the straw to his lips 
and sucked pointedly at the reddish brown liquid. Brad said, 'Yeah, 
what a lovely guy.' 
 'So you haven't seen him since?' Nick knew he should warn 
them, but didn't know how to start. 'So Nat's some kind of lord, right?' 
said Brad. 'Yes,' said Nick. 
 'He's a marquess.' 
 'Oh my god…!' said Treat under his breath. 'What, so he's 
Marquess… is it Chirk!' 
 'Chirk is the family name. His tide is Marquess of Hanmer.' 
 'Brad…? You see who's over there?' 
 'So what do we call his old man?' said Brad, shaking his head as 
he turned in his chair. 
 'His father's the Duke of Flintshire. I should just call him sir.' 
 'Treat, my god, you're right… it's Betsy!' 
 'I want her to be in my film,' said Treat. 'She's such a great 
British actress.' 
 'I don't know if you will meet the Duke,' Nick went on, uncertain 
how much pomp he was borrowing from mere use of the word. He 
aimed to speak of the aristocracy in a factual tone, because of his 
shame at his father's tally of earls. 'I've only met him once. He never 
leaves the Castle. You know he's a cripple.' 
 'You British…' said Treat, only half-relinquishing his childlike 
gaze at Betsy Tilden. She seemed to loom for him as i marvel and a 
dare, and Nick could see him going over to her. She was much too 
young for Mrs Gereth, and quite wrong for Fleda Vetch. 'You're so 
brutal!' 
 'Mm…?' said Nick. 'You know, "he's a cripple" - really.' 
 'Oh…' said Nick, and blushed as if it was his lurking snobbery 
that had been criticized and not whatever this was. 'I'm sorry, but 
that's actually what the Duke calls himself. He hasn't walked since he 
was a boy.' He was slightly winded to be called on a point of delicacy - 
and one that impinged, obliquely but perceptibly, on their lunch. He 
cleared his throat and said, 'You know, there's something I should tell 
you… Ah, here we are.' He raised a hand as Wani appeared at the desk 
by the door, and as he got up he heard both Americans murmuring, 
'Oh my god…' 
 He went over to him, smiling and capable but in a fluster of 
emotions - pity, defiance, a desire to support him, and a dread of 
people seeing him. The girl held his stick for him as she helped him off 
with his coat. 'Hello,' said Wani; he didn't seem to want Nick to kiss 
him. He took his stick again, which was an elegant black one with a 
silver handle, and tapped across the marble floor with it. He still 
wasn't quite convincing with the stick; he was like a student actor 
playing an old man. The stick itself seemed both to focus and repel 
attention. 
 People looked and looked away. 
 The Americans stood up, Treat clutching his napkin to his chest. 
'Hey, Antoine, great to see you!' 
 'How are you!' said Brad, in a sporting wheeze. He laid his hand 
for a moment on Wani's back, and Nick on his other side was doing the 
same, so that they seemed to congratulate him; though what they felt 
was the knobs of his spine through the wool of his suit. Wani sat 
down, smiling with distant courtesy, as if this was a weekly meeting, 
with a known format and outcome. There was a brief pause of silent 
adjustment. Nick smiled at Wani, but the shock was refreshed by the 
presence of their guests and a bubble rose in his throat. 
 'So what were you talking about?' said Wani. His voice was if 
anything more languid than before, though with a hint that it couldn't 
be forced. 
 'I was just explaining to Brad and Treat about the Chirks,' said 
Nick. 
 'Ah yes,' said Wani, as if this was a very old and silly story. 'It's 
only a nineteenth-century dukedom, of course.' 
 'Right…' said Brad, peeping at him and seeming to share, out of 
mere nerves and inattentiveness, the view that this was absurdly 
recent. 
 Treat laughed brightly and said, 'That's old enough for me. That'll 
do just fine.' 
 Nick said, 'It was really Sharon who saved the day - the 
Duchess…' and offered the story to Wani. 
 'Yes, a life-saving transfusion of vinegar,' said Wani; they all 
laughed loudly, as at the joke of a tyrant; and there did seem to be a 
trace of cruelty in the remark, against himself and thus obscurely 
against them. 'Shall we order straight away.' Wani turned and raised a 
hand to Fabio and as he did so Brad and Treat looked at each other 
with expressionless clarity for three or four seconds. Fabio was with 
them at once, and as always seemed to guess and applaud their 
decisions, to echo and confide to memory each item they mentioned; 
and perhaps it was only Nick who felt the new briskness in his tone 
and the quick decay of his laugh. Brad asked about the pansy salad 
and Fabio obliged with a noncommittal joke, and moved round the 
table holding the reclaimed menus flat against his chest. Nick said 
how well the restaurant was doing and smiled to insist on their part in 
its success, since Wani and he had been guests at its opening last year 
and had made it their local; and Fabio said, 'We can't complain… er, 
Nick, we can't complain,' just glancing at Wani on the second complain 
with Mimething cold in his eyes, and then at the new arrivals at the 
door, who typically were the Stallards. Nick watched Fabio go to greet 
them and the coldness had gone - he heard the usual mutual primping 
of head waiter and fashionable customers. Well, Fabio must have been 
shaken to see Wani so changed; but there was something else in his 
reaction, fear and displeasure, as if Wani's presence was no longer 
good for business. 
 Sophie and Jamie came over, Jamie slapping Wani on the 
shoulder and Sophie wrinkling her nose across the table rather than 
kissing him. Jamie had just played the romantic lead in a low-budget 
Hollywood comedy, and had been praised for his uncanny recreation of 
a dim but handsome Old Etonian with floppy hair. 
 Sophie was pregnant, and thus resting, though thick packets 
that could well have been film scripts lay in the cradle-like basket she 
was carrying. Treat and Brad were dirilled to meet them, since Jamie 
was still a possible for Owen Gereth in Spoils; cards were exchanged, 
and social visits that were never going to happen were delightedly 
agreed on. Nothing was said about Wani's health, though Sophie, as 
they went off to their table, looked back with a finger-wave and a 
cringing smile of condolence. 'Wow, what a sweet guy,' said Brad. 
 Nick, taking praise for the introduction, said, 'Old Jamie…? 
Yeah…' 
 'You guys go way back?' 
 'Yes - well, again we were all at Oxford together. He's really much 
more a friend of Wani's.' 
 But Wani seemed to disown any further intimacy. He sat very 
still, with his slender hands on the tablecloth. His square-shouldered 
jacket was buttoned but stood forward like a loose coat. He 
commanded attention now by pity and respect as he once had by 
beauty and charm. The claim to attention was constant, but it had 
turned fiercer and quieten Nick thought he still looked wonderful in a 
way, though to admit it was to make an unbearable comparison. He 
was twenty-five years old. He said, 'Stallard has always been an 
absurd figure, and he's found the perfect partner in the lovely Miss 
Tipper.' 
 'Oh…' said Brad. 'Is she… er…' 
 'It was a good match for him. She's the daughter of the ninth 
richest man in Britain, and he's the son of a bishop.' 
 'Bishops don't make that much, I guess,' said Treat, and took 
another pull on his cocktail straw. 
 'Bishops make absolutely nothing,' said Wani; and after a second 
he flashed a smile round the table at the imbecility of bishops. 
Everyone else smiled too, in nervous collusion. Wani's face, gaunt and 
blotched, had taken on new possibilities of expression - the repertoire 
of someone not only older but quite different, someone passed 
unknown in the street, was unexpectedly his. He must have looked at 
himself in the mirror, winced and raised his eyebrows, and seen this 
unbearable stranger mugging back at him. Clearly he couldn't be held 
responsible for the latest ironies and startlements of his face, though 
there were moments when he seemed to exploit them. The cheekbones 
were delicate, the frontal bone heavy, even brutal - it was his father's 
look, brought out sometimes in the past by candlelight and now 
exposed to the light of day. 
 Nick said, 'You know Wani's father's been made a lord,' not sure 
whom he was pandering to. 
 'Oh wow,' said Brad. 'Does that mean you'll be a lord one day 
too?' 
 There were several seconds of silence till Wani said, 'It's not 
hereditary. What on earth are you drinking, by the way, Treat?' 
 'Don't ask…!' said Brad, eager with embarrassment. 
 'It's… what's he called?… Humphrey? Humphrey's latest 
invention. It's a Black Monday' 
 Wani gave his grin again, bright and sarcastic in effect. 'That 
didn't take long,' he said. Humphrey was Gusto's venerable barman, 
keeper (up to a point) of long tabs and starlets' secrets. 'He trained on 
the Queen Mary. There's nothing he doesn't know about cocktails.' 
 'Well it's, what is it? It's dark rum, and cherry brandy, and 
sambuca. And loads of lemon juice. It tastes like a really old-fashioned 
laxative,' said Treat. 
 'I can't drink any more,' said Wani, 'but when I hear that, I don't 
mind.' 
 There was afcrief pause. Treat ran his finger along his fringe, and 
Brad sighed and said, 'Yeah… I wanted to ask…' They both of them, 
nicely enough, seemed relieved the subject had been brought up. 
 Wani tucked in his chin. 'Oh, a disaster,' he said, frowning from 
one to the other. 'Quite unbelievable. One of my bloody companies lost 
two-thirds of its value between lunchtime and teatime.' 
 'Oh… oh, right,' said Brad, and gave an awkward laugh. 'Yeah, 
we had it real bad too.' 
 'Fifty billion wiped off the London stock exchange in one day.' 
 Treat looked at him levelly, to show he'd registered but wouldn't 
challenge this evasion, and said, 'Hey, the Dow was down five hundred 
points.' 
 'God, yes,' said Wani, 'well, it was all your fault.' Brad didn't 
argue, but said job losses on Wall Street were terrible. 
 'Oh, fuck that,' said Wani. 'Anyway, it bounces back. It has 
already. It always recovers. It always recovers.' 
 'It's a worrying time for all of us,' said Nick responsibly. 
 Wani gave a mocking look and said, 'We'll all be absolutely fine.' 
And after that it was impossible to approach him on the subject of his 
fatal illness. Nick saw it was perplexing for the Americans, who had 
met him as a man about to get married. Now natural concern was 
mixed with furtive thinking back. 
 During lunch Brad, like Wani, drank only water, and Nick and 
Treat shared a bottle of Chablis. Treat touched Nick's arm a lot, and 
involved him in quiet side-chats about what they might do later. Nick 
tried to keep general conversation going. Wani's presiding coolness 
made them all hesitate. He seemed to play with their anxiety about 
him. Brad and Treat asked questions, and marvelled at dieir luck in 
having Wani to answer them. If Nick answered a question Wani 
listened to him and then gave a flat litde codicil or correction. 
 His technique was to hold a subject up and show his command 
of it, and then to throw it away in smiling contempt for their interest in 
it. He ate very little, and a sense of his disgust at the expensive food, 
and at himself for being unable to eat it, seeped into the conversation. 
He looked at the slivers of chicken and translucent courgettes as 
pitiful tokens of the world of pleasure, and clutched the table as 
though to resist a slow tug at the cloth that would sweep the whole 
vision away. 
 The question of the film was slow to come up, and Nick was shy 
to mention it, just because it was his own project. He'd spent months 
writing a script, and it was almost as if he'd written the book it was 
based on: all he wanted was praise. He often imagined watching the 
film, in the steep circle of the Curzon cinema - absorbing the grateful 
unanimous sigh of the audience at the exact enactment of what he'd 
written; in fact he seemed to have directed the film as well. He lay 
awake in the bliss of Philip French's review. Somehow another James 
film, The Bostonians, had come up, and the crazy thing that the actor 
who played Superman starred in it. 
 'One can imagine,' said Nick, 'only too well, the Master's irony, 
not to speak of his covert excitement, at that idea…'; though the others 
perhaps imagined it less vividly than he did. 
 'Oh, we loved your letters, by the way,' said Treat, with another 
squeeze of his arm: 'so British? 'Well, I guess we should talk about… 
our film,' said Brad. 
 Just then the desserts, mere bonnes bouches in foot-wide 
puddles of pink coulis, were set in front of them. Wani looked at his 
plate as if it and the film were equally unlikely confections. 'Or we 
could talk about it next week…' 
 'I don't mind,' said Nick, his heart thumping. He was suddenly 
incredulous that his beautiful plan, the best fruit of his passion for 
Henry James, depended on the cooperation of these two stupid people. 
He sensed already that it wasn't a question of changes, it was some 
larger defection from the plan. 'I mean we love what you've done, Nick.' 
 'Yeah, it's great,' said Treat. 
 Brad hesitated, peering at the grid of spun sugar that jutted from 
his loganberry parfait. 'You know, we've talked about this in the letter 
a certain amount. It's just the problem of the story where the guy 
doesn't get the girl, and then the stuff they're all fighting over - the 
Spoils, right? - goes up in flames. It kinda sucks.' 
 'Does it…?' said Nick; and, trying to be charming, 'It's just like 
life, though, isn't it - maybe too like life for a… conventional movie. It's 
about someone who loves things more than people. And who ends up 
with nothing, of course. I know it's bleak, but then I think it's probably 
a very bleak book, even though it's essentially a comedy.' 
 'Yeah, I haven't read the book,' said Treat. 
 'Oh…' said Nick, and coloured with proxy embarrassment, with 
the shame Treat should have been feeling. His loose idea of getting 
some time alone with him vanished in a sigh and a shrug. 'You've read 
the book, Antoine?' said Treat. 
 Wani was rose-lipped, popping in quarter-spoonfuls of ice cream, 
sucking them from the spoon and letting them slip down in luxurious 
spasms like a child with tonsillitis; he said, 'No, I haven't. I pay Nick to 
do that for me.' 
 'I don't know what you think,' said Brad, 'about the idea of 
including just a short love scene for Owen and… I'm sorry…' 
 'Fleda,' said Nick. 'Fleda Vetch.' 
 'Fleda VetcM said Treat, with a brief blare of a laugh. 'What sort 
of a name is that? Doesn't she sound like the ugliest girl in die school?' 
 'I think it's rather a touching name,' said Nick; and Brad looked 
reprovingly across the table. 
 'She sounds like a witch,' muttered Treat, as if agreeing to shut 
up; but then went on, 'I mean, can I imagine asking Meryl Streep, "Oh, 
Miss Streep, we've got this really great role for you, will you please, 
please play the lovely Fleda VetcfH" She'd think I'd just thrown up all 
over the phone.' 
 They all laughed except Wani, who said, very quiet and superior, 
as if she was someone else they would see at Nat Hanmer's wedding, 
'Fleda Vetch is what she is called.' 
 'Yeah, I don't care overly what she's called,' said Brad. 'But… 
Owen and Fleda - we need to see them together more. We need some… 
passion!' 
 'We need him getting all hot,' said Treat, flicking his glance 
towards Jamie's table. Then he winked at Nick. 'Did he ever… you 
know…' lowering his voice and looking coyly away, 'at Oxford… like, 
with other guys - I'm sure I heard someone say-' 
 'He's straight,' said Wani. 
 'Oh, OK,' said Treat, with a wobble of the head, as if to say, who's 
talking about straight here? But there was something bleaker than 
impatience in Wani's tone. He was pale and motionless, gazing at the 
far rim of his plate but clearly caught by some unpostponable inner 
reckoning. He jerked his chair back a little, and his stick, swinging off 
from the back of it, fell on the marble with a ringing clatter: he groped 
round for it, bending down, and Brad jumped up to help him, and 
reclaimed the stick and managed to absorb the blame and reassure 
the restaurant with his friendly bulk. Wani's mouth was held shut and 
he had an intensely private expression of imminent surrender. It made 
Nick think for a second of the bedroom. He stood and went off at a 
hobbling lurch among the tables. 
 A few seconds later Nick followed, frowning down at the floor, 
giving a brisk nod to Fabio's cool 'Signore?' In the black marble 
lavatory there were two cubicles, and in one of them, with the door still 
ajar, Wani was stooping and vomiting. Nick came in behind him and 
stood there for a moment before laying a hand on his side. Wani 
flinched, whispered, 'Oh fuck…' and crouched and shuddered as he 
threw up again. There seemed to be far more coming out than the 
invalidish meal that had gone in. Nick touched him lightly, wanting to 
help him and discourage him at the same time. He looked over his 
shoulder into the bowl, with a certain resolve, and saw the bits of 
chicken and greens in the pool of the prompdy regurgitated ice cream. 
He plucked out sheets of paper from the dispenser and wondered if he 
should wipe Wani's face for him; then he stood and waited, which 
Wani didn't object to. He thought with bleak hilarity that this was their 
most intimate moment for many months. He looked at the streaky 
black walls and found himself thinking of nights here the year before, 
both cubicles sometimes carelessly busy with the crackle of paper and 
patter of credit card. 
 There was a useful shiny ledge above the cistern, and they would 
go in in turn. 
 The nights sped by in unrememberable brilliance. 'Well,' said 
Wani, grasping his stick and giving Nick a fearful smile, 'no more 
parfait for Antoine.' Wani had brought the car to Gusto, and Nick 
drove him back in it to Lowndes Square. 
 'Thanks very much,' said Wani, in a whispery drawl. 
 'That's all right, old chap,' said Nick. He parked opposite die 
house and they sat for a minute. Wani was taking deep breaths, as if 
to ready himself for a race or plunge. He didn't try to help Nick by 
explaining himself- well, he never had, he was his own law and his 
own licence. If Nick asked him how he felt he was drily impatient with 
him, bodi for not knowing and for wanting to know. It was the unfair 
prerogative of illness. Nick reached a hand over die steering wheel and 
swept the thin dust off die black leather hood of die dashboard. How 
cars themselves changed as diey aged; at first they were possibilities 
made solid and fast, agents of dreams that kept a glint of dreams 
about them, a keen narcotic smell; dien slowly they disclosed their 
unguessed quaintness and clumsiness, they seemed to fade into the 
dim disgrace between one fashion and another. 'I really must get a new 
car,' said Wani. 'I know, it's frightfully dusty' 
 'It's a fucking antique.' Nick peered over his shoulder into the 
cramped back seat, and remembered Ricky, the stupid genius of the 
old days (which was to say, last summer), sitting there with his legs 
wide apart. 'I suppose you'll keep the number plate.' 
 
 'God, yes. It's worth a thousand pounds.' 
 'Dear old WHO 6.' 
 'OK…' said Wani, cold at any touch of sentiment. Nick glanced up 
and saw Lady Ouradi looking down from one of the drawing-room 
windows. She held the net curtain aside and gazed out into the 
browning leaves of the plane trees, the long dull chasm of the square. 
Nick waved, but she seemed not to have seen them; or perhaps she 
had already seen them but let her gaze wander, as it was clearly prone 
to, down the imagined vista of the past or future. He noted her austere 
wool dress, the single string of pearls. To Nick she was a creature of 
indoors, of unimaginable exiled mornings and measured afternoons; 
her gesture as she held the white curtain back was like the parting of a 
medium through which she wasn't quite supposed to see or be seen. 
'You're OK for money?' Wani said. 
 'Darling, I'm fine.' Nick turned and smiled at him, with die 
mischievous tenderness of a year ago. 'Your little start-up present has 
grown and grown, you know.' He put his hand discreedy into Wani's, 
where it lay on his thigh. A few seconds later Wani withdrew his hand, 
so as to get out his handkerchief. There was a question in the air, all 
this week, since he had come back from Paris, and it was only his 
pride which kept it from being asked: which it wouldn't be in words, 
but in some brave melting gesture. Instead he said, 'You should really 
move out of the Feddens'. Get a place of your own.' 
 'I know,' said Nick, 'it is rather dotty. But we muddle along 
somehow… I'm not at all sure they could manage without me.' 
 'One never knows…' said Wani. He turned his head away and 
looked out at the pavement, the ugly concrete planters in the square 
gardens, a bicycle frame chained to the railings. 'I was thinking I might 
leave you the Clerkenwell building.' 
 'Oh…' Nick glanced at him and dien away, almost scowling in 
shock and reproach. 
 'Of course I don't mean you should live there.' 
 'Well, no, that's not the point…' 
 'I suppose it's a bit odd leaving you something unfinished.' 
 After a couple of breaths, Nick said, 'Let's not talk about you 
leaving things.' 
 And went on, with awful delicacy, 'Anyway, it will be finished by 
then.' It was impossible to say the right thing. Wani grinned at him 
coldly for a second. 
 Until now he had only had the story of Wani being ill; he had 
taken the news about with him and brought off the sombre but 
thrilling effect, once or twice, of saying, 'I'm afraid he's dying,' or 'He 
nearly died.' It had been his own drama, in which he'd felt, as well as 
the horror and pity of it, the thump of a kind of self-importance. Now, 
sitting beside him and being offered buildings, he felt humbled and 
surprisingly angry. 
 'Well, we'll see,' said Wani. 'I mean, I'm assuming you'd like it.' 
 'I don't find it easy to think about,' said Nick. 'I need to get this 
sorted out, Nick. 
 I'm seeing the lawyers on Friday' 
 'What would I do with the Clerkenwell building?' said Nick 
sulkily. 
 'You'd own it,' said Wani. 'It'll have thirty thousand square feet of 
office space. You can get someone to manage it for you and you can 
live on the rent for the rest of your life.' Nick didn't ask how he was 
supposed to go about finding a manager. Possibly Sam Zeman could 
help him with that. The phrase 'the rest of your life' had come out pat, 
almost weightless, a futurity Wani wasn't going to bother imagining. 
For Nick it was very strange to find it attached to an office block near 
Smithfield Market. Wani knew he hated the design of the building; 
there was a sharp tease in the gift, even a kind of lesson. 'What are 
you going to do about Martine?' said Nick. 'Oh, just the same. She'll 
carry on getting her allowance, at least until she marries. Then she 
gets a lump sum.' 
 'Oh…' Nick nodded dimly at the wisdom of this, but then had to 
say, 'I didn't know you gave her an allowance.' 
 Wani slid him the smile that had once been slyly grand but now 
had something vicious in it. 'Well, not me,' he said. 'I assumed you'd 
worked it out. Mamma's always paid her. Or kept her, rather.' 
 'I see…' said Nick, after a moment, thinking how litde Wani had 
taught him about Lebanese customs. He seemed to search for the 
discreet transaction in the tilted mantelpiece mirror. He glanced at the 
house again, but Wani's mother had dropped the curtain and absolute 
discretion reigned: the black front door, the veiled windows, the 
eggshell sheen of property. 'What a charming arrangement, to keep 
your son's girlfriend.' 
 'For god's sake,' murmured Wani, looking away. 'She was never 
my girlfriend.' 
 'No, of course not, I see…' said Nick, blushing and hurrying to 
cover his own foolishness, and also feeling absurdly relieved. 'Of 
course you must never tell Papa. It's his last illusion.' 
 Nick didn't imagine seeing much of Bertrand in 'the rest of his 
life'. The little aesthete already felt the prohibition of that closed black 
door: which opened as he looked at it, to reveal Monique and the old 
servant woman, dressed in black, ready but not coming forward. 
'They're expecting you,' Nick said quiedy. 
 Wani looked across and then almost closed his eyes in droll 
disdain. All his old habits were there, and die beat of his lashes 
brought back occasions in the past when Nick had basked in his 
selfishness. He reached beside the seat for his stick. 'How are you 
getting back?' 
 'I think I'll walk,' said Nick, unthinkingly fit. 'I could do with 
some exercise.' 
 Wani pulled back the handle and the door cracked open onto the 
cold blue afternoon. 
 'You know I love you very much, don't you,' said Nick, not 
meaning it in the second before he said it, but moved by saying it into 
feeling it might still be true. It seemed a way of covering his 
ungraciousness about Wani's will, of showing he was groping for a 
sense of scale. Wani snuffled, looked across the road at his mother, 
but didn't echo Nick's words. He had never told him he loved him. But 
it seemed possible to Nick that he might mean it without saying it. He 
said, 'By the way, I should warn you that Gerald seems to be in a bit of 
trouble.' 
 'Oh, really?' said Nick. 
 'I don't know exactly what's happened, but it's something to do 
with the Fedray takeover last year. A spot of creative accounting.' 
 'Really? What, you mean the Maurice Tipper thing;' 
 'I think you can be pretty sure Maurice has covered his back. 
And Gerald will probably be all right. But tiiere may be a bit of a fuss.' 
 'Goodness…' Nick thought of Rachel first of all, and then of 
Catherine, who for the past few weeks had been in a wildly excitable 
state. 'How do you know about this?' 
 'I had a call from Sam Zeman earlier.' 
 'Right,' said Nick, slighdy jealous. 'I must give him a ring.' They 
got out of the car, and Nick dawdled across the road, finding it hard to 
go at Wani's pace. He kissed Monique and explained that Wani had 
brought up his lunch; she nodded, pursed her lips and swallowed in a 
funny mimetic reflex. She was dignified and withdrawn, but as she 
touched her son's upper arm the glow of a long-surrendered power 
over him came into her face, the animal solace of being allowed to love 
and protect him, even against such hopeless odds. Wani himself, with 
the women at each elbow, seemed to shrink into their keeping; the 
sustaining social malice of the past two hours abandoned him at the 
threshold. They forgot their manners, and the door was closed again 
without anyone saying goodbye. i-6 Nick crossed Knightsbridge and 
went through Albert Gate into the Park. He swung his arms, and his 
calves and thighs ached with guilty vigour. There was so much to 
think about, and the Park itself seemed pensive, the chestnuts 
standing in pools of their shed leaves, the great planes, slower to 
change, still towering tan and gold; but all he wanted to do was march 
along. A group of young women on horseback came trotting down 
Rotten Row, and he crossed behind them, over die damp, crusted 
sand. He didn't mind the north-easterly breeze. It was the time of year 
when the atmosphere streamed with unexpected hints and memories, 
and a paradoxical sense of renewal. 
 He thought of meeting Leo after work, always early, the chill of 
promise in the air. Once or twice they met at the bandstand, away over 
there, with the copper ogee roof: strange that that particular shape 
should have floated on its slender pillars above the quick kiss, quick 
touch, odd nervous avoidance of their meetings. He took the long 
diagonal that went past Watts's monument to, or of, Physical Energy: 
the huge-thighed horseman reining back and gazing, in a ferment of 
discovery, towards Kensington Palace. Nick gave it the smug glance 
which showed that as a critic he noticed it and as a Londoner he took 
it for granted. 
 He thought about the Clerkenwell building. What Wani had 
bought was three narrow Victorian properties making a corner block, 
one extending deep behind the others into a high iron-and-glass-roofed 
workshop. They were solidly built, of blackened brick which showed up 
plum red when they were knocked down. There were doorbells of 
moribund trades, a glass beveller, a 'Church and Legal' printer. 
 There were boarded-up windows, industrial wiring, the light 
vandalism of use. 
 Wani had taken Nick to see diem, and Nick's whole impulse was 
to do tliem up and live in them. He went into the cellars and attics, 
heaved open trapdoors, climbed onto the leads, and looked down 
through the steep glass roof into the workshop where Wani was pacing 
around in his beautiful suit, flipping his car keys in his hand. Nick 
saw their friends coming to parties and dancing in that room. 
Something in Wani's impatient, unseeing manner told him this was 
never going to happen. He felt like a child whose desperate visionary 
plea has no chance of persuading a parent. And of course the 
buildings came down - for a month or two the backs of other buildings 
not seen for a century felt die common sunlight, and dien Baalbek 
House, named by Wani as if he'd written a poem, started to go up. Nick 
cast about but really he'd never seen a more meretricious design than 
that of Baalbek House. His own ideas were discounted with the 
grunting chuckle of someone wedded to anotlier vision of success and 
defiantly following cheaper advice. And now this monster Lego house, 
with its mirror windows and maroon marble cladding, was to be Nicks 
for life. 
 When he turned into Kensington Park Gardens Nick remembered 
what Wani had said about Gerald, and started walking more slowly, as 
if to resist a strange acceleration of trouble. He was shy about meeting 
Gerald, who could be aggressive when in the wrong and sarcastic when 
he needed support. The Range Rover was parked outside the house, 
which might mean he'd come back early from Parliament. It looked 
significant. As so often, Nick didn't know what he was supposed to 
know - or indeed what he did know, since i native accounting was just 
a jocular phrase to him. Behind i lu- Range Rover a man in a reddish 
leather jacket was leaning mi the roof of a parked car and talking to 
another man sitting tit the wheel. He looked up as Nick approached, 
and carried on talking while his eyes, in one fluent sequence, seemed 
to lind him, hold him, scan him and dismiss him. Nick turned in at No 
.48, and glanced back while he felt for his keys: the man was staring at 
him, and raised his chin as though about to call out, but then said 
nothing. He smiled unnervingly. His friend in the car passed him a 
camera through the window and he put it to his eye and took three 
pictures in two seconds -Nick was mesmerized by the lazy precision of 
the clicks; and too surprised to know what he felt. He felt victimized, 
and flattered, pretty important and utterly insignificant, since they 
clearly had no idea who he was. He thought in dignity he shouldn't 
answer questions, and was confused by their not asking him any. It 
took him an age to open the blue door. 
 In the hall everything seemed calm. Elena was in the kitchen and 
Nick said hello and waited for a sign from her. She was preparing die 
'meal and a half, the separate portion, like a child's or an invalid's, 
that was made for Gerald when he was going to be late at the House. 
'Have you seen what's going on outside?' said Nick. Elena thumbed her 
pastry expressively, but only said, 'I don't know.' 
 'Is Gerald here?' 
 'Is gone to work.' 
 'Oh good…' 
 'Miz Fed upstairs with his Lord.' Elena radiated resentment, and 
Nick didn't risk exploring its cause, whether it was Gerald or what was 
being done to him: it felt large enough to include everyone. 'You take 
the tray?' she said. 
 The kettle was coming to the boil, and the tray was ready with 
two teacups and the little sweet lebkuchen that Rachel liked. Nick 
warmed the pot and put in two spoonfuls of lapsang. It was die set 
witli a pink Petit Trianon in a wreath on each cup and saucer, dull and 
pale now from the fury of the dishwasher. He poured on the water, 
gave it a good stir, dropped the lid on, and picked up the tray. Elena 
looked at him more amiably but shook her head. 'Is Street of Shame,' 
she said. 'Is Street of Shame, Nick.' It was the Private Eye phrase for 
Fleet Street, which Gerald had once teased Toby with, but Nick wasn't 
sure if she meant that or if she meant that Kensington Park Gardens 
itself had been brought down. 
 The drawing-room door was open, and Nick slowed again before 
going in. Lionel was saying, 'If he has been a bloody fool then he'll have 
to face the consequences. If he hasn't, then we have infinite resources 
to demonstrate the fact.' His manner was as quiet as ever, but without 
its usual cordiality: he sounded as if he expected the former option, 
and the stain it would bring on the family. Nick rattled the tray and 
went in. Rachel was standing by die mantelpiece, Lionel sitting in an 
armchair, and for a second Nick thought of the scene in The Portrait of 
a Lady when Isabel discovers her husband sitting while Mme Merle is 
standing, and sees at once that they are more intimate than she had 
realized. 'Ah, my dear…' said Rachel, as Nick came forward with a 
slight mime of servility, which wasn't spotted as a joke. Lionel greeted 
him with his eyes, and went on, 'When's he due back?' 
 'He's got a late division,' Rachel murmured. And Nick, setting 
down the tray, saw that though he hadn't chanced in on a secret he 
had caught the note of an older, more unguarded friendship than he'd 
heard before, the shared intelligence of brother and sister. 'Thanks so 
much,' said Rachel. 'Did you have your picture taken?' said Lionel. 'I 
did,' said Nick; and for some reason went on, 'Not my best side, I'm 
afraid.' 
 'No, they're awful about that,' said Lionel, clearly resolving to 
show by his humour and by sitting down squarely and comfortably 
that there was nothing to worry about. 'I was tipped off, so I came 
through the gardens.' 
 'Thank heavens for the gardens,' said Rachel. 'With four exits 
they really can't keep it covered.' 
 Nick smiled and hesitated. There wasn't a cup for him, but he 
longed to be included. He said tactfully, 'Is there anything I can do?' 
 'Oh…' Lionel and Rachel looked at each other, searching for an 
answer among their own proprieties and uncertainties. Perhaps it was 
too shaming, even with die press outside, for Rachel to talk about. 
'Some rather awful things are being said about Gerald,' she said, in 
her tellingly passive fashion. 
 Nick bit his cheek and said, 'Wani… Ouradi told me something 
about it.' 
 'Oh, well it's out, tlien,' said Rachel. 'It will come out, darling,' 
said Lionel. 
 Rachel poured the tea, and seemed lost in this sombre idea, 
passing Lionel a cup and die plate of lebkuchen. And what about 
Maurice Tipper?' she said. 
 Lionel sat scrunching his biscuit in a vigilant squirrel-like way, 
and licked the sugar from his lips before saying, 'Maurice Tipper is a 
cold-blooded thug.' 
 'That's certainly true,' said Rachel. 
 'My guess is that he'll only help Gerald if doing so helps himself.' 
 'Mm… I saw Sophie at lunchtime,' Nick offered. 'I thought she 
was rather evasive.' 
 'Thank god Tobias didn't marry that false little girl!' said Rachel, 
clutching at this out-of-date consolation and laughing witli new 
bitterness and relief. 
 'Quite!' said Nick. 
 'Two things you can do,' said Lionel. 'Obviously, don't talk to 
anyone. And could you bear to pop out and buy the Standard?' 
 'Of course,' said Nick, suddenly more nervous of the 
photographers. 
 'And a third thing,' said Rachel. 'Could you try and find my 
daughter?' 
 'Ah, yes…' said Lionel. 
 'She's frightfully up at the moment,' Rachel said. 'You've no idea 
what she'll do.' 
 'Well, I'll try,' said Nick. 
 'Isn't she taking the pills?' said Lionel, firm and vague at once. 
 'They can't quite get it right,' said Rachel. 'Two months ago she 
could barely speak - now she can barely stop speaking. It is a strain.' 
 They both looked at Nick and he said, 'I'll see what I can do.' He 
sensed a certain hardness towards himself, a request that he should 
prove his usefulness to the family. Then he thought briskness might be 
a mark of confidence. A structure of command, long laid away in 
velvet, had been rapidly reassembled. 
 Catherine came home about six. She was thinking of buying a 
house in Barbados, and had been having a long talk with Brentford 
about it. Nick could tell from the smell of her hair when she kissed him 
that she'd been smoking pot; she seemed both elated and spaced out. 
Flashes went off as she opened the front door, but she treated them 
almost as natural phenomena, the meteors of her own atmosphere. 
'What was all that about?' she said, hardly waiting for an answer. 
 Another visit from the Prime Minister?' 
 'Not exactly,' said Nick, following her upstairs and thinking that 
whatever was going on made another visit from the PM vn y unlikely. 
'We've been wondering where you were,' he said. K. uhel was on the 
phone in the drawing room, talking to (icrald in Westminster, and 
seemed to be getting the reassurances she needed; she was oddly 
placable. She smiled indulgently at Toby's portrait and said, 'Of 
course, darling, just tarry on as normal. We'll try…! We'll see you… 
Yup, yup.' 
 Nick went to die front windows, which looked very large and 
shiny in the ea'rly dusk. It was unsettling to know there were men 
waiting outside, their patience barely tested. The curtains were never 
closed, and when freed from the brocaded bands that held them back 
they still curved stiffly apart. Nick leant in to close the shutters, 
seldom used, which unfolded with alarming cracks. 
 When Rachel explained what was going on, Catherine seemed 
distantly enthusiastic. 'Extraordinary…' she said. 'It could be quite 
serious actually,' said Nick. 
 'Not prison, you mean?' It was the pot perhaps that gave her this 
smile of benign speculation. 
 'No,' said Rachel crossly. 'Besides, he's done absolutely nothing 
wrong. It's clearly all to do with mat hateful man Tipper.' 
 'Then Tipper can go to prison,' said Catherine. 'Or both the 
Tippers, better still.' 
 Rachel gave a twitch of a smile to show the subject of die joke 
touched her a litde too nearly. 'They're only making investigations. No 
one's been arrested, much less charged.' 
 'Right.' 
 'Uncle Lionel's been here, and he was very reassuring.' 
 Nick murmured endorsingly and said, 'Would anyone like a 
drink?' 
 Anyway, darling, you know your father would never do a tiling 
like that. He's far too experienced. Not to mention dead honest!' Rachel 
coloured slightly; it this affirmation, 'So is it in the paper?' 
 'It's not in the Standard tonight. And Toby says they won't touch 
it at the Telegraph - he's spoken to Gordon. Daddy says it's just the 
sort of thing the Guardian would love to blow out of all proportion.' 
 'I'll have um…' Catherine said, bearing down on the drinks table 
with a fascinated smile but in the end only managing to think of a gin-
and-tonic. Nick mixed her one, juniper lost in quinine: when she was 
on the up curve it was best to be careful with alcohol, annoyance, 
laughter - any cause of excitement. They stood with their glasses at 
their chins and nodded 'Cheers!' in a meaningful way. 
 'The thing is, darling,' said Rachel, 'we simply mustn't talk to 
anybody at the moment. Oath of silence, Daddy says.' 
 'I don't know anything about stocks and shares, so you needn't 
worry.' 
 'It's what they make you say, though… Darling, or they twist 
your words. They've got no principles.' 
 'They're not your friend,' said Nick, which had been Lionel's dry 
way of putting it. 'They've got the morals of rattlesnakes,' said Rachel. 
Catherine sat on a sofa, swayed her head over her glass, and looked 
from one to the other of them. 
 She started to smile and they flinched, with the feeling they were 
being mocked; but the smile spread and they saw it was to do with 
something else, the flowering of a clear belief, just touched with playful 
calculation, that they would share her happiness. 'I've had such a 
thrilling day,' she said. They sat down to dinner in the kitchen. 
Normally Nick enjoyed the nights when Gerald was kept late at 
Westminster - the mood of snug reduction and humorously tolerated 
crisis; if they had guests, or if Gerald and Rachel were due out, there 
was even a thrill to Gerald's absence: it was a wing-brush of power, the 
sign of demands and decisions greater than dinner. Tonight his 
absence was more critical. It was odd that he hadn't come home. 
Clearly he attached great importance to carrying on normally. 
Catherine said, 'What's Gerald voting about?' 
 'Oh, darling, I don't know… it's obviously something pretty 
major.' 
 'Can't we ring him?' 
 'Well, he's nbt answering the phone in the office. And if he's in 
the Chamber, or somewhere else about the Palace,' said Rachel 
impressively, 'then we couldn't reach him anyway.' 
 'He'll be back straight after the vote,' said Nick. He knew that 
Gerald had Penny's new mobile phone; Rachel must be trying to spare 
him a wild, irrelevant pep talk from his daughter. 'What is a takeover?' 
said Catherine. 'Well, it's when one company buys up another.' 
 'They acquire a majority of the shares,' said Nick. 'Then they have 
control.' 
 'So are they saying Gerald didn't have these shares?' 
 Rachel said, as if judiciously filtering the facts for her child, 'I 
think sometimes perhaps people fiddle with the price of the shares.' 
 'Make them more valuable?' 
 'Exactly.' 
 'Or less, of course,' said Nick. 'Mm…' said Rachel. 'And how 
would they do that?' 
 'Well, I suppose they sort of… um 'Mm…' said Nick, after a bit. 
They smiled doubtfully at their own unworldliness. 'It's not the same 
as asset-stripping, anyway,' said Catherine. 'No…' said Rachel, witli 
hesitant firmness. 
 'Because that's what Sir Maurice Tipper docs. Toby told me. 
Maurice Tipper, Asset Stripper. III. II'S when they get hold of 
something, it's like an old house, they strip out all the marble 
fireplaces before they demolish it.' 
 'And leave everyone on the street,' said Nick. 'Exacdy!' said 
Catherine. 
 'That, of course, is what Badger's supposed to have done all over 
Africa,' said Rachel, with a guilty grimace. 'I don't know if it's true.' 
 'Oh, Badger…' said Catherine, indulgent and dismissive at once. 
'What's become of poor old Badger, lately, I wonder.' 
 'He's often away,' said Rachel, as if to excuse her vagueness 
about him. 'I'm going to get in touch with him.' 
 'Well, you could.' 
 'I'm going to catch up with quite a number of people who've 
dropped out of my life. It's so pathetic to lose touch,' Catherine said, 
with a lively but disgusted look at her last summer, when everything 
about her had been pathetic. 
 'I'm sure he's not expecting a call…' said Rachel. 'I saw Russell 
today, for instance.' 
 'Oh really?' said Rachel thinly. 'Do you remember?' 
 'Oh, I do.' 
 'Me too,' said Nick. 'He was asking about everybody.' 
 'I should still be a bit careful with Russell,' said Nick, with a 
supportive glance at Rachel. 
 'But that was all before…!' said Catherine, in happy exasperation. 
 Later, she said, 'If Gerald resigns, you'll be able to come to 
Barbados with me, that would be perfect, wouldn't it, until things blow 
over.' 
 'That's very kind,' said Rachel. 'Though I can't help feeling there's 
more than one "if" in that sentence.' 
 'Oh, Mum, this house has got an enormous swimming pool, as 
well as being right on the beach. You just take your pick!' 
 'No, I'm sure it's delightful.' 
 'It could be just what he needs. A complete change of direction.' 
 'You have the oddest idea of just what people need,' said Rachel. 
'I've noticed it before.' 
 'Well, let's face it, he certainly doesn't need the pathetic little 
empee's salary.' 
 'What you perhaps forget is that… your father wants to serve his 
country.' 
 'OK, when you get back, plunge into charity work! Probably 
much more useful than being Monster for Social Welfare and cutting 
everyone's grants. He could found something. The Gerald Fedden 
Trust. People often have a complete change of heart when something 
like this happens. You know, they go into the East End.' 
 'Well, let's just wait and see, shall we,' said Rachel, folding her 
napkin and pushing back her chair. 
 Nick and Catherine went up to the drawing room. 'Will you put 
on some music, darling,' said Catherine. 'I'm not sure your mother 
really…' 
 'Oh, just something nice. I don't mean God-dammery. All right, 
I'll choose.' She went to the record cupboard, and knelt with her head 
cocked sideways, humming teasingly as she picked out an LP and 
prepared to put it on. Nick heard the needle drop, the kindling crackle. 
'Turn it down a bit, darling…?' 
 She did so, and tutted, 'Uncle Nick!' Out from the speakers came 
the sinister little jumps that start Rachmaninov's Symphonic Dances. 
'There, you like that,' she said. 
 'Up to a point,' said Nick, knowing how much lie didn't want to 
hear it. 
 'Oh, it's wonderful,' she said, staring from die stage at an 
invisible dress circle and raising her arms. It was a piece he'd adored 
as a teenager, and played all the time in his first year at Oxford to 
confirm and deepen the regretful longing which seemed now to have 
been the medium he lived in - it unfolded for him like that endless 
tune on the alto sax. Now its melancholy felt painful, even vicious. He 
half watched Catherine sweeping through the room, alarmingly unself-
conscious. He had danced to it himself, but by himself, in his room, 
drunk, at the end of days brightened or not by contact with Toby. 
 'It is a bit God-dammery,' he said, as a Russian Orthodox chant 
made itself heard. Catherine waved her arms hectically. 'It's a bit like 
having a bop in St Basil's Cathedral.' He tried to throw off his 
embarrassment with these square little jokes. She smiled, stretched 
out a hand to him, and scowled for a second because he wouldn't join 
her. He thought of her four months ago, trailing her hopelessness from 
room to room like a sad child with an inseparable rag; and now, mere 
chemistry, she was Makarova. She didn't notice the melancholy, the 
insidious, shifting harmonies; it was movement and therefore life. He 
said, 'The thing is, darling, there's a bit of a crisis going on. You know, 
it looks rather odd leaping round like this when your mum's so 
anxious - well, we all are.' He spoke consciously as one of the family, to 
cover his private unease, at being both needed and excluded by the 
terms of the crisis. Catherine didn't pay attention, she hummed, 
serenely, stubbornly, and a while later stopped dancing as if on her 
own decision. She wandered to the big bay window at the back, and 
stood looking out through her reflection at the lights beyond the trees. 
They seemed perhaps like elements in a pattern, which, read with the 
right intuition for shape and meaning, might reveal an instruction. 
When she turned round she gave Nick a smile that hovered before 
various possible cajolements. She sat on the broad arm of his chair 
and slid in sideways against him. 
 'I know,' she said, 'let's go out for a bit. Have you got the car 
here?' 
 'Um, yes,' said Nick. 'Round the corner. But… well, Gerald will be 
back soon.' 
 'Gerald could be ages. You know tfiey don't vote till midnight 
sometimes, if they're filimandering.' 
 'Or gerrybustering.' 
 'Exactly! We needn't be long. I've just got an idea.' 
 Of course the idea of not being here when Gerald got back was 
very attractive. 
 Rachel came in, and Nick felt he'd been caught larking about, 
Catherine squashing him like some bolshie teenage attempt at 
seduction. 'Gerald's just rung,' Rachel said. 'It seems they're going to 
be really awfully late. It's a bill he's got to, um, you know, keep a bit of 
an eye on.' 
 'How is he?' said Catherine fondly. 
 'He sounds fine. He says really not to worry' She had a new 
confidence, an almost pleasurable glow, and Nick felt sure she'd just 
been told how much she was loved. She moved across the room, 
looking for some small task to perform; found fallen chrysanthemum 
petals on a table top, swept them into her open palm, and dropped 
diem in the wastebasket. 'Oh, I like this,' she said. 'Isn't it 
Rachmaninov?' The sad waltz of the second movement was just 
catching fire. She stood gazing over their heads at the caprice by 
Guardi, and perhaps at some memory of her own. Nick thought for a 
moment she was going to start dancing too - she seemed suddenly very 
like her daughter. But really it was only in charades or the adverb 
game that she took the licence to be silly. 
 Catherine said, 'Mum, Nick and I are going out for half an hour.' 
 'Oh, darling… really?' 
 'There's just something we've got to do. I'm not going to tell you, 
but… We'll be back!' 
 'Is it quite the best moment…?' 
 'Yes, I wonder,' said Nick. 'I'm not going to talk to anyone, don't 
worry!' 
 Rachel thought, and said, 'Well, if you are going out, then 
obviously Nick should go with you.' 
 'We'll just go in the car,' said Catherine. 'Nick will be with me the 
whole time.' And she hugged him to her in the chair with a delighted 
laugh. 
 Rachel looked rather narrowly at Nick, as the guarantor of this 
excursion. He thought he might be going to put up more resistance 
than he did. He gave a half smile, a slow nod, a wearily tolerant closing 
of the eyes. She said, 'Please don't be long. And take the back way. 
Take a torch.' 
 They went out, and as they started downstairs Nick heard the 
minatory little fanfares interrupt the waltz, and wondered if Rachel 
would go on listening to it after they'd gone. In the hall it was still quite 
loud. The whole house seemed steeped in a wilful air of romance. 
Catherine wouldn't tell him where they were going, only where to turn. 
Nick sighed good-humouredly at this, and was half glad she didn't 
notice his tension as they left the house further and further behind, 
and Rachel in it alone. When they swung around Marble Arch and 
down Park Lane he said, 'It looks as though we might be going to 
Westminster.' 
 'In a sense,' said Catherine. 'You'll see.' Her seductiveness had 
hardened to a brightness. 
 'There's absolutely no point in going to the House of Commons.' 
 'No, no,' she said. 
 They went down Grosvenor Place, wound through Victoria, and 
dien headed straight towards Westminster. The floodlit front of the 
Abbey appeared, and then they were gunning out into Parliament 
Square, the bright face of Big Ben, always stirring to Nick, like the best 
picture in a child's book, showing 9.30: 9.30 was striking, iron circles 
fading in the bus roar. He said, quite relieved, 'I can't go in there, you 
know.' But she made him turn left instead, towards Whitehall, past 
Downing Street, and the Banqueting House, and dien suddenly 
towards»the river, and into a side street walled right up to the sky by a 
vast Victorian building. It was a feature of the London riverscape Nick 
had almost unconsciously absorbed, without ever deducing or being 
told what it was: he had an image of its roof, like a Loire chateau. He 
parked opposite, outside some dark ministry. The whole street was 
oddly dark, except for the glowing glass canopies of the chateau's 
doorways, somehow redolent of gaslight and cab horses, at one of 
which a porter in a peaked cap was silhouetted. For a moment a 
London sensation, unnoticed and perpetual as the throb of traffic, 
came clear for him: of order and power, rhythmic and intricate, 
endlessly sure of obedience. Then he remembered. 'This is where 
Badger lives, isn't it?' 
 'It was just Mum mentioning him,' said Catherine, as if it was an 
obvious breakthrough. 
 Nick saw that she was crazy, that the trip was not an inspiration 
but an irrelevance. He slumped and pursed his lips in tender 
annoyance. He tried kindly to find a reason in her craziness. 'You 
think Badger can somehow throw a light on this business? He's 
probably not here, is he, darling - isn't he in South Africa?' But she 
had opened the car door, with no sign in her face or voice that she was 
even aware of Nick's worry, or of any possible objection. She had her 
certainty, a source of joy and tension, like revealed religion. Nick's 
objection was mainly diat he didn't like Badger, that it was mutual, 
and that Badger would like him even less for bringing his manic god-
daughter round. It was a fuck-flat, in Barry Groom's hard phrase, not 
a proper home. He had an image of small hotel-like rooms in which 
Badger conducted strained affairs with much younger women; of 
Badger shooting a line as phoney as the prints on the wall and the 
Chippendale cocktail cabinet. 
 They went in under one of the glass canopies, and through a 
brown-marble entrance hall; a porter in a cubbyhole was listening to 
the radio and nodded back at them as if they were always in and out. 
Catherine, in her dark coat, made up, evangelical, had the confidence 
to pass anywhere; the sense of getting away with something was all 
Nick's. The wait by the lift was a reasonable but finite chance to turn 
back: Catherine smiled and quivered, hands thrust into pockets 
flashing her coat open. 'Are you sure about this?' said Nick. He knew 
he ought to be restraining her and at the same time he was trying to 
live up to her. Her conviction was a challenge to someone reasonably 
cowardly. He felt a vague intellectual awe of her insights, however 
mad. He thought her state might be like the capable elation of coke, 
but more psychic. There was a warning plink, die doors opened, and 
Penny came tearing out. 
 'Penny!' said Nick. He dawdled for a moment with a shrug and a 
helpful half smile. Catherine was already in the lift, narrow-eyed, 
breathing audibly. Nick, feeling like a silly ass and then also feeling the 
loose smugness of having discovered something without knowing what 
it was, grinned, and said considerately, 'How are you?' 
 Penny had stopped and turned round, with a look both peevish 
and frightened. She went very white; and then a rich hot pink started 
up in her round cheeks and spread (in the three or four seconds while 
Catherine stamped and said, 'Nick, come on!') into her neck and throat 
and ears. 'Urn, Nick,' she said, in bossy defiance of her blush, 
'actually, I shouldn't, um Nick, confused, reluctant to be rude, but 
enjoying Penny's blush, in itself and for not being one of his own, had 
a foot in the lift, and blocked the thrust of the door with his arm - it 
kept stolidly reasserting itself. 'How's Gerald?' he said. 'Nick, come on!' 
 Catherine said again. 
 He stood back into the lift and Penny, shaking her head and 
stepping forward, said, 'He's not here, Nick, he's not here-' as the doors 
closed. 
 'Well…!' said Nick. He glanced at Catherine, then at the mirror 
wall, where they seemed to stand like self-conscious strangers. Even in 
a stuffy old mansion block like this a slanting FUCK had been 
scratched on the brushed-steel door. He thought of Badger flirting 
relentlessly with Penny, years ago now, when Gerald had first taken 
her on. It was that awful, rivalrous straight thing, taking the girl not 
only from Nick, who didn't care, but from his best friend, who clearly 
would. He found himself smirking, looked in the mirror, and said, 
'God, darling, Badgers going to be furious. We're obviously not 
supposed to know' But the lift stopped and Catherine slipped out past 
him with a mocking frown, as if surely she couldn't have anyone so 
dim or so chicken as a friend. 
 He followed her along a red-carpeted hallway past brown-
varnished doors with bells and nameplates; on one side brown-and-
yellow leaded windows gave on to inner light wells, lit now only by the 
dim back windows of other flats. A telly could be heard from one flat, 
but otherwise sound was dampened as by the gravest discretion. The 
subliminal sense of gaslight, of stepping back through time into the 
depths of this monstrous building, was oppressive but also, for Nick at 
least, beguiling: his mind ran away for a moment along the panelled 
dado, the swans-neck curves of the light fittings. The last door on the 
left was slightly ajar, waiting perhaps for Penny's return. Catherine 
pinged the bell, and they stood looking at the card in the brass frame 
that said 'D. S. Brogan Esq'. A deeply familiar voice shouted, 'It's open,' 
and Catherine stared into Nick's face with a gleam of vindication before 
she put her arm through his. It was much worse than Nick had 
thought. He didn't want to go in, and would have run away fast if he 
hadn't been tightly held there. There was a loud sigh, soft thump of 
footsteps, and Gerald plucked open the door. He wasn't wearing shoes 
or a jacket and tie, and his front stud was undone, so that the white 
collar stood up skew-whiff. In his left hand he held a cigarette. Nick 
said, 'Oh, hello, Gerald!' and Catherine, gleaming with indignation, 
said, 'Dad! You said you'd given up!' 
 
 
 
 
 
17 
 
 
(i) It didn't take the photographers long to work out about die 
communal gardens, though they were stretched to cover all four gates. 
They put up their stepladders and looked over the railings and 
peripheral shrubbery through binoculars or through their telephoto 
lenses, dreaming of shots. The falling leaves were in their favour. It 
was news, but it was also a matter of patience. 
 They talked confidently on mobile phones. They were rivals who'd 
met so often they were friends, sharing their indifference to their 
victims in companionable Thermos caps of tea. They toasted them 
sardonically in milk and sugar. Then the house gate would open and 
Toby, perhaps, would come out, who for a while had worked with these 
guys and now was dodging them, making towards one exit and then 
switching and jogging to another - the photographers went swearing 
and clattering round the long way; one or two jumped in cars. Soon 
Geoffrey Titchfield was making hourly patrols of the gardens, after 
several of the buzzards, as he called them, had simply used their 
ladders to climb in. 'You are not keyholders,' he said. 'I must ask you 
to leave immediately.' Sir Geoffrey was deeply vexed by the whole 
episode. The exposure of his idol, terribly shocking to him, was 
brought home, like the threat of a larger disorder, by these incursions 
on the gardens. 
 At the front of the house the shutters or curtains stayed closed, 
so that indoors the day had the colour of an appalling hangover or 
other failure to get up. Electric light combined with diffused sunlight in 
a sickly glare. All the papers came as usual, in their long, arhythmical 
collapse onto die doormat, where they lay like a menace and were 
approached at last with long-armed reluctance. And there they were, 
the Millionaire MP, his Elegant Wife, his Blonde, or his Blushing 
Blonde Secretary. 'Troubled daughter speaks of ministers affair.' It 
seemed she'd spoken to Russell, and Russell had spoken to an old 
friend at the Mirror, after that there was no holding it. Oddly enough, 
in all the pictures 'heartbroken Cathy' was smiling with sublime 
conviction. That was the first day. 
 On the second day, Gerald, resenting the demeaning scurry 
through the gardens, where he looked such a fool to the other 
keyholders, walking their dogs and knocking up on the tennis courts, 
put on his widest-brimmed fedora and a dark, double-breasted 
overcoat, and came out of the front door into the film set of the street. 
Parked vans, spotlights, shoulder-hefted TV cameras, fluffy boom 
mikes, the ruck of reporters - everything took on life and purpose with 
his emergence. The freshly whitened house-front reflected the 
flashbulbs. Gerald seemed as usual to draw strength from their 
attention. He was the star of this movie, whatever he did. Nick, looking 
out from behind an upstairs curtain, saw him step on to the pavement 
and heard him say loudly, 'Thank you, gentlemen, I have nothing to 
say,' in a cordial, plummy tone. The Press were in front of him in a half 
ellipse, of which his hat formed the centre. They called him Sir and 
Gerald and Mr Fedden and Minister. Are you leaving your wife?' 
 'This way, Gerald!' 
 'Mr Fedden, are you guilty of insider dealing?' 
 'Where's your daughter?' 
 'Will you be resigning, Minister?' Nick saw how they enjoyed their 
deadpan mockery, their brief but decisive wielding of power. He found 
it frightening. He wondered how he himself would ever square up to 
that. Gerald moved slowly, with heavy patience, sturdy in the interest 
of his case and confident of knowing the right form, however 
humiliating xOac content, towards the Range Rover; which at last he 
got into, and drove off, almost running down photographers, to the 
House of Commons, to hand in his resignation. 
 Nick let the curtain drop, and made his way carefully around the 
twin guest beds and on to the brighter landing. Rachel was just 
coming out of her bedroom. 
 'Sorry about this absurd gloom!' she said. 'I find I have the 
greatest reluctance to have my photograph taken.' There was a 
briskness in her tone that warned off any touch of sympathy. 'I 
understand.' 
 She was wearing a red-and-black wool suit, a necklace, four or 
five rings, and would certainly have looked good in a photograph. Nick 
glanced past her into the shadowy white room. There was the first 
door, into a small anteroom with the bathroom opening off it, and then 
the second door, which had always sealed the couple away in a 
grandeur of privacy. Nick saw the end of the bed, a round table with 
silver-framed pictures of the children. He had hardly ever been in 
there, since his first summer, when he had walked around noiselessly, 
with his hands behind his back, an intruder in the temple of marital 
love; his own love fantasies had taken envious possession of it, like 
squatters, in the married couple's absence. 
 'Mm, strange times,' said Rachel, again as if talking to someone 
barely known, and instinctively disapproved of, whom a crisis had 
thrust her together with: Nick felt for the tender irony which always 
lined their little phrases, but he wasn't sure he found it. Perhaps she 
knew that he had known all along about Gerald and Penny, and her 
dryness was a form of bitter embarrassment. 
 He said, 'I know…' He was painfully sorry for her, but didn't see 
how to say so; it was a strange inhibition. In a way it was the moment 
for a new intimacy, and he hoped to bring her round to it. He glimpsed 
something beautiful for both of them emerging from the wreckage of 
the marriage: their old alliance, running rings of secret mockery round 
Gerald's pompous head, would flourish and be a strength to her. He 
hesitated, but he was ready. 
 She looked at him, her lips firming and relenting; then she 
turned away. She went unnoticing past Norman Kent's portrait of 
Catherine, though to Nick it played its part in die unfolding moment. 'I 
wish you would go and get Catherine,' she said, as she started 
downstairs. 
 'Oh…' said Nick, following behind, with a nervous laugh that he 
regretted. 
 'She ought to be here with her family,' Rachel said, not turning 
round. 'She needs care. I can't tell you how worried I am about her 
with that man.' 
 'Of course you are,' said Nick promptly, 'of course you are,' 
feeling he needed a new tone to console a woman twice his age. He felt 
he learned as he spoke, and saw how all her worries found an outlet in 
this one worry. He said, 'I'm sure she's safe with him, but if you want 
me to, I'll go over there, gladly,' pressing and then faltering behind her 
in anxious support and respect. The truth was he was frightened of the 
reporters and photographers: he didn't know how to deal with them, or 
with anyone who didn't show support and respect. And he was very 
wary of Russell, who seemed to have brought about his longed-for 
exposure of Gerald almost by chance, and now was 'looking after Cath' 
in his Brixton flat, and declining to let anyone see her. 
 Rachel reached the first-floor landing. 'I mean, I can't go over 
there; I'd have the whole press pack at my heels.' It was as if she was 
in danger even coming down to this level. The world outside her door 
had revealed itself as not only alien but hostile. And her world within 
doors had abrupdy been robbed of comfort. She turned and her face 
was stiff apart from her moving lips; Nick thought she might be going 
to cry, and in a way he hoped she would, because it would be a 
natural thing to do, as well as a sign of trust - he could hold her, 
which he'd never done before. He saw the quick sensual crush of his 
chin against the shoulder of her wool suit, her grey-streaked hair 
across his mouth; she would clutch him, with a shudder of acceptance 
and release, and after a while he would lead her into the drawing 
room, where they would sit down and decide what to do about Gerald.' 
 'No, you mustn't…' he said. 'Obviously.' 
 He watched her blink rapidly and choose a different sort of 
release: 'I mean, since you're so good at winkling people out!' 
 Nick didn't counter this gibe, the first he'd ever had from her. He 
said, 'Oh…' almost modestly, looking away at the carpet, the legs of the 
Sheraton table, die polished threshold of the drawing room. He felt 
very low, and Rachel went on, 'You know, we do rather count on you to 
keep an eye on Catherine.' 
 He tried to think when he'd heard the tone before. It was one of 
her adorable, unexpectedly funny little moments of exasperated 
candour about some party official, some simpleton at Conference. 
'Well,' he said, 'I have tried… as I hope you know.' Rachel didn't 
endorse diis. 'But, you know, she is an adult, she leads her own life…!' 
He gave the soft laugh of sensible conviction, which was all it had ever 
taken to win Rachel's agreement. 
 'Well, you say that!' she said, with a quite different kind of laugh, 
a single hard gasp. 
 Nick leant back on the mahogany banister, and felt his way into 
the new conditions. He said, very measuredly, 'I think I always have 
been as good a friend to her as she would allow me to be. As you know, 
friends come and go with her - and they all disappoint her. So I 
suppose I must have been doing something right if she still trusts me.' 
 'No, I'm sure she's devoted to you,' said Rachel, we all are,' in a 
sharp but conditional tone, as though it didn't much matter. 'It's really 
the question of your doing what's best for her, I mean, not simply… 
conspiring with her in whatever she wants you to do. She has a very 
serious illness.' 
 'Yes, of course,' Nick murmured, while his face grew fixed at die 
rebuke. Rachel was waiting, as if taking the pulse of her feelings; he 
peeped at her, saw her blink again and draw breath but then only give 
out a sharp resentful sigh. Nick said, 'I left her with Gerald… the other 
night. That should have been safe enough.' 
 'Ah, safe,' she said, 'yes. She should never have been diere in the 
first place.' 
 'I promise you, I didn't know where she was taking me 'She 
wasn't taking you anywhere. You were taking her, if you remember, in 
your horrible little car.' 
 'Oh…!' 
 'I'm sorry,' she said, and Nick wasn't sure if she was instantly 
retracting or grimly confirming her remark. His impulse was to forgive 
her, he frowned tenderly, the reflex of a boy who couldn't bear to be in 
the wrong. 'You know the state she was in. Who knows what's 
happening to her now, if she hasn't got her librium with her.' 
 'Mm… her lithium 'There's just rather a question of 
responsibility, you know? I mean, we'd always supposed you 
understood your responsibilities to her - and to us, of course.' 
 'Oh, well, yes…!' He flashed a smile at the sting of this. 'We'd 
imagined you'd tell us if, for instance, anything went seriously wrong.' 
Her steady tone, her emphasizing twitches, were new to Nick; they 
seemed to signal a change in dieir relations that wouldn't easily be 
reversed. He was used to her easy assents, her oddly contented 
demurrals… 'We didn't know until last night, for instance, about this 
very serious episode four years ago.' 
 'What do you mean?' said Nick, shaking his head. The 'we' was 
fairly unnerving, die apparent solidarity widi Gerald. 
 'I think you know very well what I mean.' She peered at him, with 
an effect of complex distaste; which extended in a reluctance to put it 
in words. 'We had no idea she'd tried to… harm herself while we were 
away.' 
 'I don't know what you've been told. She didn't harm herself, 
anyway. She asked me to stay with her - which I did - and she was 
fine, you know, she'd just had one of her bad moments.' 
 'You didn't tell us about it,' said Rachel, pale with anger. 
 'Please, Rachel! She didn't want to upset you, she didn't want to 
spoil your holiday,' The half-forgotten alibis came back, and the 
squeezing sensation of being out of his depth. 'I stayed with her, I 
talked her through it.' It was a bleat of a boast. 
 'Yes, she said you were wonderful,' said Rachel. 'Apparently, she 
quite raved about you to Gerald the other night.' Nick looked at the 
floor, and at the rhythm of the black-and-gilt S-shaped balusters. Then 
beyond them, and below, he heard the scratch of the front door being 
unlocked, a voice from the street saying, 'Over here, love!' and the 
jump of the knocker as me door slammed shut again. 
 Rachel stood where she was, in her own house and her 
indignation, and Nick edged away from her, still reluctantly holding 
the thread of her accusation, and went down a few steps to look over 
the banister. But it wasn't Catherine. It was Eileen, Gerald's 'old' 
secretary. She gazed up into die stairwell. She was wearing a dark 
overcoat and holding a black handbag. She looked like someone who'd 
come for a smart party on die wrong night. Nick thought she must 
have wanted to look good for the press. 'Hello, Eileen,' he said. 'I 
thought I'd better come in and see to things.' 
 'Good idea,' said Nick. 'I've said I'll keep an eye on things.' 
 'Well, that's marvellous.' Nick smiled with the real but finite 
politeness of someone who's been interrupted; he put a clinching 
warmth into it. The joke in the family had always been that Eileen had 
a crush on Gerald, who kept up an unseemly mockery of her efficiency 
and forethought. She was part of Nick's earliest idea of the house, in 
that first magic summer of possession which Rachel was now turning 
over like a stone. She'd been keeping an eye on tilings then. She came 
forward and put her hand on the tight bottom curl of the stair rail. 
 'I've brought the Standard,' she said. She'd been gripping it in 
her other hand, almost behind her, shielding them from it. 'I don't 
know that you'll like it very much.' She came up a few steps and Nick 
came down, with a vague sense of receiving a summons, and took it 
from her. He felt he should be specially diligent, and take the brunt of 
it on Rachel's behalf. He stood capably, with one foot on the stair 
above, and shook the paper flat. He saw the picture of himself, and 
thought, I'll come back to that in a second, and looked at the headline, 
which didn't make sense, and looked at the picture again and die one 
beside it of Wani. There was hardly any room for the article itself. The 
words and the pictures crowded out any sense of what they might 
mean. He felt oddly sorry for Bertrand: 'Peer's Playboy Son Has AIDS'. 
That was the subheading. 'Gay Sex Link to Minister's House'. Hard to 
get all that in. Didn't flow, very well. 
 Nick had a strange subliminal sensation that the banister wasn't 
there, and that the hall floor had hurded up to meet him, like fainting 
but remaining fully conscious. He could tell it was very bad news. 
Then he realized where it had come from, and started to read the 
article, with a feeling like a thump in the sternum. (ii) 'Moody hell, 
Nick…!' said Toby next morning. Nick chewed his cheek. 'I know…' 
 'I had absolutely no idea about this. None of us did.' He pushed 
his copy of Today away from him, across die dining-loom table, and fell 
back in his chair. 
 'Well, the Cat«did, obviously. She twigged when we were all in 
France last year.' He used the family nickname with a sense that his 
licence to do so had probably expired. 
 Toby gave him a wounded look which seemed to search and find 
him back at the manoir, under the awning, or by the pool, where 
they'd got drunk alone together that long hot afternoon. 'You could 
have told me, you know, you could have trusted me.' Toby had told his 
own secrets that day, his problems with intimacy - he'd entered into 
Nick's realm of examined feelings, it had been a triumph of intimacy in 
itself for him. 'I mean, two of my best mates, you know? I feel such a 
blasted idiot.' 
 'I was always longing to tell you, darling.' Again Toby's face 
seemed to close against the endearment. 'But Wani just wouldn't hear 
of it.' He looked shyly at his old friend. 'I know people take it very 
personally when they find they've been kept out of a secret. But really 
secrets are sort of impersonal. They're simply things that can't be told, 
irrespective of who they can't be told to.' 
 'Hm. And now this.' Toby pulled out the Sun from the slew of 
newsprint on the table. ' "Gay Sex Romp at MP's Holiday Home".' He 
threw it away from him, with a look of disdain and a hint of a 
challenge. 
 'It's really rather sweet their idea of what constitutes a romp,' 
Nick said, to try and put it in proportion. 
 'Sweet…?' said Toby, incredulously, but with a flinch of regret as 
well, that he should be speaking like this to someone he'd always 
simply trusted. He stood up, and walked awkwardly along to the far 
end of the table. The mood of an extended morning-after still reigned 
in the room, with sunshine seeping in over the top of the shutters, and 
the gilt wall lamps casting a crimson glow. He stood with his back to 
the Lenbach portrait of- what was he? - his great-grandfather: a stout 
bourgeois figure in a tighdy buttoned black coat. Nick, with his eye for 
the family line, saw Toby growing into a likeness. Toby himself had on 
a dark suit, blue shirt, and red tie. He was going to a meeting, and this 
little chat was a bit like a meeting too. He seemed to share with his 
ancestor a respect for the obvious importance of business, as well as a 
dignified failure to anticipate the scandals of this week. 'God, I'm sorry, 
Toby,' said Nick. 
 'Yah, well,' said Toby, with a big sigh that seemed to weigh a 
burden and hint at a threat. Unexpected intimacies were blowing up 
all around him. He leant on the table and looked at a paper to hide his 
discomfort. 'First it's Dad and Penny, with this fraud thing going on 
too, then there's you and Ouradi, with the plague thing…' "Well, you 
knew Wani had AIDS.' 
 'Mm, yah…' said Toby uncertainly. He squared up the 
newspapers in a pile, with distracted firmness. They were the 
astonishing evidence of his situation. 'And my bloody old sis going 
clean off the rails.' 
 'She has rather landed us in it.' 
 'It's as if she hates Dad.' 
 'It's difficult…' 
 'And hates you too. I mean, how did she get like this?' 
 It was the long-ago talk by the lake, the solemn explanation… 'I 
don't think she hates us,' said Nick. 'Since she crawled out from under 
the lithium she's just been in a mood to tell the truth. Actually, she 
always has been, when you think about it. I'm certain she'd never 
actually want to hurt us. She's been got at by people who do hate 
Gerald, perhaps; that's the thing.' 
 Anyway, it's a fuck-up,' said Toby, quickly resisting the role-
reversal. And Nick caught that startling thing, the stared-out threat of 
tears, the miserable twitch of the mouth. 
 'It's a fuck-up,' Nick agreed. He winced at his own readiness to 
explain Toby's story to him. Poor Toby had been tricked, or not 
trusted, which seemed a form of trickery, by everyone around him: it 
was awful, and Nick found a smile creeping out of the corners of his 
mouth in bizarre amusement. 
 'I must say the Independent has by far the best-quality 
photographs,' Toby said. 
 'They've achieved consistently high standards.' 
 'Yes, the Telegraph's are very murky in comparison.' 
 'The Mail's somewhat better, though.' Toby snapped back the 
pages. The Mordant Analyst had been given a double spread to explore 
the whole situation, drawing on his inside knowledge of 'the Fedden 
set'. The picture of Toby clasping Sophie on the dance floor at 
Hawkeswood was one of Russell's. Toby looked away at the floor and 
still didn't meet Nick's eye when he said, 'I don't know quite where this 
leaves us.' 
 'No,' said Nick. 'Everything's rather in the air, isn't it.' 
 'I mean, I don't see how you can stay here.' Then he did look at 
Nick for several seconds, and the lovely brown gaze, which had always 
softened or faltered, didn't do so. 
 'No, no, of course,' said Nick, with a scowl as if Toby was 
insulting him to suggest he thought he could. 
 Toby pursed his lips, stood up straight and buttoned his jacket. 
There was a sense that, though it could have been done better, he'd 
performed a bit of business, and his uneasy satisfaction carried him 
quickly to the door. 'I'm going to have a word with Ma,' he said. 'Sorry.' 
 Nick sat for a while, feeling that Toby's anger was the worst part 
of it, the one utterly unprecedented thing; and looking over the papers 
in which his own image appeared. He was letting himself in at the 
front door of this house, and also, four years younger, in a bow tie and 
his Uncle Archie's dinner jacket, looking very drunk. It was 
fascinating, if you thought about it, that they hadn't got hold of the 
picture of him and the PM. Still, they had all the rest, sex, money, 
power: it was everything they wanted. And it was everything Gerald 
wanted too. There was a strange concurrence about tliat. Nick felt his 
life horribly and needlessly broken open, but with a tiny hard part of 
himself he observed what was happening with detachment as well as 
contempt. He cringed with dismay at the shame he had brought on his 
parents, but he felt he himself had learned nothing new. His long talk 
on the phone with his father, and then with his mother, had been all 
the harder for his lack of surprise; to them it was 'a bit of a bombshell', 
it called for close explanation, almost for some countering offensive. He 
had found himself sounding flippant, and wounded them more, since 
of course, when it came to it, all their deep instincts were for him, for 
his safety, and protection. They took it utterly seriously, but rattled 
him with their clear admissions that they'd expected trouble of some 
kind, they'd known something wasn't quite right. Nick resisted that, he 
wasn't shocked, and couldn't capture at all the shock that was fuelling 
the press. He'd known about Penny, and he'd known about himself 
and Warn. The real horror was the press itself. 'Greed drives out 
Prudence,' wrote Peter Crowther, as if nobody'd ever thought of that 
before. He saw the romance of his years with the Feddens, deep, 
evolving, and profoundly private, framed and explained to the world by 
this treacherous hack. 
 The doorbell rang, and since no one answered it Nick went out 
and peered through the new spyhole: in which the furious, conceited 
features of Barry Groom loomed and then fled sideways as he rang the 
bell again. Nick opened the door, and glanced out past the MP at the 
now almost deserted street. 'Hello, Barry, come in… Yes, they've 
virtually all gone now.' 
 'No thanks to you,' said Barry, stepping past him and frowning 
his eyebrows and mouth into two thin parallel lines. 'I've come to see 
Gerald.' 
 'Yes, of course.' It wasn't clear if Barry was treating him as a 
servant or an obstacle. 'Come this way,' he said, and went on 
gracefully, as he turned back down the hall, 'I'm so sorry about all this 
ghastly business.' There was a strange smooth relish in saying that. 
For a second Barry seemed to take it as his due, then his face soured 
again. He said, 'Shut up, you stupid little pansy!' It was a quaint 
sentence, and somehow the more expressive for that. 
 'Oh…!' - Nick darted a look in the big hall mirror, as though for 
witnesses. 
 'That's hardly-' 
 'Shut up, you little cunt1' said Barry, with a biting clench of the 
jaw, and pushed past him and down tfie passage towards Gerald's 
study. 
 'Oh, fuck off,' said Nick, in fact he only mouthed the words, 
because he thought Barry might turn back and punch him in the face; 
Gerald opened his door and looked out like a headmaster. 
 'Ah, Barry, good of you to come,' he said, and gave Nick a 
momentary stare of reproach. 
 You ignorant, humourless, greedy, ugly cunt…' Nick went on to 
himself, in the shocked hilarity of having been insulted. He wandered 
in the hall, blinking in astonishment at the black-and-white marble 
squares of the floor. He couldn't quite tell, when he went into the 
kitchen, if Elena had heard this outburst. She always protested, dimly 
but sincerely, at Gerald's unguarded fucks - she was serious about all 
that. 'Hello, Elena!' said Nick. 
 'So, Mr Barry Groom come,' said Elena. She was a little woman 
but she occupied the kitchen from wall to wall. She patrolled it. 'He 
want coffee?' 
 'Come to think of it, he never said. But I rather think not.' 
 'He don't want?' 
 'No…' He looked at Elena with cautious tenderness, uncertain 
what credit remained from his years of diligent niceness to her. 'By the 
way, I won't be here for dinner tonight.' Elena raised her eyebrows and 
pinched her lips. The new revelations about Nick and Wani must be 
amazing to her. It wasn't clear if she'd even taken in that Nick was gay. 
He said, 'It's all a bit of a mess, isn't it? Un pasticcio… un imbroglio.' 
 'Pasticcio, si,' she said, with a hard laugh. They'd had a certain 
amount of fun over the years with each other's Italian. She went into 
the pantry, and spoke to him without turning round, so that he had to 
follow her. 'I'm sorry?' 
 'How long you been here now?' She peered up at the shelved tins. 
 'In Kensington Park Gardens? - Oh, four years last summer, four 
and… a quarter years.' 
 'Four years. A good time.' 
 'Yes, it has been a good time' - he grunted at the litde blur of 
idiom. She was reaching up, and Nick, not that much taller, stretched 
past her. 'The borlotti?' 
 He put the can into her hands, so that she had at least to nod in 
thanks; then he followed her out again, as if hoping for another task. 
She jammed the beans under the tin opener and cranked round the 
handle, something Nick felt he'd seen her do scores, hundreds of 
times, with her tomato puree and her fagioli and all the things she 
preferred canned to fresh. And suddenly it was obvious to him. He 
said, 'Elena, I've decided it's time to hand in my resignation.' She 
looked at him sharply, to make sure she'd understood him; then she 
nodded again, in acknowledgement. She might almost have smiled at 
his apt phrasing. She moved back to the table, and her busyness 
expressed her purpose but also perhaps hid some sort of regret at the 
news. Nick was very shaken by it himself. He glanced at her hopefully. 
Behind her on the wall were all the family photos, and she seemed to 
stand, stooped and efficient, in an angled but intimate relation to them 
-indeed she appeared in one of them, displaying a lordly Toby in his 
pram: she'd been there from the beginning, in the legendary Highgate 
days… She started chopping some onions, but looked up again and 
said, 'You remember when you first come here?' 
 'Yes, of course,' said Nick. 'The first time we meet 'Yes, I do,' and 
he chuckled fondly and went a little pink, because of course they'd 
never been over that minute of confusion in the hall. He saw he was 
pleased she'd mentioned it. It was hardly even an embarrassment, 
since all he had done was be charming to her; he'd treated her not as 
an equal but as a superior. 'You thought I was Miz Fed.' 
 'Yes, I know I did… Well, I'd never met either of you. I thought, a 
good-looking woman…' 
 Elena squeezed her eyes shut over the onions - it seemed for a 
moment like a slide into another emotion. Then she said, 'I think to 
myself that day, this one's… sciocco, you know, he don't know 
anything, oh, he's all very nice, lady, but he's you know…' she tapped 
her forehead with a finger. 'Pazzo…?' said Nick, taking a last sick 
chance. 'He's no good,' said Elena. Nick went up to his room, and 
stood looking at the window sill. Late-morning, late-October sunlight 
dimmed and brightened indifferendy over it. He was lost in thought, 
but it was thought without words, pure abstraction, luminous and 
sad. Then a simple form of words appeared, almost as if written. It 
would have been best in a letter, where it could have been done 
beautifully, with complete control. Spoken, it risked tremors and 
deflections. He went downstairs to see Gerald. 
 The study door was ajar, and he could hear him talking to Barry 
Groom. He stood in the passage, as he felt he had often done in this 
house, as an accidental eavesdropper. Decisions were being made all 
the time, in an adjacent room, in a phone call half-curiously 
overheard. He liked the noise of business and politics, it was an adult 
reassurance, like the chatter of parents on a night journey, 
meaningless, fragmentary, and consoling to the sleepy child on the 
back seat. Sometimes of course he did pick up on a secret, a surprise 
still being contrived, and his pleasure was a very private one, the 
boosted glow of his own trustworthiness. Barry was saying, 'I can't 
think how you let it happen.' Gerald made a gloomy rumble and single 
hard cough but said nothing. 'I mean, what's the little pansy doing 
here? Why have you got a little ponce hanging round your house the 
whole fucking time?' 
 The last words were louder and louder, and Nick's pulse 
thumped as he waited, four or five seconds, for Gerald to put him 
right. He was warm with indignation, and a new combative excitement. 
Barry Groom had no idea of the life they led in this house. 'I suppose 
I'd have to say,' said Gerald, 'that it was an error of judgement. 
Untypical - I'm a pretty sharp judge of character as a rule. But yes… 
an error.' 
 'It's an error you've paid a very high price for,' said Barry Groom 
unrelentingly. 
 'He was a friend of the children, you know. We've always had an 
open-door policy towards the children's friends.' 
 'Hmm,' said Barry, who had publicly disinherited his son 
Quentin 'on principle', to make him learn about money from scratch. 
'Well, I never trusted him. I can tell you that, unequivocally. I know the 
type. Never says anything - always nursing his little criticisms. I 
remember sitting next to him after dinner here, years ago, and 
thinking, you don't fit in here, do you, you little cocksucker, you're out 
of your depth. And I'll tell you something else: he knew that. I could 
see he wished he was upstair? with the women.' 
 'Oh…' said Gerald, in wan protest. 'We always got along all right, 
you know.' 
 'So fucking superior.' Barry Groom swore harshly and 
humourlessly, as if swearing were the guarantee of any unpalatable 
truth. It was just what he'd done that night, after dinner, with an effect 
Nick could still remember, of having absolutely no style. 'They hate us, 
you know, they can't breed themselves, they're parasites on generous 
fools who can. Crawling to you, crawling to the fucking Ouradis. I'm 
not remotely surprised he led your poor lovely daughter astray like 
this, exploited her, there's no other word for it. A typical homo trick, of 
course.' 
 Gerald murmured something, with an effect of grumpy 
submission. Nick stood clenched by the door, leaning forward slightly, 
as if about to knock, in a novel confusion ol feelings, anger at Gerald's 
failure to support him, and a strange delighted hatred of Barry Groom. 
Barry was a multiple adulterer and ex-bankrupt - to be hated by him 
was surely a mark of probity. But Gerald… well, Gerald, for all his 
failings, was a friend. 
 'Dolly Kimbolton's completely furious about all this, I need hardly 
say,' Barry said. 'Ouradi's just given another half-million to the Party.' 
 Nick trod quietly away and sat down at his old place in the dining 
room. He looked again at the picture of 'Banger' Fedden and Penny 
Kent embracing, taken from hundreds of feet away and so blown up 
that the lovers broke down into a pattern of meaningless dots. 
 Gerald let Barry out and a minute later Nick went back to the 
study, knocked, and put his head round the door. He looked about 
quickly, as though checking Gerald was alone, and drawing on some 
humorous shared relief that Barry had gone. Gerald was standing at 
his desk, surveying various documents, and glanced up over his half-
moon glasses. 'Is this a good moment?' Nick said. Gerald grunted, a 
loudish dense sound made up of 'what?', 'no', yes', and a furious sigh. 
Nick came in and shut the door, not wanting to be overheard by 
anyone. The room still seemed to tingle with what had recendy been 
said in it. The low leather armchair still showed where the visitor had 
sat. A process went on here, there were meetings and decisions, a 
sense of importance as seasoned and stifling as the odour of leather, 
stale cigar smoke and polish. 
 'A good moment,' said Gerald, plucking off his glasses and giving 
Nick a quick cold smile. 
 'Yes, well…' said Nick, hearing the words bleakly dilate. 'I mean I 
won't be more than a moment.' 
 'Oh…' said Gerald snootily, as if to say it would take more than a 
moment to get through the business he had in mind. He threw his 
glasses onto the desk, and walked over to the window. He was wearing 
cavalry twill trousers and a buff crew-neck sweater. The effect was of 
symbolic abasement mixed with military resolve - the strategy for a 
comeback must already be in hand. Nick had a silly sense of privilege 
in seeing him in private and in trouble; and at the same time, which 
was more of a shock, he felt almost oppressively bored by him. 
 Gerald gazed into the garden, but really into his own sense of 
grievance. Nick wasn't sure whether to speak, it was as hard as he 
expected, and he stood holding the back of a chair, tensed against 
what he thought Gerald was preparing to say. 'How's Wani?' Gerald 
said. 'Oh…' The question showed a kind of chilly decency. 'He's terribly 
ill, as you know. It doesn't look at all hopeful…' 
 Gerald nodded slighdy, to show it was therefore typical of a lot of 
things. 
 'Bloody tough on the parents.' He turned to stare at Nick, as if 
challenging him to sympathize. 'Poor old Bertrand and Monique!' 
 'I know…' 
 'To lose one» child…' They both heard a touch of Lady Bracknell 
in this, and Gerald turned promptly away from the danger of a joke. 
'Well, one can only imagine.' He shook his head slowly and came back 
to the desk. He had the heavy-faced look, indeed like someone 
resisting a laugh, that was his attempt at solemn sympathy. Though 
there was a mawkish hint too that he had somehow 'lost' a child 
himself: he absorbed the Ouradis' crisis into his own. And ghasdy for 
the girl too.' 
 For a moment Nick couldn't think what he meant. 'Oh, Martine, 
do you mean?' 
 'The fiancee.' 
 'Oh… yes, but she wasn't actually his girlfriend.' 
 'No, no, they were going to get married.' 
 'They might have got married, but it was just a front, Gerald. She 
was only a paid companion.' 
 Gerald pondered this and then flicked up his eyebrows in sour 
resignation. The facts of gay life had always been taboo with him: he 
and Nick had never shared a frank word or knowing joke about them, 
and this was an odd place to start. With a nervous laugh Nick went on, 
'/'//miss him, of course.' 
 Gerald busied himself with some papers, shuffled them into a 
box-folder and snapped down the spring. He glanced, as if for 
approval, at the two framed photos, of Rachel and the Prime Minister, 
and said, 'Remind me how you came to be here.' Nick wasn't sure if 
courtesy really required him to do so. He shrugged, 'Well, as you know, 
I came here as a friend of Toby's.' 
 'Aha,' said Gerald, with a nod, but still not looking at him. He sat 
down at the desk, in the spaceship black chair. He made an 
exaggerated moue of puzzlement. 
 'But were you a friend of Toby's?' 
 'Of course I was,' said Nick. 
 'A funny sort of friendship, wasn't it…?' He glanced up casually. 
'I don't think so.' 
 'I don't think he knew anything about you.' 
 'Well, I'm just me, Gerald! I'm not some alien invader. We'd been 
in the same college for three years.' 
 Gerald didn't concede this point, but swivelled and stared out of 
the window again. 'You've always been comfortable here, haven't you?' 
 Nick gasped with disappointment at the question. 'Of course 'I 
mean, we've always been very kind to you, actually, I think, haven't 
we? Made you a part of our life - in the widest sense. You've made the 
acquaintance of many remarkable people through being a friend of 
ours. Going up indeed to the very highest levels.' 
 Yes, certainly.' Nick took a deep breath. 'That's partly why I'm so 
dreadfully sorry about everything that's happened,' and he pushed on, 
earnesdy but slyly, you know, with Catherine's latest episode.' 
 Gerald looked very affronted by this - he didn't want some 
defusing apology from Nick, and especially one that turned out not to 
be an apology but a commiseration about his daughter. He said, as 
though parenthetically, 'I'm afraid you've never understood my 
daughter.' 
 Nick flattered Gerald by taking this as a subtle point. 'I suppose 
it's difficult for anyone who hasn't suffered from it to understand her 
kind of illness, isn't it, not only moment by moment, but in its long-
term patterns. I know it doesn't mean she loves you and Rachel any 
the less that she's done all this… damage. When she's manic she lives 
in a world of total possibility. Though actually you could say that all 
she's done is tell the truth.' He thought he'd perhaps got through to 
Gerald - who frowned ahead and said nothing; but tlien, rather as he 
did in TV interviews, carried on with his own line, as if no answer or 
objection had been made. 
 'I mean, didn't it strike you as rather odd, a bit queer, attaching 
yourself to a family like this?' 
 Nick thought it was unusual - that was the beauty of it, or had 
been, but he said, 'I'm only the lodger. It was Toby who suggested I live 
witli you.' He took a risk and added, 'You could just as well say that 
the family attached itself to me.' 
 Gerald said, 'I've been giving it some thought. It's the sort of 
thing you read about, it's an old homo trick. You can't have a real 
family, so you attach yourself to someone else's. And I suppose after a 
while you just couldn't bear it, you must have been very envious I 
think of everything we have, and coming from your background too 
perhaps… and you've wreaked some pretty awful revenge on us as a 
result. And actually, you know…' he raised his hands, 'all we asked for 
was loyally.' 
 The strange, the marvellous thing was that at no point did Gerald 
say what he considered Nick actually to have done. It seemed as 
natural as day to him to dress up the pet lamb as the scapegoat. There 
was no point in fighting, but Nick said, as if eerily detached from the 
very young man who was gripping the chair back, tearful with 
surprise, 'I haven't the faintest idea what you're talking about, Gerald. 
But I must say it's a bit steep to talk to me about loyalty, of all things.' 
It struck him he'd never spoken a word of criticism to Gerald before. It 
clearly struck Gerald too, from his incredulous recoil, and the 
grappling way he turned Nick's words on him. 
 'No, actually, you haven't the faintest fucking idea what you're 
talking about!' 
 He stood up convulsively, and then sat down again, with a sort of 
sneer. 'Do you honestly imagine that your affairs can be talked about 
in the same terms as mine? I mean - I ask you again, who are you? 
What the fuck are you doing here?' 
 The slight rephrasing, the sharpening of his position, loosed a 
flood of anger, which moving visibly through his face seemed almost to 
bewilder him, like a physical seizure. 
 Trembling with the contagion of madness Nick said the thing he'd 
come to say, but in a tone of cheap sarcasm he'd never intended to 
use: 'Well, you'll be devastated to hear that I'm moving out of the 
house today. I just dropped in to tell you.' 
 And Gerald, furiously pretending not to have heard, said, 'I want 
you out of the house today.' 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
 
 
The Duchess insisted that Gerald and Rachel go to the wedding. 
Gerald had made a noisily abject phone call: 'Really, Sharon, I could 
never forgive myself if I caused you a moment's embarrassment on so 
joyous a day,' and before Sharon, in her robust way, had finished 
saying that he shouldn't talk nonsense, he had rapidly said, 'Oh good, 
oh good,' in a tone which suggested he hadn't really meant it in the 
first place. It was a tiny protocol of self-abasement that he had found 
himself reluctantly obliged to follow. 'I just thought I should ask,' he 
said, as if the offer and not its cause might be the social false note. He 
didn't really believe he could be an embarrassment to anyone. They 
drove off to Yorkshire on the Friday morning. 
 Wani had had an exquisite new morning suit and dimu-i suit 
made, with narrow trousers and a smaller chest disguised by flyaway 
lapels. They looked like the formal dress of a little prince, which might 
only be worn once before he grew out of it. Nick saw them laid out on 
the ogee bed, with the new Oxfords and evening slippers aligned on the 
floor beneath. It was as if two people even more insubstantial than 
Wani were lying back side by side on the covers. He helped Wani pack, 
and peeked out of habit in his leather stud-box, where there was a 
flesh-pink paper packet an inch long. He took it out and hid it, with a 
sense of a new code of honour overriding an old one. 
 He found Wani lying on the sofa, in front of some heavy-duty 
video: but his eyes were closed, his mouth open and askew. Nick took 
a second or two to burn off his horror in the slower flame of his pity. 
Twice now he had come across Wani dozing and leaned over him not, 
as he used to, for the private marvel of the view, but to check that he 
was alive. He sat by him widi a sigh and felt the strange tenderness 
towards himself that came with looking after someone else, the sense 
of his own prudence and mortality. He thought it might be like 
parenthood, the capable concealment of one's worries. He hadn't told 
Wani, but he was having another HIV test in the afternoon: it was 
another solemn thing, and even more frightening than it need have 
been for not being talked about. From the corner, of his eye, the video 
seemed to pullulate, like some primitive life form, with abstract 
determination. It was an orgy, unattribut-able organs and orifices at 
work in a spectrum of orange, pink, and purple. He looked more 
closely for a moment, with a mixture of scorn and regret. It was what 
they were already calling a 'classic', from the days before the antiseptic 
sheen of rubbers was added to the porn palette - Wani had hated that 
development, he was an aesdiete at least in that. Turned down low, the 
actors grunted their binary code -yeah… oh yeah, oh yeah… yeah… 
oh… yeah, yeah… oh yeah… 'Is the car here?' said Wani, still waking, 
with a look of dread, as if he longed for his word to be challenged and 
the trip to be cancelled. His father's chauffeur was to drive him to 
Harrogate in the maroon Silver Shadow. A nurse was travelling with 
them, a black-haired, blue-eyed Scotsman called Roy, whom Nick felt 
pleasantly jealous about. 
 'Roy will be here in a moment,' he said, ignoring Wani's weak 
sulk of resentment; and then, to encourage him, 'I must say, he's very 
cute.' 
 Wani sat up slowly, and swung his legs round. 'He speaks his 
mind, young Roy,' he said. 'And what does he say?' 
 'He's a bit of a bully.' 
 'Nurses have to be pretty firm, I suppose.' 
 Wani pouted. 'Not when I'm paying them a thousand pounds a 
minute, they don't.' 
 'I thought you liked a bit of rough,' said Nick, and heard the 
creaky condescension of his tone. He helped Wani up. Anyway, four 
hours in a Rolls-Royce should smooth him out.' 
 'That's just it,' said Wani. 'He's madly left-wing.' And the ghosdy 
smile of an old perversity gleamed for a moment in his face. 
 When the bell rang, Nick went down and found Roy talking to the 
chauffeur. Roy was about his own age, wearing dark blue slacks and 
an open-neck shirt; Mr Damas wore a dark grey suit and funereal tie 
and a grey peaked cap. They stood at an angle to each other - Roy 
candid and practical, fired up by the crisis of AIDS, throwing down his 
own bravery and commitment like a challenge to Mr Damas, who had 
driven the Ouradis since Wani was a boy and looked on his illness 
with respect but also, as a creature of Bertrand's, with an edge of 
blame. The recent newspaper stories had brought shame on him, and 
it struggled with the higher claims of loyally in his square face and 
leather-gloved hands. He straightened lii. v cap before accepting the 
two suitcases that Nick had brought down. 
 'So you're not coming, Nick,' said Roy, with sexy reprehension. 
'No, I've got a few things to sort out here.' 
 'You won't be there to protect me from all these dukes and ladies 
and what have you.' 
 The sudden reassurance of being flirted with, over Wani's 
stooping head, was shadowed by a flicker of caution. He was still 
getting used to the interest of his own case, something extrinsic to 
himself, which he registered mainly in the way other people assumed 
they knew him. 'I think I'd need protection from them myself,' he said. 
 Roy gave him a funny smile. 'Do you know who's going to be 
there?' 
 'Everyone,' came a wheezy voice. 
 Roy looked into the back of the Rolls, where Wani was fidgeting 
resentfully with a rug and the copious spare cushions. 'Just get 
yourself setded down in there,' he said, as though Wani was a regular 
nuisance in class. There was something useful in his briskness; he 
seemed to take a bleak view and a hopeful one at the same time. 
 Mr Damas came round and shut the door with its ineffable 
chunk - it was the sound of the world he moved in, a mystery in his 
charge though not his possession, the tuned precision of a closing 
door. Wani sat, looking forwards, lost in the glinting shadow of the 
smoked glass. Nick had the feeling he would never see him again, 
fading from view in the middle of the day. Such premonitions came to 
him often now. He made a beckoning gesture, and Wani buzzed down 
the glass two inches. 'Give Nat my love,' Nick said. Wani gazed, not at 
him, but just past him, into the middle ground of ironic conjecture, 
and after a few seconds buzzed the window shut. 
 Nick went into the deserted office on the ground floor, and 
started going through his desk. He didn't have to move out of 
Abingdon Road, in fact he was staying upstairs while he searched for a 
flat, but he felt the urge to organize and discard. It seemed clear, 
although Wani wouldn't say so, that the Ogee operation was closing 
down. Nick was glad he wasn't going to Nat's wedding, and yet his 
absence, to anyone who noticed, might seem like an admission of guilt, 
or unworthiness. He saw a clear sequence, like a loop of film, of his 
friends not noticing his absence, jumping up from gilt chairs to join in 
the swirl of a ball. On analysis he thought it was probably a scene from 
a Merchant Ivory film. 
 The doorbell trilled and Nick saw a van in the street where die 
Rolls had been. 
 He went out and there was a skinny boy in a baseball cap pacing 
about, and some very loud music. 'Ogee?' he said. 'Delivery.' He'd left 
the driver's door open and the radio on - 'I Wanna Be Your Drill 
Instructor' from Full Metal Jacketechoed off the houses while he piled 
up big square bundles on his trolley and wheeled them into the 
building. He'd taken over this bit of the street for five minutes - it was 
an event. It was the magazine. 'Thanks very much,' said Nick. He stood 
aside with the ineffectual half smile of the non-worker, longing to be 
left alone with the product. The boy pounded in and out, breathing 
sharply: it was as if this delivery was keeping him intolerably from 
another delivery, as if he'd have liked to have made all his deliveries at 
once. He stacked up the bundles, a dozen of them, in four squat 
columns. Each packet was bound both ways with tight blue plastic 
tape; Nick scratched at it and broke a nail. 'Sign, please,' said the boy, 
whisking a manifest and a biro from his jeans pocket. Nick hurried 
down a loose approximation of his signature, and handed the paper 
back, to find the boy looking at him with his head tilted and eyes 
narrowed. Nick coloured but hardened his features at the same time. If 
the boy was a Mirror reader he might well recognize him - he sensed a 
latent aggression muddle and swim towards a focus. 'Want to see?' 
said the boy, and before Nick understood he'd whisked out a Stanley 
knife from his other pocket, thumbed the blade forward, and ripped 
through the tape on the nearest bundle. He pulled off the loose paper 
wrapping, slid the first glimpsed shining copy out, turned it in his 
hands, and presented it to Nick: 'Voila!' Nick held it, like the winner of 
a prize, happy and unable to hide, sharing it courteously with the boy, 
who stood at his elbow working it out. Nick felt very exposed, and 
hoped there wouldn't be questions. 'Yeah, that's beautiful,' said the 
boy. 'That's an angel, is it?' 
 'That's right,' said Nick. Simon had done a wonderful job -r clear 
glossy black, with the white Borromini cherub on the right-hand side, 
its long wing stretching in a double curve on to the spine, where its tip 
touched the wing tip of another cherub in the same position on die 
back, the two wings forming together an exquisitely graceful ogee. No 
lettering, except at the foot of the spine, OGEE, ISSUE i in plain 
Roman caps. 
 Nick thought he'd rather not open it, he was teeming with 
curiosity and hot-faced reluctance; he needed to be alone. The boy 
shook his head admiringly. 
 'Yeah, fucking beautiful,' he said. 'Pardon my French.' He stuck 
his hand out, and Nick shook it. 'See you, mate.' 
 'Yes… thanks a lot, by the way!' 
 'No worries.' 
 Nick smiled, and watched his first critic bound out of the office. 
 'Right…' he said, when he was alone, and even then he smiled 
self-consciously. 
 He sat down at Melanie's empty desk, the magazine squarely in 
the centre, and turned back the cover with an expression of vacant 
surmise. And of course what he saw was the wonderland of luxury, for 
the first three glossy spreads, Bulgari, Dior, BMW, astounding 
godparents to Nick and Wani's whimsical coke-child. He went quickly 
to his name under the masthead on page 8 - 'Executive Editor: Antoine 
Ouradi. Consulting Editor: Nicholas Guest' - and blushed, out of pride 
and a vague sense of imposture. He thought how relieved his parents 
would be to see that, to see his name in print as a distinction, not a 
shameful worry. It fortified him. He went on through, stopping for a 
moment on each page - he'd read every word of it ten times in proof 
and passed the pages for the printer but he felt they had undergone a 
further unaccountable mutation to become a magazine… he blurred 
his eyes against the impossible late mistake. 
 His own article, deferentially far back, behind Anthony Burgess 
on brothels and Marco Cassani on the Gothic revival in Italy, was 
about the Line of Beauty, illustrated with sumptuous photos of 
brooches, mirrors, lakes, the legs of rococo saints and sofas. He read it 
with a beating heart, going back once or twice to ride the slide of an 
elegant sentence again. Beside him as he read were other admirers… 
Professor Ettrick, his trust in a litde-seen student restored… Anthony 
Burgess, in Monaco, brought to a marvelling halt as he skimmed his 
contributor's copy… Lionel Kessler, relaxing perhaps on a Louis 
Quinze day bed, garlanded all round with lines of beauty, seeing 
welcome proof that his clever maligned young friend was a mensch. 
Nick went on, with a confident smile, through the latter pages, the 
glowing short features on mah-jong sets and toy soldiers of the Raj. 
The inside back cover, to his satisfaction, was an ad for 'Je Promets'. 
And after that the answering angel with its lifted wing. Nick took the 
highest view of it all, his initial timidity was flooded out by its opposite, 
a conviction that they'd produced a masterpiece. 
 Strange teetering mood of culmination. Five minutes later he 
wished he had it to read through fresh again; but that could never 
happen. He took a copy upstairs lo die Hat, and opened it at random 
several times - to find thai its splendour h.nl.1 glint to it, a glassy 
malignity. No, it was very good, li w.ilustrous. 
 The lustre was perfected and intense 11 w.is die shine of marble 
and varnish. It was the gleam of somctlimi', that was over. 
 How he wished Wani could have been here to see it - he'd missed 
it by five minutes. He could have taken it with him to Yorkshire, given 
copies to the guests, to Toby, to Sophie, to die Duchess, to Brad and 
Treat. Nick pictured Roddy Shepton, huge in tails and top hat, casting 
a wary eye over it as he waited for a drink. He pictured Wani himself, 
shuffling through the rooms in chilly defiance to show them the one 
beautiful thing he had managed to make out of his millions - it would 
confirm or confound their slight expectations that he was or wasn't 
going to do something. The reflex acclaim for anything published by a 
child of the fellow-rich would be loud, but tempered by disgust at his 
illness and remembered unease about his origins. Copies would be left 
behind in bedrooms and lavatories. Nick sighed over their fate and 
then thought how silly he was, since Wani hadn't taken the magazine 
with him; and really there were worse things to imagine. He was afraid, 
for instance, that he hadn't been careful enough in checking Wani s 
bags - he could easily have had other wraps of coke in his pockets or 
in his rolled socks. The crisis in May had forcibly broken his habit, but 
the reprieve, the return to London and its suddenly finite pleasures, 
must have pulsed with temptation. Nat himself was clean now, but his 
friends included half a dozen steady users, who could easily and 
carelessly offer Wani a line. And his heart was very weak. It would be a 
kind of suicide. 
 Nick stood at the kitchen window, hardly seeing the house-backs 
opposite as he lived through the phone call, from Sharon perhaps, or 
from Gerald himself, tersely dutiful: a massive heart attack. There was 
nothing they could do. 
 When he went into the sitting room, there was the magazine on 
the table. It was a weird sort of launch, when there was never going to 
be a second issue. It would be good if people knew that, and prized it 
as itself, not as a portent or pilot of something to come. It was the only 
Ogee. Lying there, in a room in his house, at noon on a mild autumn 
day, it might have been Wani's memorial tablet, with the angel's wing 
sheltering the blank where his name and achievements should go. 
Next morning Nick drove up CO Kensington Park Gardens to collect 
his things. There was intermittent drizzle and he wondered if the 
wedding hats were being spoiled in Yorkshire. The wide street was 
empty, with ih. it accidental vacancy of a London street, a momentary 
lull in which the pavements, the house-fronts, the rain-striped 
windows have the aura of the deja vu. He let himself in at number 48, 
hasty in the new skills of avoiding notice: which he countered 
needlessly by slamming the door shut. 
 Inside, in the hall: the sound… the impassive rumble of London 
shrunk to a hum, barely noticed, as if the grey light itself were subtly 
acoustic. Nick felt he'd chanced on the undisturbed atmosphere of the 
house, larger than this year's troubles, as it had been without him and 
would be after he'd gone. The gilt lantern burned palely in the 
stairwell, but in die dining room the ordinary shadows deepened in the 
corners and hung like smoke in the coving of the ceiling. The boulle 
clock ticked, with mindless vigilance. He went up the stone stairs and 
into the drawing room. It was really just a matter of finding his own 
bits and pieces, the CDs mixed in family-wise with theirs, a book that 
he'd lent them and watched filter slowly and unread to the bottom of 
the pile. He stood by the piano and thought about giving the Mozart 
Andante a final go; but the effect would have been maudlin as well as 
laughably inept. Toby's portrait looked out at him, an emblem of 
adolescence in its hormonal glow and expectant frown. It added an 
urgency to the need to move on. Nick stood in front of the fireplace, 
holding his possessions against his chest. A lorry passed outside, and 
the windows throbbed in their frames for a moment, in sympathy with 
its roar and the rattle of its tailgate, and then the broad quasi-silence 
disclosed itself again. 
 And something else, what was it?, the smell of the place, tapestry 
smell, polished wood, lilies, almost churchy - he felt his senses seize 
and resign the thousand impressions he'd grown used to. 
 And it all reached back. It spoke of Gerald and Rachel without 
visible interruption. I le went down to the kitchen, where the tidiness 
and prolusion, «tic- jars, the noticeboard, the draped dishclodi, were 
signs of a wide, deep system. He was already an intruder, glancing up 
at the photos of these absent celebrities. 
 He went down again, to the basement, to fetch some cardboard 
boxes from die trou de gloire. This lumber room under die kitchen was 
where die gilt ballroom chairs were stacked and interesting old tables 
and bleary mirrors abandoned; and where Mr Duke kept his paints, 
ladders, and toolboxes, along with a ketde and a calendar - it was his 
den, and Nick almost expected to find him there, in the subconscious 
of the house. He pressed down the light switch and got the shock of 
the wallpaper, which was purple with a pattern like black wrought 
iron, only partly hidden by all the junk. It always amazed him. It spoke 
of a time before Gerald and Rachel, and a different idea from theirs of 
what was great fun. Like his own parents they seemed to have avoided 
the '60s, with its novel possibilities and worthwhile mistakes. Perhaps 
in the Highgate days they'd had a joss stick and a floor cushion, but 
here the purple room was the junk room. Nick found some old wine 
boxes, and took them awkwardly upstairs. He wondered who'd lived 
here before the Feddens. There might well have been only three or four 
owners in the years since the whole speculation rose up out of die 
Notting Hill paddocks and slums. It was a house diat encouraged die 
view its inhabitants had of themselves. Nick tliought of Gerald's 
showmanship, die parties, the padietic climax of the PM's visit. That 
had been just a year ago, another drizzly autumn wedding… He 
stopped on the second-floor landing, set down the boxes and went into 
Gerald and Rachel's bedroom. From the window there was the view of 
die gardens, in slanting rain, the large brown leaves of the planes 
dropping and blowing. It was a grander but closer view than the one 
he'd grown used to upstairs, the treetop view, with other rooftops and 
a spire beyond. The gardens grew smaller at this time of year: you saw 
the far fence and die street outside. He turned and walked softly on die 
pale carpet towards the bed. Who slept on which side? - Rachel here, 
clearly, with the novels and the earplugs. The little Gauguin landscape 
Lionel had given them hung opposite. On the round walnut table, with 
a bowl of lavender, and china boxes, stood the photographs in silver, 
ivory, or red-velvet frames. 
 He picked up die one of Toby as a Lord of Tyre - Nick couldn't 
remember his name. He was the trusty minister who looked after 
things while Pericles went on his travels; he only came on at die 
beginning and the end, and spent the middle acts lounging restively 
around the cricket pavilion, which was used as the green room for 
these open-air plays. It was June, the smell of the lake and cut grass 
outside, creosote and linseed in the stuffy pavilion. Toby took off his 
heavy tunic, and blocked imaginary deliveries with a cricket bat as he 
waited for Sophie, who was playing Marina, to come off. Someone had 
photographed him dien. 
 He wore dark tights, and his own suede shoes. His naked upper 
body looked very white against the line round his neck where the 
make-up ended. His face 'was feminine, over-beautiful, a dancer's face, 
his body muscular and jutting enough to cause amusement in others. 
Nick had the brief but memorable role of Cerimon, the Lord of Ephesus 
who revives Queen Thaissa when she's washed ashore in her coffin: it 
was one of the intensest experiences of his life: 'I hold it ever / Virtue 
and cunning were endowments greater / Than nobleness and 
riches…', his heart slamming, tears in his eyes; and then it was over, 
he made his dignified exit - a sense of floating and thinness, a forced 
adaptation to die scene outside the circle of lit stage anil dark 
audience, who were already attending to what came afterwards. He 
peeled off his grey beard, twirled oil his cloak, and had a jealous bottle 
of Guinness while Toby 'unconsciously' llcxcd his biceps for Sophie - 
they were preoccupied l»v en li oilu-i and by having still to go on. Toby 
wasn't a very good actor, but the role was only a bit of rhetoric, quite 
unpsychological, and he was warmly applauded - tliere was something 
right about him. He did it as if there was no more to acting than to 
rowing or passing a rugger ball. He was neither modest nor vain. 
 Nick knew he would never see the picture again, and found it 
hard to put it back on the table. It gleamed in the rainy light as an 
emblem of why he'd come here. 
 It wasn't clear with Toby, any more than with Leo and Wani, if 
fantasy could hold back time, if this sleek second-year with his 
sportsman's legs and marvellous arse could still excite him when he 
knew the fat Toby of five years on. Well, not in the mind, perhaps, but 
in an image, a photo: it took a certain aesthetic nerve to fly in the face 
of the facts. He did something silly and solemn, and left on the glass 
the light, blurred imprint of his lips and the tip of his nose. 
 Up in his room he pulled handfuls of books from his shelves and 
thrust them like bricks into the boxes. He hardened himself against 
his taste for nostalgia - die long-breathed leisure of the old days was 
over, matters were more urgent and unsure. The week ahead was 
already shadowed by the wait for his test results. 
 The boost, the premature relief of taking charge and agreeing to 
learn the worst, waned steeply in the following days; already when he 
thought of it he felt unreachably alone. It was the third test he'd had, 
and that fact, and the mysterious number three, seemed by moments 
to shrink and to swell the chance of a positive result. 
 The boxes filled immediately, in proof of the ungraspable formula 
relating shelf-length to box-capacity. He carried one of them down, and 
as he dumped it in the hall he heard the sound of the back door being 
unlocked, feet scuffed on the mat, an umbrella shaken. Elena? Or 
Eileen again? Whoever it was was very unwelcome. He was annoyed by 
their furtiveness as well as their confidence. He went into the kitchen 
with a bored look. 
 'Oh my god!' said Penny in a breathy rush. She held the pink 
bundle of her umbrella in front of her chest. Then, furious to have 
been frightened, she said, 'Mm, hello, Nick,' and went to the sink with 
a bored look of her own. 'I thought you'd gone,' she said. 
 'I think I thought you'd gone,' said Nick, quite gently. They'd both 
been in the wars, and he felt they might finally have found some 
ground to share. There was an outside chance she might give him 
some sympathy, which so far he hadn't had a taste of; and to him 
commiseration was always easy. 
 She settled the wet brolly, like a blown flower, and came back 
across the room. 
 'In five minutes I will have. I'm getting my things.' He seemed 
almost to be blocking her way. 'You're not at the wedding,' she said. 'I 
thought I'd give it a miss.' 
 'Yes. Well, I don't know them, of course.' 
 'Oh, Nat's awfully nice.' 
 'Uh-huh.' 
 'I don't think anyone really knows Beatriz yet. Hardly even Nat 
actually!' 
 'She's Argentinian, isn't she?' 
 'Yes, she's a rich widow. Her first husband broke his neck 
playing polo.' He hesitated and said, Apparendy she's four months 
pregnant.' 
 Penny made a grim snuffle. 'At least I avoided that,' she said, and 
with this tiny sarcastic self-exposure she edged past him and out of 
the room. 
 He hadn't seen her Mine the nipjii. it Badgers flat, and he had to 
admit she had. in i inn est, u bleak unanticipated glamour. A week ago 
lui ti. tim was known only to her family, her school and college frit ml., 
Uld hM work contacts; now millions worldwide had heard about her 
sex life. He watched her march off along the passage; his mocking 
sense of her as a busily ambitious litde person with no sense of 
humour rather faltered. He stood with a thin smile of remorse, and a 
minute later went after her into Gerald's study. She was standing 
reading a yard-long fax, which she clumsily folded and put down. She 
said, 'So where are you going to go?' crisply, almost as though she 
were despatching him herself. 
 'Oh, I'm staying at Wani's. Yup.' He gave a rueful smile over the 
ramparts of his own scandal, but no answering wave came from within 
hers. 'Then I'm going to start looking for a place of my own.' 
 'You're not worried about money.' 
 Nick shrugged. 'I've done all right, actually, in the past year or so. 
With a litde help from my friends… How about you?' 
 'I don't have much.' 
 'No, I mean, where are you staying?' 
 'Oh, I've gone back home for a bit.' 
 'Right… How's Norman taken all this?' 
 'Well, how do you imagine? Very badly indeed.' She moved some 
papers on die desk and put diem down as if inadver-tendy on die 
looped fax. 'He detests Gerald, of course, and always has.' 
 Nick shook his head slowly, as if this was beyond his grasp. 'I 
never really believed that. Just because he's a Tory.' 
 'Fiddlesticks. He took Rachel off him - that's what he's never 
forgiven him for.' 
 'It was an incredibly long time ago,' said Nick, turning towards 
die window to cover his surprise. 
 'Well, Dad's like that. When he was young he thought he was 
going to be very happy and very rich. And then Gerald came along.' It 
was clearly an arrival she could vouch for the force of. Nick laughed for 
a second and was vaguely touched. 
 He said, 'We all know how competitive Gerald is.' 
 Penny searched in a drawer for a while before saying, 'Mmm…' It 
was more than competitive, it was pathological - to steal the girlfriend 
and then fuck the daughter. Clearly he wasn't called Banger for 
nothing. He said, widi a little whine of incredulity,* You've heard about 
his new directorship.' 
 'Yes… yes, I have.' 
 'It's rather amazing, isn't it? With the share thing hanging over 
him 'Oh, they'll want him,' said Penny. 
 'Yes,' said Nick. He remembered her when she first came here, 
with nothing but a good degree behind her, innocent, pliant, a little 
complacent at the candlelit table; now her eyes looked tired and 
guarded from the glare of the lights. 'It's rather amazing to resign in 
disgrace one day and be offered a job at eighty thousand a year the 
next.' 
 He was afraid she resented his word 'disgrace'. 'That's how this 
world works, Nick. Gerald can't lose. You've got to understand that.' 
She sat down at the desk and looked around it. He had the sense of 
her clearing it of any scraps of sentiment - it was a secret raid. 
 'I expect you'd like to be left alone,' he said. He came and stood in 
front of her so as to glance at die fax, which he saw was in Gerald's 
impossible handwriting: it ended with that breezy ideogram that might 
have been 'Love' or 'Yours' or 'Hello' and a big 'G' and a line of crosses. 
Then he found Penny was looking at him tensely, with a look that 
acknowledged the writing and the kisses, and with hurried blinks as 
she decided. 'I'm not giving him up, Nick.' 
 'Oh…' said Nick .1 m not. 'I see.' 
 'I don't care what Dad says, or Madam, or the Editor of the Sun.' 
 Nick stared respectfully, but said, 'I thought he'd virtually been 
given up for you.' 
 "What…? Oh, I see - well, publicly, yes. That's what we want 
people to think.' 
 'You say "we".' 
 'We're very much in love.' 
 Nick looked at the floor, perhaps impatiently. It seemed 
everything was going to go stubbornly on: first it was Rachel who 
wouldn't leave Gerald, and now Penny wouldn't either. He must have 
something extraordinary, Gerald, something Nick had been incapable 
of understanding. He saw the story reaching on through an obscure 
futurity; innumerable articles by the Mordant Analyst. He said, 'But 
how can you bear the secrecy?' with a real curiosity as to how someone 
else would answer this question. 'Perhaps it won't be a secret.' 
 'Hmm…' Nick's raised eyebrow and dry chuckle made her blush 
but not apparendy change her mind. 'Anyway, I don't care,' she said. 
'Well…' 
 'Catherine's always mocked and jeered at Gerald,' said Penny, as 
if not quite able to bear the line of talk she'd started. 
 Nick said hesitantly, 'I think it's pretty mutual.' Penny's world 
seemed only to make sense to her as a forcefield of detestations. 
 'I know she's always hated me,' she said, with a grim laugh that 
didn't quite spare Nick either; she didn't come out with it, but she 
seemed to know what he'd thought and said about her over the years. 
'You know that's not true,' said Nick, in a mutter at the pointlessness 
of saying it. 'I think it's herself that she hates most at the moment.' 
 Penny tucked her chin in, and gave him a very old-fashioned 
look. 'She was revelling in the whole thing, I would say.' 
 'That's not revelling, Penny. At first it seems thrilling, but dien it 
becomes a kind of torment to her, being manic' He realized that 
Penny's main source of views on Catherine would be Gerald; just as 
his own, besides a friend's intuition, was the strenuous prose of Dr E. 
J. Edelman. 
 'Well, it's nothing to the torment she's caused,' said Penny 
unrepentantly. 
 Nick shook his head at her in astonishment, and thought he 
might as well leave her to it. She was too excited to look at him as she 
said, 'I assume it was you that told her, was it?' 
 'Absolutely not!' said Nick. 'Well, that's certainly what Gerald 
thinks.' 
 Nick said, 'You see it's typical of Gerald to think she couldn't 
work it out for herself. Actually she's the cleverest one of us all.' 
 'I could tell you suspected something when you were with us in 
France,' Penny said. 
 'I was very worried about Rachel,' Nick said. 'She's an old friend.' 
 'Well, I wonder if she feels the same about you.' Penny gave him a 
short sharp smile, and then sat forward, with her elbows on the desk. 
And now, i(you'll excuse me,' she said, 'I have things to do,' and found 
a chance after all, in the dullest of formulas, for a further dismissal. 
 • Nick pulled the blue from door slim, double-locked the Yale 
locks and the Chubb lot k.. mil MUIHI liddling die keys off his ring. He 
held open the It-tinlm*. mil Hung them through and heard diem tinkle 
on the marble floor. Then he peered through the letterbox himself and 
saw diem lying there inaccessibly. 
 There was also the back-door key, so in fact he still could get in, 
but he soon threw diat in too. The one he was most reluctant about 
was the sleek bronze Yale for the communal gardens; it had a look of 
secrets to it. He could probably keep it, no one would remember; it 
would be nice to be still in fact, if not by rights, a keyholder. His eyes 
moved in lazy twitches of indecision. He hardly saw himself coming 
back, haunting the place, gazing up at the Feddens' windows for glints 
of the life they were leading without him. Painful and pointless. He 
pushed up die flap and put his hand through with the key in it, held it 
for a second before letting it drop onto the mat. 
 The little car was jammed full of boxes and curled heaps of 
clodies on hangers. 
 It sat low on its springs, under all these possessions heavy as 
passengers. Nick stood by it, still thinking, and then drifted 
unexpectedly down the street. The pavement was dry now in patches, 
but the sky was threatening and fast-moving. 
 The tall white house-fronts had a muted gleam. It came over him 
that die test result would be positive. The words that were said every 
day to others would be said to him, in that quiet consulting room 
whose desk and carpet and square modern armchair would share 
indissolubly in the moment. There was a large tranquil photograph in 
a frame, and a view of the hospital chimney from die window. He was 
young, without much training in stoicism. What would he do once he 
left die room? He dawdled on, rather breathless, seeing visions in die 
middle of the day. He tried to rationalize the fear, but its pull was too 
strong and original. It was inside himself, but die world around him, 
die parked cars, the cruising taxi, die church spire among the trees, 
had also been changed. They had been revealed. It was like a drug 
sensation, but without die awareness of play. 
 The motorcyclist who lived over the road clumped out in his 
leadiers and attended to his bike. Nick gazed at him and then looked 
away in a regret that held him and glazed him and kept him apart. 
There was nothing this man could do to help him. None of his friends 
could save him. The time came, and they learned die news in the room 
they were in, at a certain moment in their planned and continuing day. 
They woke die next morning, and after a while it came back to thtm. 
Nick searched their faces as they explored their feelings. He seemed to 
fade pretty quickly. He found himself yearning to know of dieir affairs, 
their successes, the novels and the new ideas that the few who 
remembered him might say he never knew, he never lived to find out. 
It was die morning's vision of die empty street, but projected far 
forward, into afternoons like this one decades hence, in the absent 
hum of their own business. The emotion was startling. It was a sort of 
terror, made up of emotions from every stage of his short life, weaning, 
homesickness, envy and self-pity; but he felt that the self-pity belonged 
to a larger pity. It was a love of the world that was shockingly 
unconditional. He stared back at the house, and then turned and 
drifted on. He looked in bewilderment at number 24, the final house 
with its regalia of stucco swags and bows. It wasn't just this street 
corner but the fact of a street corner at all that seemed, in the light of 
the moment, so beautiful. 
 
The End 
 
 
Cover Blurb 
 
'A novel so exquisitely written that at times it feels almost as if it could 
dispense with plot and characters and exist on a plane of pure 
perception and connotation. It doesn't, of course, and it ably depicts 
the high-days of a boom society and the ambiguous charm of being 
both insider and cuckoo in the nest. 
 But its delights and rewards extend beyond its comic or 
documentary achievements and are to be found in its author's almost 
uncanny apprehension of the world he observes' Alex Clark, The 
Sunday Times A novel which, though richly textured, has the ring of 
simple human truth. The book is Jamesian in the best sense; indeed, 
in some ways, Hollinghurst surpasses his master. His prose is both 
super-elegant and super-succinct' David Robson, Sunday Telegraph 
'Magnificent… There are literally thousands of impeccably, nuanced 
touches. Hollinghurst is living proof that the vaulting claims made by 
the Master on behalf of the novel - "the force and beauty of its process" 
- still hold good today Geoff Dyer, Daily Telegraph 'There is something 
memorable on every page… there is much to savour in The Line of 
Beauty, not least its humour, a shivering yet morally exacting satire 
that leaves no character untouched' Henry Hitchings, Times Literary 
Supplement 'Hollinghurst writes beautifully. His sentences seem at 
times sculptural, carved with a care and craft that it's possible to 
delight in. 
 He can illuminate character with the briefest of glances' Keith 
Ridgway, Irish Times 'One cannot help admiring the sheer classiness of 
writing that is the literary equivalent of leather upholstery and a 
walnut dashboard. Settling ourselves in the comfortable grip of 
Hollinghurst's flawless prose, we are taken on a ride through 1980s 
London that is smooth, unhurried and utterly captivating' Andrew 
Crumey, Scotland on Sunday 'An epic novel… Hollinghurst could not 
fail to write an elegant sentence and his style and gently acerbic 
humour carry the reader through a tumultuous era… A beautifully 
realised tale' 
 Attitude 'Luminous… a crafty, glittering, sidelong bid by a 
contemporary master of English prose to be considered heir to James 
himself Neel Mukherjee, The Times 'Hollinghurst proves himself to be 
one of the sharpest observers of privileged social groupings since 
Anthony Powell' Alfred Hickling, Guardian 'The title alludes to the S-
shaped double curve, thought by William Hogarth to be the model of 
beauty and elegance in painting. Conjured by Nick to describe a lover's 
body, it also illustrated the ways in which opposite compulsions and 
conflicting feelings flow into each other incessantly. It is an apposite 
figure for Hollinghurst's novel, which must rank among the funniest 
ever written about Thatcher's Britain, while remaining one of the most 
tragically sad' Angel Gurria-Quintana, Financial Times 'Hollinghurst's 
writing has a clarity, an unforced quality contained within the 
boundaries of a cool emotional reticence… always stylish and poised, 
with generous cadences of sorrow and delight' Peter Bradshaw, New 
Statesman Almost unbelievably well written… Negotiating cocaine, 
adultery, homosexuality and Margaret Thatcher in a serious novel 
requires a perfect touch, and Hollinghurst has shown that he has it. In 
its dazzling, very contemporary way, the book is tragic. But it is also 
consistently funny… Hollinghurst's sense of ambiguity is intensely 
artful, but, more than that, it feels lifelike' Sebastian Smee, Spectator 
'[A] brilliant recreation of that bigoted, nepotistic, racist, callous and 
mean-spirited epoch is timely… until this fabulous novel ends' Peter 
Conradi, Independent on Sunday Alan Hollinghurst is the author of 
three novels, The Swimming-Pool Library, The Folding Star and The 
Spell. He has received the Somerset Maugham Award and the James 
Tait Black Memorial Prize for Fiction, and he was shortlisted for the 
Booker Prize in 1994- He lives in London. 
