Organized for Antiquity: Software
Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw
Why We’re Organized for a Distant Past and How to Organize for
Modernity Instead
Kevin Meadows·Follow
36 min read·2 days ago
13
Photo by Birmingham Museums Trust on Unsplash
Open in app
Search Write
3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 1/44
Introduction
Before the advent of mass production in the twentieth century, most
workplaces were small outfits that did custom work using their own rules of
thumb to guide them. This approach meant that the work was expensive,
unpredictable, and could only be done in small volumes. A different method
was required as the nature of work shifted to large manufacturing centers,
and modern mass production began in earnest. Along with this shift came a
different mindset, changing the focus to organizing for maximum efficiency
because the scale of work was so much larger.
Enter Frederick Taylor and his Principles of Scientific Management [1].
Taylor used time-and-motion studies to determine the most efficient means
of producing work products, something he termed Scientific Management.
Gone were the rules of thumb, and in their place arose a management class,
those who were supposedly better educated and more enlightened about
how the work should be done. Using Taylor’s Scientific Principles, workers
were given instruction cards detailing precisely how the work should be
performed and how long it should take.
Although dismissing workers’ input about how best to do their jobs was
unwise, Taylor’s methods were undeniably transformative. Productivity
expanded dramatically, and profits followed [2]. What made these methods
successful? It was primarily the nature of the manufacturing work during
the era, which was characterized by the following attributes.
1. Tasks could be broken down into simple, repetitive, and measurable
steps.
2. Change was slow and predictable.3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 2/44
3. Information flowed slowly and mostly locally.
4. There was rarely any need to discover a new way of doing something
once an efficient method was found.
5. Competition was mainly local to the area or nation and was limited by
capital-intensive barriers.
By contrast, consider the attributes of software work.
1. The work is complex and difficult to reduce to simple steps.
2. Change is constant, and its pace is quickening.
3. Information flows instantly around the world.
4. Competition is fierce and worldwide, and there is a low barrier to entry.
5. Our environment can change overnight with a single social media post.
To state the obvious, Taylor’s work attributes define a bygone era that no
longer exists. Yet we still use his methods for organizing our software work
and are so immersed in them that we don’t realize their pervasiveness. As
we’ll see below, this mindset is profoundly misapplied when it comes to
software engineering. It’s long past the time to move away from antiquity
and rethink how we organize our efforts.
But why are we stuck in the past? To answer that question, we must first
delve into the nature of software engineering.
The Nature of Software Engineering
Software engineering’s multi-fold nature allows it to be viewed from
differing perspectives, each with a particular slant. This section examines3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 3/44
some of them, stitching together a view of our industry that we may not have
previously considered.
The Cynefin Framework
One way to understand software engineering’s nature is through the use of
the Cynefin Framework, a decision-making guide [3]. The framework is
divided into five domains, each with its own decision-making process. The
domains break down as follows.
from Wikipedia
Clear3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 4/44
In the Clear domain, cause and effect are easy to grasp, and taking an action
leads to a predictable outcome. The work is typically standardized, thus
allowing the creation of “best practices” that can be used to generate reliable
results. In this domain, we sense the facts of our situation, categorize them
according to rules, and then respond with the appropriate best practice.
Complicated
In the Complicated domain, cause and effect can still be understood, but it
requires analysis by trained experts exercising good judgment. Best
practices are replaced by “good practices” that are subject to change. Here,
we must first sense the situation to determine the facts, analyze the results,
and respond with the appropriate good practice.
Complex
In the Complex domain, cause and effect are unclear and can be determined
only via hindsight. No apparent “best” answers exist, but many possible
ideas could work. Here, we must first probe via experiments, sense the
results, and respond with actions we believe will have beneficial outcomes.
This domain lies squarely in the realm of “unknown unknowns.” That is, we
don’t know what we don’t know. Changes in one part of the system result in
unpredictable, non-linear changes in other areas. There are no best
practices, but beneficial practices will emerge with time. Rather than force a
plan of action, we must patiently allow the path forward to be revealed
through emergence and iteration.
Chaotic3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 5/44
In the Chaotic domain, cause and effect can’t be determined. Events are
uncontrolled and chaotic. The only way forward is to take quick action of any
kind. We must first act, sense the result, and then respond with further
action that seems appropriate, attempting to create order out of the chaos
around us. The goal is to eventually migrate the situation to the Complex
domain.
Confusion
The Confusion domain is located in the center of all others. Here, it isn’t
clear in which domain our environment lies. Different factions jostle for
power, and people argue with each other. The only way out is to break down
the problems into parts and assign each to a different domain, then respond
according to the dictates of the respective domains.
The Software Engineering Domain
Some of our software engineering work lies in the Clear or Complicated
domains. We’ve done these jobs before and have best practices for them. An
example in the Clear domain is changing the text on a button or updating
data for a website that displays sales tax rates. An example of the
Complicated domain would be adding an interface to an external service,
where we already use many others. This interface work is difficult, but we’ve
done it before, and it only requires careful execution from experts.
Occasionally, our work falls into the Chaotic domain. A good example is
when our subscription-based software unexpectedly goes offline, preventing
large numbers of paying users from doing their work.
However, we most often operate in the complex domain, where our work is
empirical, non-deterministic, and emergent [4]. To find a way forward, we
must probe with safe-to-fail experiments, sense the outcomes, and respond3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 6/44
with further experiments to illuminate a path. We must be patient and
iterative in our approach. Our solutions should be discovered through
experimentation rather than imposed from on high.
Even when we think we’re in a given quadrant, we often can’t know until we
finish the work. Worse, the boundaries between quadrants are fuzzy and
fluid. For example, our work might shift between Complicated and Complex
without us realizing it. This uncertainty makes predictive, planning-based
approaches frustratingly failure-prone.
Complex Adaptive Systems
A complex adaptive system is made up of multiple parts that dynamically
interact with each other in unpredictable and nonlinear ways. There is no
single part that controls the entire system, making interactions between the
parts difficult to predict and control [5]. Each part is affected by the actions
of others, unpredictably adapting to them. Identifying cause and effect in
such systems is an exercise in futility because a given cause may have an
impact that is randomly nonexistent, minor, or profound, and it’s nearly
impossible to predict which it will be [6]. Examples of complex adaptive
systems include economic markets, weather, nature, and software
engineering [7].
Why should we consider software engineering as a complex adaptive
system? Because it consists of complex, multiple agents dynamically
interacting with each other in autonomous, unpredictable ways. These
agents can be customers, regulators, programmers, code, markets,
requirements, or any other entity that affects the system. Each agent adapts
to the actions of other agents, and each adaptation leads to further rounds of
adaptations in a perpetual stimulus-response loop. Additionally, system
changes are nonlinear, and the magnitude of their effect can’t be estimated.3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 7/44
Finally, outcomes are highly dependent on initial conditions, which are
rarely known to a sufficiently detailed level to predict future responses [5].
Unlike easily modeled, simple systems, such as manufacturing assembly
lines, the interconnected nature of complex adaptive systems defy
prediction. It’s nearly impossible to envision how they will respond and
evolve. Put simply, software engineering will never be a simple, predictable
endeavor, no matter how much we may otherwise prefer it. It’s firmly
anchored in the complex, adaptive realm.
Parenthetically, one of the more exasperating aspects of a complex adaptive system
is that the ability to predict one part of the system doesn’t mean we can predict the
whole system. We frequently see this dynamic when we break down software
projects into tasks and subtasks, estimate each one, and combine the individual
estimates to arrive at an overall estimate. Unfortunately, even if we’re lucky
enough to estimate some of the individual tasks accurately, the combined estimate
typically fails, often spectacularly. It’s tempting to blame the estimators for a lack
of skill when this happens, but it’s an inescapable characteristic of complex
adaptive systems. No matter how often we try to improve our estimates, we can
never escape the unpredictability of these type of systems. They defy predictions.
The question we might ask ourselves is why we continue to believe otherwise.
Manufacturing vs Software Engineering
Belief in the manufacturing approach leads software companies to organize
their people for efficiency and execution, dividing the work up into
specialties, with each specialty a separate department. For example, there
are departments for Product Management, Development, Database, QA, and
DevOps. Department managers oversee the work, making sure it’s done
according to schedule and everyone is kept fully utilized to maximize
efficiency. As each specialist completes their work, the product moves in3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 8/44
assembly-line fashion to the next specialist in the line, who completes their
work, passes it to the next, and so on. Each specialist adds shape and form to
the item until it emerges from the end of the line as a fully-fledged work
product ready for customers. It’s an intuitive, straightforward process that’s
easily organized. Unfortunately, it isn’t very effective.
It’s natural to wonder why Taylor’s methods were effective in manufacturing
yet perpetually yield disappointing results when we apply them to software
engineering. It seems so sensible that the same basic approach should work
for any sort of manufacturing endeavor, whether it’s a physical product or
the zeroes and ones of software. So why don’t we see the success Taylor did?
Because software isn’t the same as manufacturing. In software, unlike in
manufacturing, once we figure out how to do something, that knowledge is
of little use for the next task because it’s different from the previous one.
Taylor never had to face our persistent and stubborn problem:
In software engineering, we never do the same thing over and over again.
Instead, each task we undertake is different from the last. If the tasks were
the same, we would simply use our software skills to automate the process.
No matter how much the new task might rhyme with those in the past, they
are never the same, meaning that we must perpetually innovate.
If only it were as simple as figuring out how to do a task and then doing it
over and over again, as in manufacturing. If only the work were
deterministic and the pace of change was slow, as it was for Taylor. Alas, it
just doesn’t work that way for us. Consider how Harvard Professor Amy
Edmondson describes Taylor’s era and then contrast it to our fast-paced,
uncertain, modern software world:3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 9/44
“Periods of stability could be counted on. Products, processes, and even customers
were mercifully uniform, minimizing the need for real-time improvisation to
respond to unexpected problems, technological changes, or customer needs.” [8]
Amy Edmondson
However discomforting it may be to accept, software engineering is
knowledge work, and knowledge work reflects complex, unpredictable
processes, not the predictable ones that Taylor encountered. For us, it’s
always something new every time. Mass production methods simply don’t
apply to us.
Our Flawed Mental Framework
What accounts for our long history of organizing our software outfits like we
were doing repetitive manufacturing work? Habit and uncritical thinking,
perhaps, which leads to a flawed mental framework.
We assume that we operate in an orderly and predictable world and that any
uncertainty can be controlled with adequate planning and oversight. This
belief lies at the root of our plans and managerial structures. If our business
domain is predictable, the thinking goes, we can create command-and-
control systems that will drive plannable, consistent, and predictable results.
At its core, our failures are caused by our inability to grasp the mathematical
foundation of knowledge work and innovation. We don’t realize we’re
mistakenly assuming that nondeterministic, stochastic processes can be
planned and predicted as if they were deterministic and linear.
Whether we realize it or not, we’re essentially subscribing to the idea of a
clockwork universe, commonly known as Laplace’s Demon [9]. Laplace3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 10/44
believed that if an all-knowing, intelligent being (a “Demon”) knew the initial
conditions of a system to perfection, then it could predict the outcome of all
events far into the future. It was a perfectly deterministic view of the
universe.
We unknowingly make similar assumptions in our drive to predict the
outcome of our software efforts — typically cost and completion dates. We
believe that our businesses are complicated machines like Laplace’s Demon
that can be controlled with proper oversight and that doing so will yield
predictable outcomes.
Our work would be so much easier if this approach worked, but
unfortunately, it doesn’t. Randomness and minuscule imperfections in our
initial-conditions knowledge intrude into our perfect model and lead to
wildly divergent outcomes as time progresses [9]. In reality, we’re barely able
to understand what’s happening today, and we certainly don’t understand
what will happen in the future. Believing otherwise suggests a lack of
awareness of the fundamental nature of our work.
Our mental framework of predictable systems simply doesn’t apply to our
work, no matter how much we wish it did and how much we try to make it
fit. That’s the fundamental mismatch in software engineering. We manage it
like it was deterministic, but the reality is that it’s nondeterministic and
empirical, firmly anchored in the Complex realm.
“Our comforting conviction that the world makes sense rests on a secure
foundation: our almost unlimited ability to ignore our ignorance.” [10]
Daniel Kahneman3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 11/44
Pitfalls of Organizing for Antiquity
There are as many pitfalls of Organizing for Antiquity as there are
organizations, and each will manifest its unique varieties. Still, there are
broad classes that are common throughout the landscape. This section
describes some of those common problems.
Silos
As described above, it’s common to see software personnel organized into
separate departmental silos for Product Management, Development,
Database, QA, and DevOps. These examples are only a partial list, and a
moment’s thought provides many others. This separation makes sense if
we’re focused purely on efficiency, but it badly falters if we want the work to
flow continuously toward the customer.
The problem is that separating workers into silos causes information,
collaboration, learning, and work items to languish in the liminal spaces
between silos. Knowledge transfer and learning are throttled, meaning that
solutions derived in one department must be reinvented in others at a
significant cost. Instead of moving quickly through the system, work
products move in fits and starts, waiting on approvals from managers and
bandwidth from other teams. We gain efficiency within each silo by keeping
everyone busy, but we fail to see the enormous cost burden it imposes by
having teams that are isolated from each other.
An anecdote: I once worked in a company whose managers frequently complained
of “too many silos around here,” faulting those who resided in the silos for their
failure to reach into other silos to share information. The managers never seemed
to grasp that it wasn’t the fault of the workers. Instead, it was the fault of the
system, which was designed explicitly around insular silos, thereby separating the
people who should have been collaborating.3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 12/44
Queues
Separating workers into siloed departments inevitably means that queues
form between them as work items wait to move from one silo to the next.
Queues are shockingly pervasive, invisible, and unmanaged in most
workplaces. They are also economically damaging. How much? In his book,
The Principles of Product Development Flow [11], Donald Reinertsen states:
“Invisible and unmanaged queues are the root cause of poor economic
performance in Product Development.”
Donald Reinertsen
Queues result in lengthened delivery times, increased risk, lower quality,
and poor morale [12]. They also delay crucial feedback on our work until
long after we lose its intellectual context, requiring us to spend time and
money restoring it when we’re called to revisit the work. Additionally, this
late feedback means we waste time and money pursuing fruitless paths
before discovering a better course.
It may be surprising to realize that poor economic performance isn’t caused
by what most organizations suspect, such as idle workers, excessive salaries,
regulatory compliance, or a host of other costs. Instead, it’s a direct result of
how they’ve organized themselves and something over which they have
complete control.
The beloved children’s book author, Dr. Suess, unwittingly described
organizational queues in his book Oh, the Places You’ll Go! [13]. Simply
substitute the word “everything” for “people” and “Everyone”:3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 13/44
headed, I fear, toward a most useless place.
The Waiting Place…
…for people just waiting.
Waiting for a train to go
or a bus to come, or a plane to go
or the mail to come, or the rain to go
or the phone to ring, or the snow to snow
or the waiting around for a Yes or No
or waiting for their hair to grow.
Everyone is just waiting.
Inventory
In software engineering, inventory can be defined as any item where
thinking has been done and the item is stored while waiting for further
work. Examples include user stories sitting in a backlog and undeployed
code sitting in a repository. Tightly paired with queues, inventory is the
unavoidable byproduct of separating workers into silos.
We rarely consider inventory in software engineering circles because it’s
hidden on a computer rather than piling up on the shop floor, as in
manufacturing. Its lack of physical presence means it’s too often “out of
sight, out of mind.”
So what’s wrong with inventory? After all, in manufacturing businesses,
inventory is considered an asset on the balance sheet. However, it can be
argued that in software organizations, inventory is a liability that incurs
management costs until it becomes deployed software producing revenue, at
which point it’s converted into an asset. Indeed, in Lean Manufacturing
principles, inventory is classified as waste [14]. Additionally, inventory’s3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 14/44
usefulness decreases with time because markets may shift and no longer
reward our work by the time it’s finally deployed. With this viewpoint, it’s
easy to see that inventory is something expensive that we should minimize.
Bureaucracy
Once workers are organized into departments, managers for each
department are deemed a necessity. Each manager must then report to their
manager that their respective departments are fully utilized and their
workers are always on task. Status reports and other impediments of an
entrenched bureaucracy soon follow. Additionally, separate departments
inevitably create handoff artifacts to prove that each department has
adequately done its job and that if anything goes wrong, the department
can’t be blamed.
All of this “proof of busyness” does little to advance the customers’ interests
and mostly serves to justify the bureaucracy’s presence. The documentation
and checklists validate the work, but they don’t determine if we’re building
useful software, only that we’re working hard while simultaneously taking
time away from creating the very software our customers want. It’s a safe bet
that customers derive little or no value from status reports and other
bureaucratic output.
A more pernicious problem is that once a bureaucracy is established,
however small and inconsequential initially, it soon becomes a living
organism seeking to increase its reach and duration. Whatever positive
values it might provide, these are often subordinate to maintaining its
existence.
Another downside of bureaucratized systems is their negative effect on
morale and initiative. Workers, hamstrung by restrictive processes and3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 15/44
approval procedures, are gradually worn down by bureaucratic red tape.
Their morale and initiative suffer, imperiling the organization’s future. Many
workers eventually succumb to learned indifference and simply strive to
“keep their heads down and their mouths shut.” This outcome is hardly a
recipe for long-term organizational success in the face of hungry
competitors [15].
When left unchecked, bureaucracy eventually drives out innovation,
independent thought, and the joy of solving problems. Everything is
standardized to serve the rule-makers, whose power is too often absolute. It’s
easy to convince ourselves that this approach makes work more predictable
and straightforward to measure. That’s unlikely, but one thing isn’t: our work
is ultimately less satisfying and less open to the innovation that drives
market advances and customer delight [15].
Planning and Predicting
Part of being organized for antiquity is believing that our work is predictable
and plannable. As discussed above, that simply isn’t possible with the
complex work we find in software engineering.
We can never know in advance whether the next task will be hard or easy.
Far too often, we think we’ve done the hard part, and the next bit will be
easy, only to find that it isn’t. It’s quite likely that the hardest part will be
whatever is next, and when that’s completed, the next part will also be hard,
if not harder.
Consider how many projects that are “90% done” require another 90% of
their time to finish the last 10%. That’s the nature of complex systems. We
can only determine how difficult and time-consuming something will be3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 16/44
after we’ve completed it. In short, certainty is found only in hindsight.
Foresight is just random guessing.
The downside to planning and prediction is that we’re spending our limited
time on wasteful practices. It would be much more productive to spend that
time building valuable software and improving our capabilities to do so.
Delaying Feedback
Being organized around departments and specialties means that we
accidentally create barriers to our workflow that impede our ability to
maximize the throughput of our work. In effect, it takes much longer than it
should to get market feedback to see if we’re on the right path or if we’re
going astray.
Rapid feedback provides powerful economic leverage [11]. Few companies
take advantage of it, quite possibly because they simply aren’t organized to
do so. Instead, their work products move sluggishly through a system
designed for efficiency instead of effectiveness, hampering their ability to
see if they’re on the right path and immediately pivot when they aren’t.
Organizations that fail to realize this will find themselves at a competitive
disadvantage.
Stifling Innovation
One of the unavoidable drawbacks of applying an assembly line mindset to
software engineering work is that we typically fail to leave time for
innovation. Suppose we believe that, like an assembly line, we make money
for every widget we manufacture. In that case, the natural conclusion is to
churn out as many widgets as possible to maximize profit. In effect, we
become a feature factory with little regard for the innovation that drives
long-term survival.3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 17/44
Additionally, when we adopt Taylor’s mantra of monitoring workers to get
the most from them, we rob them of their initiative, freedom to experiment
and adapt, and willingness to team up with others to solve problems that
can’t be solved by working independently. Instead, we should find a balance
between maintaining existing products and innovating new ones.
“… the managerial mindset that enables efficient execution actually inhibits an
organization’s ability to learn and innovate. The narrow focus on getting things
done inhibits the experimentation and reflection that are vital to sustainable
success.” [8]
Amy Edmondson
This “narrow focus on getting things done” by adhering to assembly line
processes means that we often fail to consider the long-term consequences
of our short-term thinking. Such an oversight leads to a steady accumulation
of technical debt, software bloat, fragile code bases, and other problems that
make it unnecessarily complicated to innovate.
An anecdote: I once worked in an outfit where a senior executive praised one of his
managers to me, admiringly saying, “He gets things done.” Given that the
manager was prone to making short-term decisions that came with substantial
long-term costs, I left unsaid my obvious rejoinder: “If only they were the right
things instead of the right-now things.” It was only years later that I realized it was
an example of being so focused on the present that it stifled long-term innovation.
The Capability Trap
There’s a cruel, self-reinforcing loop to organizing for antiquity. By
definition, this loop is nearly impossible to see when caught in it, making it
unlikely that we’ll pull ourselves out. It works like this: When we’re focused3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 18/44
on keeping the assembly line moving, we don’t have time to step back, find
the source of frequent problems, and make improvements to alleviate them.
In effect, we’re so busy firefighting we don’t have time to clear the
undergrowth causing all the firefighting. This approach typically means
we’re too busy for time-saving activities like refactoring messy code, writing
unit tests that make it safer to change code, or automating our build and
deployment process.
This phenomenon is so common across human systems that there’s a name
for it: The Capability Trap [16]. When organized for antiquity, there’s rarely
time to improve our capability. The result is that it becomes ever more
challenging to do our jobs, and we’re forced to work overtime to keep up
with demand. This overtime only makes the problem worse because
exhausted workers are prone to error, and fixing the mistakes means there’s
even less time to make things better. It’s a frustratingly self-reinforcing
pattern.
Unfortunately, the first rule of the Capability Trap is that when we’re caught
in it, we seldom know that we’re caught in it [16]. This diabolical blindness to
our predicament means we spend our time working harder and harder with
no apparent gain or realization that we need to extricate ourselves.
As an organization sinks deeper into the Capability Trap, managers may be
tempted to attribute their difficulties to workers’ laziness instead of the true
cause: an ineffective system.
If management believes that workers are lazy and shiftless, then it’s tempting
to institute a “get tough” policy that will frighten them into working hard.
Not only is management’s assessment wrong, but so is their solution.
Research shows that instilling fear has the opposite result of what we want3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 19/44
by making it harder for workers to concentrate, innovate, and solve complex
problems [8]. These activities are crucial to developing software.
Unfortunately, this result usually reinforces management’s belief that
workers are shirking, leading to further “get tough” measures and a
corresponding decrease in productivity, creating a self-reinforcing
downward spiral [17]. The upshot? We needn’t worry about competitors if
being “tough” makes us our own worst enemies.
“Fear may motivate those doing routine, unthinking, individual work, but it’s
crippling for those doing work that requires teaming and learning.” [8]
Amy Edmondson
These self-confirming attribution errors lead organizations into a cruel trap.
Unable to see that their actions exacerbate their predicament by creating a
fear-based environment (that their most skilled workers will escape), they
make the work even harder to complete, further reinforcing their attribution
errors. It’s a vicious cycle that sometimes ends only when the company
ceases to exist.
Because complexity and entropy accumulate with time, we must set aside
time to make things better. Otherwise, they’ll steadily get worse until getting
anything done is a Herculean task. That’s when managers become frustrated
that “it takes so long to get things done around here” and believe it’s because
no one is working hard enough. Punitive measures are then a short step
away, which only serve to worsen the problem.
Engendering fear into workers so that they “get things done” means that they
don’t have time or the intellectual ease to learn. In effect, we’re throwing3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 20/44
away the chance to get better at our jobs, discover new product ideas, and
increase our earnings potential.
An anecdote: Many years ago, I was an employee at an agency that placed its
people in businesses around the area, performing software work for the companies.
This usually entailed a meet-and-greet session with the client, where we would
gather in the manager’s office and introduce ourselves so we could understand
their needs and begin building trust. These were highly effective meetings that
instilled a sense of optimism for all involved, and I always looked forward to them.
Until one day.
We had landed a new client, and something immediately seemed amiss when we
walked into the manager’s office. Instead of a feeling of optimism and welcome,
there was an electric tension before we even started. Rather than offering friendly
handshakes, the manager immediately began interrogating us one by one, asking
questions such as:
“Where did you go to school? What did you study? What was your grade point
average?”
A few of these questions even veered uncomfortably into the personal realm.
Needless to say, after a few minutes of this, all of us were stealing glances at one
another that showed our disbelief at the manager’s tactics. Finally, when he
finished his inquisition, he turned to all of us and said:
“I’m going to keep you on your toes. I know you’ll try to cheat me, so understand
that I’m wise to you.”3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 21/44
If there was any doubt about the effectiveness of this approach, it became apparent
a few minutes later when we met the administrator of their computer system. I was
deeply dismayed to see someone so afraid of losing his job that he was unable to
focus on the task at hand.
It was again proven a few days later when this same administrator didn’t follow
our instructions about how to roll out one of our changes, causing the company’s
primary computer system to crash. In a rage, he left a voicemail filled with
profanity, threats, and blaming, everything short of investigating the problem to
avoid repeating it. In a twisted way, his rationale was understandable. He was
clearly terrified of his manager and probably wanted to deflect blame to protect
himself, a common tactic in destructive work environments. I suspect that anyone
who could leave for better working conditions had long ago done so.
I can never know for sure, but I think the manager in this episode genuinely
believed he was doing the right thing. I suspect he was simply unable to see the
damage he was causing and that there might be a better way to oversee others.
Perhaps the moral is that it pays to question what we think of as effective
management. We may be doing more harm than we realize.
Organizing for Modernity
It’s now time to turn from learning about our antiquated approach to
discovering modern organizational methods for software engineering. What
follows is a list of these ideas.
Change Our Mental Framework
The reality of the complex, adaptive, and emergent business world around us
no longer fits our simple, command-and-control approach. And no matter
how hard we try, we can’t continue to force fit our model onto a world that
doesn’t match it. Like it or not, we’re in an emergent, collaborative world.3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 22/44
Once we understand this, we’ll realize that instead of command-and-control
systems, we should create teams that thrive on uncertainty and respond to
change. We can then harness variability and uncertainty to generate just-in-
time responses that help us steer toward value.
Taylor had a deep mistrust of workers and a low opinion of their intellect,
believing they had to be carefully measured and monitored at all times lest
they shirk their duties or do the wrong thing. His opinion of them was so low
that he believed they had to be given strict instructions by a “more
intelligent” supervisor [1]. It’s difficult to see how this philosophy applies to
the knowledge workers in software engineering, yet we too often see traces
of it today. It’s time to leave Taylor in the past, where he belongs, and
incentivize collaboration, learning, experimentation, and making things
easier for tomorrow. Instead of keeping workers on a short leash, as Taylor
would, we should learn to trust the workers to self-organize around the best
way to do their work.
“Self-organization requires a fundamental departure from command and control
philosophy of traditional hierarchical bureaucratic organizations. Self-
organization requires a belief in local rationality of individuals and units (e.g.
those closest to the customer know the customer best).” [7]
Vidgen and Wang
We unwittingly incur a cost of delay by utilizing command-and-control,
hierarchical systems for approving decisions. More specifically, we assume
that information’s value is static and that there’s no loss of value as it slowly
migrates into the upward reaches of the hierarchy for approval. In reality,
information in modern workplaces has a frightfully short shelf-life, its value3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 23/44
quickly decaying with time, and delays bring a substantial and often invisible
cost.
“The practice of relaying decisions up and down the chain of command is premised
on the assumption that the organization has the time to do so, or, more accurately,
that the cost of delay is less than the cost of the errors produced by removing a
superior. However, it’s often the case that the risk of acting too slowly is higher
than the risk of letting competent people make judgment calls.” [6]
Stanley McChrystal
Become a Learning Organization
Learning organizations have cultures that focus on continuously acquiring
and disseminating knowledge throughout. They prioritize personal and
professional improvement, pursuing knowledge through experimentation,
psychological safety, an openness to new and sometimes oppositional ideas,
and leaving time for reflection [18]. They test the validity of their knowledge
through productive debate and entertaining dissenting viewpoints. They
seek to learn from everyone instead of knowledge being handed down from
above on stone tablets.
Humans are born with a remarkable superpower: intellectual curiosity, but
we’re too often willing to surrender it for the thrill of believing we’re right.
As wonderful as it is to believe we’re right, it’s much better to learn.
By breaking down silos, reaching across boundaries, and practicing
collaboration, learning organizations are able to spread knowledge
throughout their enterprise. While seemingly minor when viewed from a
short-term lens, the Principle of Marginal Gains [19] means that small, daily3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 24/44
improvements compound over time to produce remarkable long-term
benefits. This principle is the essence of a learning organization.
A learning organization understands that while it must exploit the profitable
niches it has found, it is insufficient to focus entirely on them. Due to
competitors and market forces, the niches are inevitably transient. The
organization must also seek new opportunities to ensure its long-term
survival.
“The long-term survival of an organization depends on its ability to engage in
enough exploitation to ensure the organization’s current viability and engage in
enough exploration to ensure its future viability.” [7]
Vidgen and Wang
Embrace and Learn from Failure
There are different classes of failure. The stereotypical viewpoint is that they
result from careless individuals who recklessly disregard the well-being of
their employers. That’s undoubtedly one class, although a vanishingly small
percentage. The far more common class of failure occurs because we don’t
yet know our path forward and must iteratively experiment to find it,
repeatedly failing and trying again until we find success. These are so-called
intelligent failures, and they’re a necessary component of working with
complex adaptive systems [20].
Failures are inevitable in complex adaptive systems because it’s nearly
impossible to get things right the first time. It takes trial-and-error
experiments to discover solutions, and failures along the path to discovery
are necessary steps to steer toward an end goal that can’t be seen at the
outset. Unfortunately, many organizations see failure as something that3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 25/44
needs to be punished instead of as something from which to learn. It’s all too
easy to point the finger at a single individual in the false belief that complex
systems are amenable to a single point of blame. The thinking seems to be
that all we must do is find that person, make an example of them through
punishment, and we will prevent future failures.
If only it were so simple.
Unfortunately, this approach does nothing to prevent future errors. It only
makes workers fearful (reducing their ability to solve problems), drives
failures underground, and destroys the learning opportunity that failure
provides.
Mistakes are part of how we learn, and we should make allowance for them.
Managers who celebrate perfect execution are unwittingly preventing their
teams from stretching hard enough [20]. It’s when stretched that we make
the mistakes that teach us new things. Worse, when managers make it clear
that they won’t tolerate mistakes, it does nothing to prevent them. It merely
buries the small, inescapable mistakes until they resurface in much larger
form to threaten the company’s survival [20]. A learning organization must
allow the free reporting of problems and mistakes so that their learning
opportunity isn’t lost.
“Executives often think if people aren’t blamed for failures, what will ensure that
they do their best? This concern is based on a false dichotomy. In actuality, a
climate for admitting failure can coexist with high standards for performance.” [6]
Stanley McChrystal3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 26/44
Finally, workers are often held accountable for the system’s failures, over
which they have little to no control. Rather than focusing on a command-
and-control response to complexity, we should focus on building systems
that are resilient to it.
Team of Teams
Most software organizations are built around vertically-arrayed silos of
specialist teams. As discussed above, this leads to problems with
coordination, communication, and learning. Rather than silos with rigid,
hierarchical chains of command, we might consider the idea of a Team of
Teams [6]. In this approach, team members move fluidly across teams,
establishing familiarity with other skills, providing expertise to teams who
lack it, and returning to their original team when done. No one is
permanently affixed to a given team for the duration of their employment
but instead resides in a network of teams.
One benefit of this approach is that information no longer decays in the
space between teams but is instead shared among them, disseminating
information across the enterprise. An additional benefit is that we minimize
the fundamental human tendency to align ourselves into tribes of Us and
Them. In theory, we want to believe that we’re all on the same team and
rowing in the same direction. In practice, it’s often anything but. Moving
individuals between teams means that the organization is less likely to divide
itself into groups of “they’re lousy and we aren’t,” fostering greater flow and
cooperation throughout the system. Put simply, teams who share members
perform better [6].
“We don’t need every member of a team to know everyone else on every other
team. We just need everyone to know someone on every other team. That way,
teams envision a friendly face on other teams rather than competitive rivals.” [6]3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 27/44
Stanley McChrystal
Software Teaming
There’s a readily available alternative to the problematic siloing strategy.
Rather than dividing our forces, we concentrate them and bring their
collective power to bear on our work. We group the people into teams who
physically work together, all addressing the same task at the same time, on
the same computer. This strategy is the Software Teaming (Mob
Programming) approach [21].
When we combine our forces, not everyone will be 100% needed at every
moment, but when needed, there’s no delay for someone engaging with the
team. The focus is on the flow of the work, keeping it moving toward the
customer and profit instead of the maximum utilization of individuals.
While it may be unnerving to realize that some team members will have
moments of idle time, the benefits we obtain can help us overcome our
unease. These benefits include:
1. The number and length of queues are reduced.
2. Less inventory is created.
3. With less waiting, code is more quickly delivered to customers,
increasing the throughput of revenue-producing products.
4. Quicker delivery provides an earlier return on investment. In the finance
world, sooner is better than later.
5. Quicker delivery allows rapid market feedback, which provides powerful
economic leverage, paving the path to greater profit.
6. Code is constantly reviewed and refactored in real time, reducing
duplicate code, improving designs, and minimizing expensive defects.3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 28/44
7. Technical knowledge is disseminated across the team instead of held
within individuals. There’s less risk of a single point of failure when
someone crucial quits. And in siloed companies, there’s usually someone
crucial who managers fear will quit.
8. Fewer meetings, emails, documentation, and other such items are
necessary to coordinate everyone’s work, thus allowing more time to
construct profitable software.
Open Allocation
One of the twelve Agile Principles is hiring motivated people, giving them
the tools they need, and trusting them to get the job done [22]. This principle
minimizes managerial impediments intended to detect unmotivated
workers, saving money by avoiding questionable oversight mechanisms. The
mechanism of Open Allocation is based on just such trust.
In Open Allocation, the workers propose ideas, and it’s their job to recruit
other workers to join them. Promising ideas naturally attract workers and
gather momentum. Weak ideas soon wither [23]. This approach is based
upon the Open Space concepts of a marketplace of ideas, the freedom to
choose those most interesting to us, and the ability to change our minds at
any moment and go somewhere else where we can add value [24]. In short,
we use market signals to determine which ideas are most viable and which
are best extinguished.
Instead of management deciding who will work on what, Open Allocation
lets workers choose from a constantly changing menu of offerings. In effect,
we tell them, “You’re good at what you do. That’s why we hired you. We trust
you to choose where you can add the most value.”3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 29/44
Open Allocation has the benefit of reducing the incentives that lead to
bureaucracy. There’s little need for expensive, hierarchical layers when we’re
free to propose and choose the work that interests us. This model means that
those who know their skills best, the individual workers, are free to choose
the place where they can best utilize their skills.
Agile organizations understand that the marketplace is dynamic and that
static projects hinder their ability to adapt. They realize that when faced with
constant change and rapidly shifting markets and technology, a much better
philosophy than static objectives is this:
Each day, you must arrive in the morning and determine the most important and
helpful thing that must be done right now. Often, that will be the same as
yesterday or last week, but sometimes it won’t. Holding on to earlier priorities
means you aren’t thinking hard enough about the complex, adaptive system
around you. Yesterday’s beliefs were fine yesterday but might be outdated today.
Hold them loosely, and be willing to change them at any moment.
Factors that Inhibit Change
If we decide to change our antiquated organizational structures into
something more modern, is this an easy thing to do? As it typically happens,
no. There are often considerable barriers to surmount, but as with most
difficult changes, the rewards are worth the effort. Besides, if it were easy,
everyone would do it, erasing its competitive advantage.
Dogma
Despite being highly intelligent creatures, humans aren’t always adept at
thinking about our thinking, especially when it comes to reevaluating long-
held, popular beliefs. These beliefs often calcify into dogma, where we no
longer weigh them carefully in the light of evidence but instead3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 30/44
unquestionably accept them. Worse, rather than considering the merit of
those who ask us to reconsider these beliefs, we sometimes become
defensive and hostile toward them.
We’re especially prone to dogma when we’re under severe pressure to get
things done. It isn’t unusual when questioning a long-held practice to be met
with an exasperated response and the retort, “We don’t have time for that!
Just get it done.” We can certainly argue that we “get things done faster”
when we don’t stop to question them, but whether that’s advisable in the long
term is another matter. In short, it’s easier to follow a well-worn path than to
blaze a new trail through the thicket, so it’s only natural for us to continue
doing the same thing.
It’s perhaps unsurprising that after more than a century of Taylorism [1], its
philosophy has become embedded in our thinking as dogma. At this point,
it’s simply rote, the hymn book from which everyone sings.
How do we jettison this dogmatic organizational view and consider
alternatives? The bad news is that there’s no easy answer. Dogma, by
definition, is a fundamental human tendency and is impervious to reason.
The good news is that we aren’t powerless. Simply being aware of dogma’s
ubiquity means that we’re more likely to resist its cognitive appeal.
If there’s an operating principle to help overcome dogma, perhaps it’s this
one:
Instead of dogma, leave room for doubt.
Utilization3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 31/44
Utilization is a common and rarely questioned belief that we must keep our
software engineering staff fully busy at all times or we’re wasting money
[25]. This philosophy is a direct outgrowth of Taylorism and is widespread in
companies that adhere to Taylor’s principles.
The problem we face when organizing for modernity is that we must accept
that all staff members will not be 100% utilized at all times when we’re
focused on keeping work products moving toward the customer. This
realization is often a step too far for those steeped in the utilization mantra,
and they typically resist any approach that permits anything other than the
full utilization of workers.
How do we circumvent this? Much as we do with the problem of dogma. Just
knowing that we have the problem is a big step toward reconsidering it and
eventually overcoming it. It’s also helpful to realize that our focus must shift
from utilization to keeping the work flowing.
Incentives
One thing is clear about incentives: they work [26], often too well and in
unintended ways that conflict with our desired goals.
Suppose a company is organized around specialist departments, command-
and-control hierarchies, and chain-of-command decision-making. In that
case, it’s tough to convince workers to change their practices without also
changing their incentive structures. Otherwise, we’re essentially saying to
them, “We’re rewarding you for doing this one thing but want you to do
another without the guarantee of a reward.”
It’s unrealistic to expect people to risk their paychecks for an uncertain
outcome. We need to change their incentives if we want them to change their3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 32/44
actions. We might even consider removing incentives outright, given the
research indicating how often they maximize the wrong behavior and
demotivate those who are otherwise self-motivated [26]. There’s little need
for incentives if we trust the workers to self-organize and do their best work.
“The best policy may be to avoid incentives altogether and focus instead on
creating systems in which intrinsic motivation, cooperation, ethical behavior,
trust, creativity, and joy in work can flourish.” [26]
Gipsie Ranney
Escalation of Commitment
As discussed above, some work environments regard failure as something to
be hidden when it happens and punished when it can’t be. It’s probably no
surprise that in these environments, people are loath to admit a strategy isn’t
working. They will continue with it instead, if for no other reason than job
preservation. If significant money and resources have been consumed along
the way, then the fear of job loss is magnified. This approach almost
guarantees that failing strategies will continue being used, even when it’s
abundantly clear that they should be abandoned.
Rather than stop and reconsider our methods, we often believe that failure is
due to our not applying them rigorously enough, neglecting to stop and
consider that our methodology might be flawed. If our heavily planned and
managed approach isn’t working, the thinking goes, it’s not because the
approach is fundamentally wrong. Instead, it’s because we’re not executing it
with sufficient dedication, and we must, therefore, redouble our efforts and
further our commitment to achieve success. This doubling-down on failure
is a common bias, so common, in fact, that it’s called Escalation of
Commitment [27].3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 33/44
We would be much better served by being cognitively curious, always willing
to reconsider cherished beliefs, and experimenting with new approaches in
a true agile fashion.
“There is comfort in doubling down on proven processes, regardless of their
efficacy. Few of us are criticized if we faithfully do what has worked many times
before. We no longer live in a world where planning and discipline will lead to
success. Instead, we live in a world that requires agility and innovation.” [6]
Stanley McChrystal
The Craving for Certainty
The desire for certainty is a cornerstone of many software workplaces.
Business plans and quarterly earnings imply that with sufficient skill and
devotion, our software endeavors can be as predictable as a manufacturing
assembly line. As detailed above, this simply isn’t possible.
But this expectation is so fundamental that we will employ agile frameworks
that promise predictable results by following their precise instructions and
checklists. It bears mentioning that the most predictable output of these
frameworks is not always agility but bureaucracy and expensive consultants
to guide us in using the framework.
Wanting to know what the future holds is a fundamental human need as old
as our species. That’s why we have horoscopes and fortune tellers. But in our
constantly changing, unpredictable software environment, how can any
process provide certainty about the future? It can’t, and we’ll benefit if we
resist believing so.3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 34/44
“[We must] fight against the desire for instructions that specify process steps and
guarantee results. We must accept that every process is necessarily inadequate and
can always be improved. Unfortunately, we crave the certainty of having a process
that promises guaranteed results.” [20]
Amy Edmondson
We too often seek the thrill of certainty in a domain where it’s rarely found.
Wanting immediate answers to problems that take time to understand and
define, we can make misinformed decisions and then rush to the next issue,
all the while certain that we know things we really don’t and acting on false
knowledge. Each rash decision comes with steadily accruing, long-term
costs, making our future work unnecessarily difficult. It’s a form of
deliberate ignorance in the pursuit of short-term gain.
Bureaucratic Resistance
Bureaucracies are adept at resisting change and preserving their dominance.
Even when we think we’ve reoriented them into a more nimble form, it’s
sometimes the case that we’ve merely transformed them into a different
bureaucracy. It can be a maddening exercise of squeezing a balloon, pushing
in one direction only to see it emerge in another, effectively negating the
effort [15].
The solution, if there is one, is to inform all stakeholders that the
organization’s long-term viability is the primary concern and must take
precedence over the short-term parochial interests of bureaucratic fiefdoms.
An anecdote: I once worked in a software firm that required software deployments
to be approved by multiple committees, each formed as a result of failed
deployments. The committees were subsets of one another, meaning that the same3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 35/44
members would be approving a deployment multiple times. To make matters
worse, most of the committee members were not technical people and had little
understanding of what was actually being deployed. They mostly asked questions
that tried to determine if I had done my homework. On the surface, it was an
understandable strategy intended to prevent disaster, but in reality, it did little to
prevent further failures. Instead, it only added layers of bureaucratic resistance. It
probably would have been better to streamline the committees into a single one.
Better still, remove them entirely by building more robust testing, code review, and
system resiliency instead of hoping that approval measures could prevent problems.
Closing Thoughts
In much of our industry, the foundational belief of how to organize ourselves
is based on false assumptions about the nature of our work, which ultimately
harms us in the long run. Our work lies in the Complex domain, not in the
simple, Clear domain of Taylor’s era. This phenomenon is why heavy,
bureaucratic systems struggle to keep up with the rapid and constant change
in the software industry.
For manufacturing outfits in the past, being organized for antiquity worked
well because the speed of business was slow, and the work was simple.
Today, we move at breakneck speeds, and the rate of speed continues to
increase. Organizing for antiquity means we’re structuring ourselves for a
world that no longer exists and never applied to software engineering.
There is perhaps a silver lining to the widespread practice of organizing our
workplaces according to Taylorism principles. If everyone is organized for
antiquity, it leaves a significant market opportunity for those who choose a
more modern approach. Better still, if the majority are dogmatic about their
method, they’re less likely to realize that a competitor has found a more3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 36/44
effective strategy and adopt it themselves, providing a long-term benefit to
those who organize for modernity.
Being organized for antiquity is a problem hiding in plain sight. We’ve
unwittingly subscribed to Taylor’s century-old principles, and only a
reconsideration of our belief system will reveal that we’re organized the
wrong way. It’s time to choose a different approach.
References
[1] Taylor, Frederick Winslow, 1911. “The Principles of Scientific
Management”
[2] Denning, Steve, 2024. “Putting The Man Before The System Drives The
World’s Most Valuable Firms”
https://www.forbes.com/sites/stevedenning/2024/02/04/putting-man-before-
the-system-drives-the-worlds-most-valuable-firms/
[3] Snowden, David, and Boone, Mary, 2007. “A Leader’s Framework for
Decision Making”
https://hbr.org/2007/11/a-leaders-framework-for-decision-making
[4] Pelrine, Joseph, 2011. “On Understanding Software Agility — A Social
Complexity Point Of View”
https://cdn.cognitive-edge.com/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2/2020/11/16124017/110510-On-Understanding-
Software-Agility.pdf
[5] Complex Adaptive System
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complex_adaptive_system3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 37/44
[6] McChrystal, Stanley, 2015. “Team of Teams: New Rules of Engagement for
a Complex World”
[7] Vidgen, Richard, and Wang, Xiaofeng, 2006. “Organizing for agility: A
complex adaptive systems perspective on agile software development
process”
https://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1123&context=ecis2006
[8] Edmondson, Amy, 2012. “Teaming: How Organizations Learn, Innovate,
and Compete in the Knowledge Economy”
[9] Carrol, Sean, 2019. “Where Quantum Probability Comes From”
https://www.quantamagazine.org/where-quantum-probability-comes-from-
20190909/
[10] Kahneman, Daniel, 2011. “Thinking, Fast and Slow”
[11] Reinertsen, Donald G., 2009. “The Principles of Product Development
Flow: Second Generation Lean Product Development”
[12] Zuill, W. and Meadows, K., 2022. “Software Teaming, A Mob
Programming, Whole-Team Approach. Second Edition”
[13] Suess, Dr., 1990. “Oh, the Places You’ll Go!”
[14] Lean Manufacturing Tools. “Waste of Inventory; causes, symptoms,
examples, solutions”
https://leanmanufacturingtools.org/106/waste-of-inventory-causes-
symptoms-examples-solutions/3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 38/44
[15] Meadows, Kevin, 2024. “The Bureaucratization of Agile: Why
Bureaucratic Software Environments Aren’t Agile”
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/the-bureaucratization-of-agile-
025dd5e2d2d0
[16] Landry, E. and Sterman, J., July 2017. “The Capability Trap: Prevalence
in Human Systems.” The 35th International Conference of the System
Dynamics Society (pp. 963 – 1010)
https://proceedings.systemdynamics.org/2017/proceed/papers/P1325.pdf
[17] Repenning, N. and Sterman, J., November 2000. “Self-Confirming
Attribution Errors in the Dynamics of Process Improvement.” Sloan School
of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
https://web.mit.edu/nelsonr/www/SelfConfAttErrors_v1.0.html.pdf
[18] Garvin, David, Edmondson, Amy, and Gino, Francesca, 2008. “Is Yours a
Learning Organization?”, Harvard Business Review
https://hbr.org/2008/03/is-yours-a-learning-organization
[19] Harrell, Eben, 2015. “How 1% Performance Improvements Led to
Olympic Gold”
https://hbr.org/2015/10/how-1-performance-improvements-led-to-olympic-
gold
[20] Edmondson, Amy, 2023. “Right Kind of Wrong: The Science of Failing
Well”
[21] Zuill, W., and Meadows, K., 2022. “Software Teaming: A Mob
Programming, Whole-Team Approach. Second Edition”3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 39/44
[22] “Principles Behind the Agile Manifesto”
https://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html
[23] Wikipedia, “Open Allocation”
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_allocation
[24] Owen, Harrison, “A Brief User’s Guide to Open Space Technology,” Open
Space World
https://openspaceworld.org/wp2/hho/papers/brief-users-guide-open-space-
technology/
[25] Meadows, K., 2023. “Utilization Considered Harmful: Why It’s Costly
Keeping Everyone Busy in Software Organizations”
https://jmlascala71.medium.com/utilization-considered-harmful-
f992776e5e3e
[26] Ranney, G., 2018. “The Trouble with Incentives: They Work,” Systems
Thinker, vol. 21
https://thesystemsthinker.com/%EF%BB%BFthe-trouble-with-incentives-
they-work/
[27] Wikipedia, “Escalation of Commitment”
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escalation_of_commitment
Agile Software Organization Design Taylorism Software Engineering
Business Re Engineering3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 40/44
Written by Kevin Meadows
92 Followers·1 Following
Kevin Meadows is a technologist with decades of experience in software
development, management, and numerical analysis.Follow
No responses yet
Ashley caceres Pagan
More from Kevin Meadows
What are your thoughts?
The Bureaucratization of Agile
Why Bureaucratic Software Environments
Aren’t Agile
Utilization Considered Harmful
Why It’s Costly Keeping Everyone Busy in
Software Organizations
Kevin Meadows
 Kevin Meadows3/29/25, 5:18 PM Organized for Antiquity: Software Engineering’s Fundamental Flaw | by Kevin Meadows | Mar, 2025 | Medium
https://medium.com/@jmlascala71/organized-for-antiquity-software-engineerings-fundamental-flaw-57bc2e5ef3c3 41/44
