Credit: Bailey Rosser
The Gambler and the Genie
How it feels to write code in partnership with a large language model
Drew Harry·Follow
16 min read·3 days ago
258 9Get unlimited access to the best of Medium for less than $1/week.Become a member
Open in app
Search Write
3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 1/22
hat if you could describe — in plain, non-technical English—an app
you want to create and it simply appeared? From a distance, this is
what an engineer does. Someone describes a feature they want added to the
app, the engineer asks some clarifying questions, and then adds the feature.
English in, code out. Simple enough. Now, swap out that human for a model
that has the same basic interface. Write your request for code into a box, see
that code spit back to you.
If this swap — a large language model like ChatGPT for a human — worked
when it comes to writing software, it would obviously be consequential.
Software is the engine at the heart of a significant portion of the economy.
We should take seriously this question: can you write code using just English
and no technical knowledge?
With no other constraints, the answer is “yes.” I can put a sentence into
Claude and get out a working game. Magic! So we’re done? The end of
humans writing software?
Not quite. Can you build something novel, something substantial, something
you can iterate on over time? Writing only in English? I’ve spent a couple of
months going deep with the best tools money can buy to do this, and the
answer is “absolutely not.”
The reasons why this doesn’t work are important to consider more deeply.
The way you write software with an LLM is quite different than writing
software “manually.” This transformation offers clues about how producing
software might change and what skills will be necessary to produce the
software of the future.
What kind of thing is an LLM?W3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 2/22
We regularly draw on physical objects to name software components. These
metaphors offer us intuition about the purpose and operation of otherwise
very complex bits of software.
Folder. Proxy. Server. Client. Desktop. Keys. Library. Trash Can. Dropbox.
Bookmark. Firewall. Cache. Passwords.
Many of these metaphors are so successful that they lose their connection to
their namesake entirely.
A technology as surprising and contested as the large language model
demands a metaphor. What is this thing?
One dangerously prominent option is “a person.” This is communicated to us
by the dominant interface to LLMs; the chat box. We enter a message, the
model processes (thinks?) and sends (types?) a response.
There are many sorts of relationships you might have with a person that
offer useful metaphors: coach, editor, teacher, therapist, lawyer, care-giver,
assistant, collaborator, friend, or lover. You can find a startup trying to sell
you each of these kinds of “people.”
Perhaps the most valuable relationship is “employee.” If you can craft an
experience that feels like sending an email or a text message to an
“employee” and they complete the work for you, that would be a jackpot.
The Genie
When I’m writing code with an LLM, I don’t feel like I have an employee or a
partner. It feels like I have a mediocre Genie. I imagine a feature I want to3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 3/22
build, rub the lamp, and make a wish. Sometimes I get what I want,
sometimes I don’t.
Luckily, this Genie doesn’t have a limit on wishes. If I get something useless
in response to my wish, that’s okay. I can wish again with slightly different
wording and maybe that will work.
This metaphor makes us face an immediate problem. Do I actually know
what I want? Can I describe it? Genies are known for their literal
interpretation of wishes, and this one is no different.
In a very basic sense, the Genie has to read between the lines of your wish. If
I ask for a certain capability in 20 words, perhaps 50 lines of code are
generated. My words and the generated code are both attempts to represent
the same idea, but there is quite a bit more code than words describing the
code. I am taking advantage of the ambiguity that natural language affords to
save time manipulating the code itself. The Genie is making assumptions
about what I meant based on the rest of the code, our past conversations,
and all the code it has been trained on from other people. Herein lies a
fundamental (and perhaps irresolvable) tension. The more precisely I write
my prompt to get something useful, the less value I’m getting from having a
Genie in the first place. So I’m encouraged to be pithy and hope the Genie
will give me what I wanted.
A pithy prompt. I don’t even offer the LLM clarity on what “proper” would be. But this worked!
3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 4/22
A more elaborate prompt, but one that still seriously under-specifies all the implementation details. Worked
fine.
Unfortunately, what I want is often not clear to myself. When I want
something nearly identical to something that exists in the world already, I
just name the thing I want to copy. So when I say “like that thing someone
else made, but slightly different” it is uncommonly good at delivering what
you ask for.
But when I step outside that territory and try to make something new, I run
into two roadblocks.
1. Without something to mimic, the Genie is much worse at generating
working code.
2. Without something to mimic, I don’t actually know what I want. So my
descriptions of what to build are less explicit and leave more to the
imagination. Which in turn tends to disappoint me even when it does
work.
Without the Genie, I might carefully map out what I want to build. Its
components and their connections, or draw a picture of the end result I’m
aiming for. But the Genie is patient, and will iterate with me indefinitely. So
instead of having a plan, it’s more like I’m throwing darts. Make this. No, not
like that, make it more like this. Ugh, that doesn’t work. I give up and I’ll ask
again tomorrow and see if I get a different result. I think a lot less, and shift
into “guess and check” mode.
Mechanics, Doctors, Detectives, and the Gambler
3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 5/22
When the process of producing code is nearly instantaneous, the affective
experience of writing software undergoes a shift. The experience would,
“before,” be a mangle of activities like this:
Think about what you intend to build next.
Explore your existing code.
Add some code, see what happens.
Look up documentation (or StackOverflow) to figure out how something
is supposed to work.
Open your “debugger” — a highly sophisticated diagnostic tool that lets
you peer into the operations of a program and see what’s happening.
Think about what you should name something in your program.
Sketch a design for something on a piece of paper.
Go for a walk.
It is a contemplative, deliberative, intentional process. Sometimes you’re like
a Mechanic, replacing an old component with something more modern and
high performance. Other times you are like a Doctor, ordering a battery of
labs to diagnose a concerning outcome.
Then there’s the anticipation every time you run your code — did you get it
right? And a moment of joy when it works as you hoped. Most of the time,
though, nothing happens and you’re left scratching your head and
wondering where you went wrong.
My favorite role is the Detective. You’re in a “Beautiful Mind”-style fugue
state and suddenly all the pieces fit together. You experience the elation of3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 6/22
successful deduction. You see with perfect clarity why something that should
work is broken. You make one careful change in the exact right place and
then everything works.
The Genie ends these roles. It does the scientific work of the Doctor, the
Mechanic’s work of installing new capabilities, and (less well) the Detective’s
work of synthesizing the evidence required to make sense of a mysterious
bug.
In their place emerges “the Gambler.” The Gambler does not study the code
or make plans. The Gambler keeps asking the Genie for code until
something they desire appears in front of them. Then they start asking for
something new. And so on until the Gambler gets exhausted, because the
Genie never will.
Sometimes, simple requests fail. You ask to change the color of something,
and the Genie simply doesn’t do it. Ask again, and it sheepishly says “Oh,
sorry. Sure!” Sometimes you ask to change the layout of a screen and it
breaks all the buttons on the screen at the same time.
Commo n failure mode; prior functionality is removed as a side effect of adding new functionality.
3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 7/22
Sometimes your code will fail in an odd way and you don’t know why. You
ask the Genie “any ideas why this might not work?” And the Genie suggests a
fix that works perfectly. Or it might suggest an obviously irrelevant change to
a part of your code that is operating perfectly fine. Try again?
Responding to a proposed change that computed (-1,-1) as a valid point for a circle with radius 1. It’s not.
We must not neglect that being a Gambler is quite a bit more fun than being
a Mechanic, a Doctor, or a Detective. Sometimes, you gamble and win. A task
that might have taken you hours without your Genie is completed in
minutes. It’s done in a way you would not have realized would work, but is
more elegant than you might have imagined without much more time
planning. And when you lose, the sting isn’t that bad. Just ask the Genie in a
different way. All you have to lose is your own time.
Finding The Right Questions
There is tremendous variation in how to build any given piece of software.
Even if you could describe the behavior of a piece of software in a truly
exhaustive way (which is known to be possible for narrow, math-y pieces of a
program), there are many ways to do it. They are not equally useful.
Consider an analog example. You tell the Genie “make me a robot that can
get me any book I want from the library given a title and author.” The Genie
produces a machine that rolls around the stacks and scans every book,
3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 8/22
looking for the title/author combination you requested. It can take anywhere
from 5 minutes to about an hour to find what you’re looking for. Even worse,
it can’t tell you the library doesn’t have the book without spending an hour
doing a complete search.
You might say “do it faster” or “use the card catalog instead of checking every
book” or “check another library if the first one doesn’t have the book.”
Sometimes these additions will work great. More often, some element of how
the existing code operates will make it difficult to add the next feature you
imagine. At which point, you have to tear down what you’ve built so far, and
rebuild the code from scratch with your hard-earned foresight about where
you intend to go.
This is one great weakness of the Genie. You cannot necessarily transform a
piece of software that does one thing into a piece of software that does two
things. The order of the questions you ask, and the way you phrase them,
really do have an impact on whether you get working code out the other end.
Do I get better results when I ask nicely? Should I be terse or verbose?
Should I ask the Genie for ideas about what to do next? Do I need to remind
the Genie not to break the code that works? The Genie offers no feedback; it
appears to understand you reasonably well regardless of what you do, but
can produce all manner of outcomes even with similar sorts of questions.
This feeds the Gambler’s superstition. Sometimes it feels like you’re gaining
mastery over the Genie, learning to deploy it more effectively. Intuiting what
it will struggle with and where it will shine. But the Genie is full of surprises.3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 9/22
Sometimes it seems slower or faster at different times of day. More
perceptive at night, maybe. Who can say?
Superstition or not, this more ad hoc, improvisational mode of producing
software has a real velocity to it. I don’t finish a session working with the
Genie to be exhausting. I don’t feel taxed to my intellectual limits. When I
consider a new arc of work, I feel a sense of possibility more than I feel
overwhelmed by uncertainty or difficulty. Maybe this is just my relatively
weak engineering skills peeking through. As someone more motivated by
the result than the craft itself, though, I find that removing a significant
amount of the mechanical drudgery of producing code is mildly liberating.
A bit of code that calculates a color some percentage “between” two colors. In other words, it transforms the
statement “find a color 22% between blue and green” into a specific color. The Genie generated this working
code in one shot with a very minimalist prompt, probably because this is commo n task.
3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 10/22
I have always been someone who thinks out loud, and the Genie plays
naturally to this instinct. Instead of saying “add keyboard input with re-
mappable inputs” I might say “I’m thinking about a new keyboard input
system. I know I will want to support alternate key mappings for players who
prefer arrow keys instead of WASD for movement. I’d also like to configure
these mappings using a text-based configuration file, not in code.” Part of
me knows this to be an inefficient affectation.
And yet… when I write out my long-form thinking (like I might if I were
explaining my plans to a human collaborator), I find that my ideas become
sharper, the pitfalls of a particular design become more obvious, and I feel
more connected to the output. Is this a form of anthropomorphizing the
Genie? Showing care for its feelings by expressing my desires as gentle
suggestions rather than orders? I can’t say that’s not part of it. But the
production of software is a lonely business, and the artifice of the “chat”
really does do something for me. Psychologically, you know? It feels too
much like interacting a work colleague over Slack for me to fully let go of my
corporate communication habits.
The shadows of others
If venture capitalists are seeking “employee” as the most valuable potential
metaphor, there are popular countervailing movements to classify LLMs as
something more akin to a dressed-up copy machine. Something that
facilitates copyright violation and wage theft from professional artists.
Stories abound of the illustrator laid off when their Senior Marketing
Director discovered they could get illustrations for free from the Canva AI
Image Generator, or the video game concept artist who was “replaced” by the
Stable Diffusion Discord Server. Whether cause and effect is quite so neat is
hard to judge. Still, stories of jobs lost because of LLMs are plausible and
plentiful enough to catalyze a neo-Luddite reaction that seeks to punish3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 11/22
corporations through bad press and boycotts when it appears that they
intend to use “AI” in a substantial way in the production of creative work.
A project page on itch.io, an indie game marketplace. Including AI-generated graphics, sound, or text will
cause your work to be de-listed by default.
Among engineers, this movement has not really taken hold in the same way
as among visual artists. Perhaps because engineers are inclined to feel
economically secure at the top of the corporate pay scales. Perhaps because
they understand that there is little public sympathy for the precarity of the
Software Engineer in the U.S. with a median salary of $130k. Or perhaps they
have faith that the demand for productivity-improving software is without
practical limit.
It’s certainly the case that no past tool that improves software engineer
efficiency has done much to dent their employability. Tools like Salesforce or
Workday that at one time purported to let non-technical business users
configure and manage their “business processes” without having to hire an
engineer instead gave rise to their own specialized class of certification-
3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 12/22
toting analysts and consultants who could manipulate the ever-more-
complex logics of these monolithic tools.
And yet, to look at the outputs of the Genie one would have to be engaged in
systematic self-delusion to not sense the existence of other authors. The
facile example is that if you start to write your own email address for people
to share feedback requests to, it will eagerly suggest someone else’s email
address instead.
Auto-completing someone else’s email address.
Jeff is a real guy who seems to have written a lot of code!
The fingerprints of other authors are omni-present. The style of code
sometimes shifts noticeably. The names the Genie chooses for things are
good quality, but don’t feel like what you would choose. Sometimes a block of
code does more than you need in a way that makes it feel lifted out of some
other system. Magic values with alarming precision will sometimes appear.
Are these the result of some human tuning them until they work, or a true
synthetic “insight” from the model or my prompt language?3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 13/22
The logic for a bit of animation code, filled with arbitrary constants.
I feel it most acutely when I try to do anything actually novel, or use a niche
software library or language. The rate at which the Genie produces useless
garbage will skyrocket. I have tangibly stepped outside the realm in which
there exist plentiful authors from whom you can copy, and all of a sudden
the magic’s potency fades. It leaves me wondering whether the power I felt
was just the power to launder other people’s work into my own in a
sufficiently complex manner as to avoid feeling responsible.
I don’t think there is a good faith argument that this is not a form of
copyright laundering. It may be that engineers, unlike artists, don’t mind
that this is happening and would consent to contributing their code to the
training datasets of these models if asked.
There are some important historical differences between engineering and
art work that help explain the more muted outcry. Software, especially
commercial software, rarely credits its authors. Engineers are habituated to
a sort of “remix culture” in which any software of consequence is a melange
of tens or hundreds of “libraries” written by others and included for free.
Some of the most famous engineers are famous precisely because they have
designed and maintain some of these building block libraries and give them
away for free.
3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 14/22
The Illustrator “splash” screen over time. Early versions listed contributing authors, modern versions do not.
Photoshop, however, does still credit individual contributors.
We might be able to explain the difference in reaction. But as someone who
both produces my own code from scratch on occasion and who is finding
value in producing code with the help of a Genie, I still desire absolution for
what I’m doing. If my Genie is valuable to me, it is only because of an
incomprehensibly large pool of code that it was trained on. Companies that
train LLMs should be required to pay licensing fees far more broadly than
they do today. It’s possible to imagine a more equitable exchange of value
where instead of paying $20/month for my Genie (which gets split between
the LLM company and the company that built the Genie), I’m paying
$200/month and much of that flows into a licensing revenue pool that pays
out tiny fractions of pennies per line to people who contributed something
novel to the model training set. This structure doesn’t exist yet and I don’t
perceive much demand to create it. We should not mistake this lack of a
reaction among engineers for enthusiastic consent for how LLM companies
are treating publicly available code examples. I expect that if we get closer to
a true “write English, get working code” level of performance, it must also be
valuable enough to compensate everyone who makes it possible. We need
some incentive for people to continue to generate novel code that extends the
zone of what is possible for LLM-users to draft off.
Layers upon layers
3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 15/22
If engineers have any instinctive revulsion to LLM-generated code, it flows
more from pride than a perceived loss of economic power. “A tool like that
would just slow me down, and produce lower quality code than I can write.”
Today we can say “draw a circle on screen” in one line of code. Engineers 50
years ago would be painstakingly doing the math to compute the locations of
every pixel on the screen and turning them on or off one-at-a-time in a
display buffer. The difference for the modern engineer is that the work of
computing a circle and making it appear on the screen has been done by
someone else and packaged up so you don’t have to think about it. The work
isn’t gone, it’s just hidden. So much of computing is about solving problems
and then “hiding” them so that someone else can build something on top
without thinking much about the details. This has happened so many times
that a modern engineer might not even know what’s actually going on when
they say drawCircle. They just know it works.
One might try to draw the Genie into this history of adding layers. We
already have the notion of a “compiler” — a program that takes in human-
readable statements like drawCircle and spits out a long list of computer-
readable instructions that produce that outcome. You could view the Genie
through the same lens — a way to ascend to a higher plane of existence
where we say “draw a circle” in English and that is translated into drawCircle
and then into machine code. Just one more layer on the stack of many other
layers.
But adding an unpredictable layer into the stack would have deep
consequences. The predictability of a computer is the one firm point of
leverage you have when trying to fix a broken program. Any errors must lie
with your own faulty instructions. Any unpredictability you observe is the
result of your own misunderstanding of the code you wrote, not in the3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 16/22
machine itself. If something is going wrong, you know for absolute certainty
the computer is doing exactly what it was told, and somewhere you have not
given it the correct instructions.
To add the Genie into this mix is to violate a deep contract between the
human and the machine. You are unleashing unpredictability into a world of
perfectly predictable operation. It may be a useful, it may become the
common way to write code, but we must be honest; it is an inflection point
in the history of tools that help us write code, not a continuation of trends.
What comes next
The era that this Genie portends is filled with unknowns. Amidst the
uncertainty, I will make one firm claim about the future. The next era will
reward taste and judgement over raw speed, intellect, access, or training. If
you know what you want software to do but not how to write the code to do
it, there are fewer barriers to making it real than they have ever been. The
dream of “describe it and it will exist” is false. However, I wager that with
tenacity and a vision for something new, you are more likely than ever to be
able to succeed. It will require learning how to write software. Maybe not in
the same way I learned, and maybe with some conceptual gaps that would
alarm a traditionalist. You might not be able to pass a software engineering
job interview. Nevertheless, you can create something from nothing. That is
the enduring magic of engineering and it feels almost as good as it did before
the era of Genies and Gamblers.
Many thanks to Bailey Rosser for contributing graphics and editing.
Additional editing from Max Brawer, Alix Gierke.3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 17/22
The game I built using Cursor (and Claude) is called GRIDLOCK. Code is on
github.
Continue on this thread with another writer thinking about gamblers and
genies and LLMS!
Written by Drew Harry
864 Followers·348 Following
@medialab phd, @olincollege engineer. interested in: games, socio-technical
systems, computer-me diated commu nication, online commu nities, & data
visualizationFollow
Responses (9)
Ashley caceres PaganSoftware Development Large Language Models Metaphor Creativity
Artificial Intelligence
What are your thoughts?3/29/25, 5:19 PM The Gambler & The Genie | Coding with an LLM | Medium
https://medium.com/@drewwww/the-gambler-and-the-genie-08491d96aee6 18/22
