 
https://crsreports.congress.gov  
 
Updated April 3, 2025
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge: Status of Oil and Gas Program
The Arctic National Wildlife Refuge  (ANWR , or the 
Refuge) comprises 19 million acres in northeast Alaska, 
administered primarily by the Fish and Wildlife Service 
(FWS) in the Department of the Interior  (DOI) . ANWR’s 
Coastal Plain —a 1.57 -million -acre area in the northern part  
of the Refuge ( Figure 1)—is viewed as an on shore oil 
prospect, with  a mean estimate by the U.S. Geological 
Survey  of 7.7  billion barrels of technically recover able oil 
on federal lands . (For comparison, total U.S. petroleum 
consumption in 202 4 was about 7.4 billion barrels.)  The 
Refuge  also is a center of activity for caribou and other 
wildlife , with subsistence use  by Alaska Natives  and critical 
habitat for polar bears under the Endangered Species Act  
(ESA; 16 U.S.C. §§1531 -1544 ).  
P.L. 115 -97 established a program for oil and gas leasing 
and development in  ANWR’s Coastal Plain . The law’s 
2017 enactment marked a turning  point in decades of 
congressional debate over energy development in the 
Refuge. Prior to  enactment  of the law , Section 1003 of the 
Alaska  National Interest Lands Conservation Act of 1980  
(ANILCA;  P.L. 96 -487) had prohibited oil and gas 
activities  in ANWR unless  explicitly authorized by an act 
of Congress.  Section 20001 of P.L. 115 -97 directed the 
Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Land 
Management (BLM), to establish and administer a  
competitive oil and gas program for ANWR’s Coastal Plain  
and added this program as  a stated purpose of the Refuge . 
The law require d at least two lease sales in the Coastal Plain , one  within fo ur years of the law’s enactment  (i.e., by 
December 2021)  and a second wit hin seven years (by 
December 2024) . Each  lease sale was required to  offer at 
least 400,000 acres and to include those areas with the 
highest potential f or discovery of hydrocarbons.  The law 
also contained  provisions concerning management o f the oil 
and gas program, minimum  royalty rates for ANWR leases, 
disposition of revenues from the program, rights -of-way, 
and surface development.  (For more information, see  CRS 
In Focus IF10782, Arctic N ational Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) 
Oil and Gas Program: Provisions in P.L. 115 -97, Tax Cuts 
and Jobs Act .)  
During BLM’s implementation of  the ANWR oil and gas 
program, Congress has continued to debate leasing in the 
Refuge . Successive presidential Administrations have taken 
varying approaches to program implementation .  
January 2021 Lease Sale  
On January 6, 2021, under the  first Trump Administration, 
BLM held the first oil and gas lease sale  for the ANWR 
Coastal Plain , offering 22 tracts on 1.1 million acres . The 
sale yielded a total of $14.4 million in high bids , and  BLM 
issued leases for nine tracts , covering 437,804 total acres. 
Seven  of the leases went to  the Alaska Industrial 
Development and Export Authority  (AIDEA),  a state -
established public corporation . Two leases went to private 
companies , both of which later relinquished the ir leases . 
Figure 1. Arctic National Wildlife Refuge  
 
Source:  FWS, Arctic National Wildlife Refuge Comprehensive Conservation Plan , April 2015 . Edited by CRS.  

Arctic N ational Wildlife Refuge: Status of Oil and Gas Program  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  The 2021 lease sale was informed by  a 2019 environmental 
impact statement  (EIS) and a 2020 record of decision  
(ROD) prepared under the National Environmental Policy 
Act of 1969  (NEPA; 42 U.S.C. §§4321 et seq. ) The ROD 
directed that  approximately 1.5 million acres —the entire 
Coastal Plain program area —be offered for leasing for the 
2021 sale (although later changes  resulted in 1.1 million 
acres ultimately offered at that sale). The ROD identified  
more than 60% of the program  area as subject to surface 
occupancy and/or timing restriction s. 
After taking office in 2021 , President  Biden  issued  
Executive Order  (E.O.)  13990 , direct ing the Secretary of 
the Interior to place a “temporary moratorium ” on activities 
in the Coastal Plain leasing program and to conduct a new 
analysis of the program’s  potential environmental impacts 
in a manner consistent with applicable law. DOI suspen ded 
operations on the leases  awarded at the 2021 sale while  a 
supplemental environmental impact statement ( SEIS) was 
prepared  to reevaluate impacts  of the leasing program . 
In September 2023, the Secretary of the Interior cance led 
the ANWR leases from the 2021 lease sale (the seven leases 
held by AIDEA). According to a DOI press release , the 
Secretary found that the NEPA analysis underlying the sale 
was based on “fundamental legal deficiencies,” such as 
failure to analyze a reasonable range of alternatives  and to 
“properly quantify” downstream greenhouse gas emissions . 
However, i n January 2025, President Trump issued  E.O. 
14153 , rescin ding the lease cancellations  and order ing 
agencies  to issue authorizations  needed for development . 
Also, in March 2025, the U.S.  District Court for the District 
of Alaska  vacated  the 2023 lease cancellat ions, on the basis 
that DOI did not obtain a required court order prior to the 
cancellations .  
January 2025  Lease Sale  
After complet ion of  the SEIS  required by  President Biden’s  
E.O. 13990 , DOI issued a ROD  on December 9, 2024,  and 
scheduled  the second Coastal Plain lease sale  for January 
10, 2025 . For the second lease sale, BLM required  stricter 
environmental protections and offered less acreage  than 
was offered  at the first sale. BLM’s chosen  alternative  from  
the SEIS  offer ed for leasing the minimum allowable 
acreage under P.L. 115 -97 (400,000 acres), with 
approximately 80% of th at acreage subject to restrictions on 
surface occupancy and/or timing limitations. AIDEA  and 
the State of Alaska  filed legal challenges to the ROD.    
On January 8, 2025, DOI announced  that no bids had been 
received for the January 2025 lease sale by the bid deadline, 
thus concluding the sale with no acres leased. Some 
observers, including AIDEA , stated that BLM’s “strict” 
terms for the lease sale discouraged participation. Others 
noted  other factors that could discourage industry interest, 
including  the area ’s distance  from  existing infrastructure, 
the expense of developing in Ar ctic conditions, a lack of 
updated data on oil and gas resources, and the potential for 
litigation related  to environmental impacts of development. 
For further discussion, see CRS Report RL33872, Arctic 
National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR): An Overview . President 
Trump’s  E.O. 14153  rescinded  the SEIS that had informed 
the 2025 sale and reinstated the earlier  2020 ROD and 2019 EIS, thus potentially facilitating the inclusion of wider 
acreage and fewer restrictions in future lease sales .  
Alaska Native Lands in the Coastal Plain  
Some lands  in and adjoining  the Coastal Plain  are owned by 
Alaska Native corporations . A 1983 agreement, known as 
the Chandler Lake Agreement , provided that oil and gas  
development would not take place on the se Alaska Native 
lands  until Congress approved development of  the Coastal 
Plain . P.L. 115 -97 thus opened the possibility o f oil and gas 
development on  both the federal lands and the Alaska 
Native lands.  After the 2021 lease sale, Alaska Native 
corporations applied for permits  to conduct seismic testing  
on their lands, but BLM and FWS did not complete the 
approv al process for  the necessary permits .  
Issues for Congress  
Congress and stakeholders have  long debated priorities for  
energy development and  preservation of  natural habitat in 
the Refuge. Broader questions about U.S. energy and 
climate polic y also have shape d the debate. Supporters of 
oil and gas leasing assert  that Coastal Plain development 
would increase U.S. energy security and bring  economic 
benefits to Alaska Native communities and other Alaska 
residents . Opponents contend  that ANWR leasing would 
irrem ediably damage wildlife habitat and subsistence uses 
and, more broadly, express concern  about climate impacts 
of continued investment in fossil fuel  extraction and use .  
The status of the  Coastal Plain oil and gas  program  may 
continue to be of interest to Congress . Options for Congress 
could include  requir ing additional lease sales beyond the 
two required in  P.L. 115 -97, prohibit ing further leasing, or 
maintain ing the current statutory framework  that leaves 
future leasing decisions to  the executive branch . President 
Trump’s E.O. 14153  accords  with 118th Congress 
legislation  (H.R. 6285 ) that would have  direct ed BLM to 
reissue the canceled Coastal Plain leases  from the 2021 sale  
and declar ed that future leasing should follow the 2020 
ROD . By contrast, other 118th Congress bills ( H.R. 724  and 
S. 282 ) would  have repeal ed the ANWR leasing program 
and designate d the Coastal Plain as wilderness  under the 
Wilderness Act ( 16 U.S.C. §§1131 et seq. ), meaning that 
commercial development would be prohibited . 
Congress also could consider whether to set additional 
requirements  for managing oil and gas development in the 
Refuge. P.L. 115 -97 set certain conditions, such as limit ing 
production and support facilities  to 2,000 acre s. Congress 
could consider whether to revisit  additional provisions from  
earlier bills (e.g., H.R. 49  and S. 49  in the 115th Congress)  
related to seasonal closures, land reclamation,  species 
protection, drilling technologies, employment of Alaska 
Natives, pipeline construction standards, and other matters.  
Another potential issue for Congress is federal revenue 
from  ANWR lease sales, which to date has been lower than 
some earlier predictions . Some previous proposals  (e.g., 
Section 118  of House -passed H.R. 3055  in the 116th 
Congress) would have directed  BLM to set minimum bids 
sufficient to produce specified revenue amounts.   
Laura B. Comay , Specialist in Natural Resources Policy    
IF12006
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge: Status of Oil and Gas Program  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  | IF12006  · VERSION 23 · UPDATED   
 
Disclaimer  
This document was  prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should n ot be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyr ight protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.  
 
