 
https://crsreports.congress.gov  
 
April 4, 2025
Census Bureau Data : Selected Access , Privacy , and Penalt y 
Provisions in  Titles 13 and 26, U.S. Code
The Census Bureau  collects and pub lishes  data on various 
population and economic characteristics  under the authority 
of Title 13 of the U.S. Code . Additionally, Section 6103(j) 
of Title 26 authorizes the Interna l Revenue Service (IRS)  to 
share certain information  from federal tax returns with the 
Census Bureau . All of t hese data are collected from 
individuals, commercial entities, and governments across 
the United States and territories.   
Under Section 9 of Title 13 , data collected by the Census 
Bureau are to be used solely for statistical purposes , which 
includes the “description, estimation, or analysis of the 
characteristics of gr oups, without identifying the 
individuals or organizations that comprise such groups.”  
Some  of the data that the Census Bureau collects are 
considered personally identifiable information  (PII)  and 
business identifiable information  (BII) , which includes but 
is not limited to names, addresses , Social Security numbers, 
employer identification numbers, telephone numbers, email 
addresses , trade secrets, commercial  information , and 
financial information .  
Much of the data collected during Census Bureau surveys 
are disseminated for public access  in a digital format  
without identifying individuals . Federal law require s that 
PII and BII remain confidential . 
Confidentiality p rotection s of Census Bureau data are found 
primarily in Sections 9 and 214 of Title 13 , and also in 
Section 6103 (j) of Title 26 as it pertains to tax information  
for statistical purposes .  
Data Access  
Generally, access to Census’s restricted -use, confidential 
data is limited to Census Bureau and Department of 
Commerce personnel as detailed in Section 9 of Title 13 . 
Section 6103(j)(1) of Title 26  permits the IRS to share 
federal tax return information with the Census Bureau only 
for structuring the census and conducting related statistical 
activities . Under Section 3583 of Title 44 , the Census 
Bureau (and other agencies within the federal statistical 
system ) permits researchers  to access confidential data 
through a standard application process (SAP).  
Access under Title 13   
The confidentiality of certain information  collected by the 
Census Bureau is established in Section 9 of Title 13 . 
Specifically , Section 9 (a) states that the Secretary of 
Commerce, any officer or employee of the Department of 
Commerce or Census Bureau, or a local government census 
liaison may not:  (1) use the information furnished under the 
provisions of this title for any purpose other than th e 
statistical purposes for which it is supplied; or  
(2) make any publication whereby the data 
furnished by any particular establishment or 
individual under this title can be identified; or  
(3) permit anyone other than the sworn officers and 
employees of th e Department or bureau or agency 
thereof to examine the individual reports.  
Individuals  who are authorized to have access to 
confidential informati on are referred to in Section 214 of 
Title 13 . Individuals with access  generally include  those 
who are an employee or staff member  of the C ensus 
Bureau , who have “taken and subscribed the oath of office ” 
or “sworn to observe limitations imposed by section 9” of 
Title 13; or those who are a “census liaison ” per Section 16 
of Title 13 . Under Section 214, these individuals  (as well as  
former employees , staff members , and census liaisons ) are 
prohibited from wrongfully disclosing confidential 
information from census respondents and are subject to 
penalties for doing so .  
Section 23 of Title 13  allows t he Secretary  to utilize 
temporary staff including “ employees of Federal, State, or 
local agencies or instrumentalities, and emplo yees of 
private organizations ” to assist the Census Bureau in 
performing work authorized under Title 13 , but only if such 
temporary staff  swear  to observe the confidentiality 
requirements of Section 9.  
Section 9  also prohibits census reports collected  from 
individuals or establishments from being admitted as 
“evidence or used for any purpose in any action, suit, or 
other judicial or administrat ive proceeding ” without their 
consent.  
Federal Statistical Research Data Centers  
Certain restricted -use data are accessible to researchers  at 
Federal  Statistical Research Data Center s (FSRDCs ) 
established across the continental United States.  FSRDCs 
are intended to serve as secure hubs for members of the 
public to access certain confidential information.  
In order to gain access to FSRDCs, r esearchers must 
complete a standard application process (SAP) , which 
includes completing a background investigatio n and 
fingerprinting in order to obtain special sworn status ( SSS).  
As part of the SAP, researchers must be associated with an 
approved project. According to the SAP portal , the access 
application proces s can take an expected 12 to 24 weeks  for 
Census Bureau Data: Selected Access, Privacy, and Penalty Provisions in Titles 13 and 26, U.S. Code  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  approval , depending in part on whether  the applicant needs 
data from multiple statistical agencies or units. This process 
can take longer than the expected 24 weeks for applications 
that require approval from organ ization s and  entities  
outside of the SAP, such as state and local governments .  
The SAP is developed in compliance with Section 3583  of 
Title 44 , which includes criteria to determine an applicant’s 
access to a data asset. OMB memorandum M -23-04 further 
establishes SAP guidance, including the condition that th e 
restricted -access data must be  used exclusively for 
statistical purposes.  
Data Privacy  
The Census Bureau has established its own policies and 
procedures to ensure access and confidentiality standards  
are followed within the agency . This includes applying  
statistical safeguards  to Census data, as well as data 
stewardship controls such as Census’s Disclosure Review 
Board  (DRB)  and training programs for staff.  
Statistic al Safeguards  
According to the Census  Bureau , statistical safeguards 
“help prevent someone from using that statistic to learn 
about a specific person .” Statistical safeguards limit the 
possibility that information on individuals may be disclosed 
by using  methods to remove, modify, or disguise data 
collected from respondents.  
Over time, the Census Bureau has used several different 
methods  to limit disclosure, such as cell suppression, data 
swapping, and noise injection. The Census Bureau is 
currently using a  differential privacy  framework . The 
Census Bureau explains that differential privacy “wo rks by 
adding statistical noise —small, random additions or 
subtractions —to every published statistic so that no one can 
reidentify  a specific person or household with any certainty 
using any combination of the published data .” 
The Census Bureau indicates  that this process requires 
balance. If too much noise is introduced, the data will be of 
no use; if there is too little noise, the data are unprotected.  
Data Stewardship  
The Census Bureau  established the Disclosure Review 
Board (DRB) , which has the primary responsibility to 
ensure that released statistical products adhere to the 
confidentiality standards established by federal law . The 
DRB broadly oversees the Census Bureau’s disclosure 
avoidance  policies and methodologies.  
The DRB supports the Data Stewardship Executive Policy 
(DSEP) Committee , which was established to ensure 
protection of Title 13 data . The mission of the DSEP 
Committee is to ensure the Census Bureau can “effectively 
and responsibly collect and use data ab out the nation’s 
people and economy ,” which requires respondents ’ privacy 
and data confidentiality to be protected throughout the data 
lifecycle.  Census Bureau employees —as well as contractors and 
other individuals who have attained SSS —are, by virtue of 
their lifetime oath,  considered data stewards who have 
responsibility to protect the confidentiality and privacy of 
information they  can access. To ensure compliance with the 
confidentiality of information collected per Titles 13 and 
26, the Census Bureau requires the aforementioned 
personnel to complete a “ data stewardship awareness 
training ,” which consists of four courses:  Data 
Stewardship/Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) , 
Title 13/CUI , Title 26 , and Cyber Security . 
New Census Bureau employees, contractors, and other SSS 
individuals must complete the trainings prior to or 
immediately upon onboarding. Trainings must be 
completed annually in compliance with the Federal 
Information Security Modernization  Act (FISMA).  
Penalties  
Under  Section 214 of Title 13 , individuals with access to 
sensitive information maintained by the Census Bureau are 
subject to penalties for wrongf ul disclos ure of  such 
information.  
Furthermore, Section 7213(a)(1) of Title 26  provides 
criminal penalties for unauthorized disclosure of  tax 
information , which for the most part are the same as the 
penalties for 13 U.S.C. §214 . Section 7431 of Title 26 
provides civil damages for unauthorized disclosure.  While 
both Section 214 and Section 7213(a)(1) provide for a 
maximum fine of $5,000,  or imprisonment of not more than 
5 years, or both , it is possible that violations of those 
offenses may be subject to the superseding fines set out in 
Section 3571(b) of Title 18.  
Issues for Congress  
Considering the breadth of private information on 
individua ls across the United States and territories held by 
the Census Bureau, Congress may have an interest in the 
statutory and administrative policies intended to protect 
respondents ’ confidentiality.  
Congress could conduct  oversight on the  administrative 
policies and procedures implemented  by the Census Bureau  
to ensure they  are compliant and sufficient to meet the 
confidentiality requirements established by Title 13 and 26.  
Furthermore, Congress may request additional reporting on 
the statistical safeguard  methods used to protect 
confidential data.  
Taylor R. Knoedl , Analyst in American National 
Government    
IF12957
  
Census Bureau Data: Selected Access, Privacy, and Penalty Provisions in Titles 13 and 26, U.S. Code  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  | IF12957  · VERSION 1 · NEW   
 
Disclaimer  
This document was  prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should n ot be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyr ight protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.  
 
