 
https://crsreports.congress.gov  
Updated April 4, 2025
Guatemala: An Overview
Guatemala, the most populous country in Central America, 
has strived to consolidate its democracy since the 1990s. It 
has faced many pol itical and social challenges, as well as  
human rights abuses and widesp read impunity. 
Traditionally, the United States and Guatemala have had 
close relations, with friction at times over certain issues, 
such as corruption  and migration . The 119th Congress may 
seek to  assess  the U.S.- Guatemala relationship on the 
aforementioned issues, the  promotion of democracy , and 
efforts to combat illicit drug trafficking.  
Political Situation  
Guatemala has a long history of internal conflict and 
violence, including a 36 -year civil war (1960 -1996). For 
most of that period, the Guatemalan military held power 
and repressed citizens’ human rights. An estimated 200,000 
people  were killed or disappea red during the civil conflict; 
83% of the victims were Indigenous. In 1986, Guatemala 
established a civilian democratic government, but military 
repression continued. In 1996, then -President Álvaro Arzú 
(1996 -2000) and Guatemala’s main insurgent group, the  
Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unit (URNG), signed 
United Nations -mediated peace accords  to end the conflict.  
Nearly 30 yea rs later, some of the goals put forth in the 
accords, such as eradicating extreme poverty , integrating 
Indigenous Guatemalans, and bolstering institutions, 
remain unfulfilled. Successive governments have struggled 
to strengthen the Guatemalan justice syste m to punish 
perpetrators of grave human rights abuses and massive 
corruption . Indigenous Guatemalans continue to face 
poverty and social exclusion.  Guatemala’s  democratic 
institutions remain fragile , largely due to high levels of 
state capture by  elites.   Current President Bernardo Arévalo, from the center -left 
Movimiento Semilla  party, won Guatemala’s 2023 
presidential elections —capturing 58% of the vote —
following a tumultuous election period marred by  alleged 
irregularities  and the disqualification of several leading 
candidates.  Since his inauguration in January 2024 , Arévalo 
has had  trouble advancing his agenda , including anti -
corruption efforts . Arévalo’s  Semilla party  has 23 of 160 
seats in Guatemala’s congress;  in November 2023 , 
prosecutors suspended the  party ’s status and declared its 
lawmakers as independents. In January 2025, Arévalo ’s 
approval rating stood at 39%, a decrease from 54% reported 
in May 2024.   
Arévalo  also has had to contend with repeated legal 
challenges from the Office of Attorney General María 
Consuelo Porras . Officials in that office  have  engaged in 
legal maneuvers against Arévalo  since  the election period  
and throughout his term , including seeking to lift Arévalo’s 
immunity from prosecution  and ordering arrests of party 
members, amo ng other  actions . Since 2021, the  United 
States  has desig nated  Porras and other top Guatemalan 
prosecutors for allegedly obstructing high-profile 
corruption  investigations against  some  government  
officials . At least 45 prosecutors and judges , including 
many who worked with the U.S. -backed International 
Commission Against Corruption in Guatemala  (CICIG ; 
2007-2019 ), have fled Guatemala since 2018.  Others have 
been imprisoned.   
Although constitutionally the President can remove the 
Attorney General for a “ duly justified cause ,” a law (the 
Ley Orgánica del Ministerio Público ) requires due process 
for the removal of the Attorney General. In accordance with 
that law, Arévalo has filed criminal comp laints against 
Porras for abuse of authority and has proposed legal 
reforms to remove the attorney general prior to the end of 
her term in 2026.  
Economic and Social Conditions  
Guatemala has the largest economy in Central America, 
with an estimated gross domestic product (GDP) of $ 112.4 
billion in 2024, according to the International Monetary 
Fund . Despite average real GDP growth of 3.5%  per year 
over the past decade , more than 55% of the population  live 
in poverty. Roughly 79% of Indigenous Guatemalans live 
in poverty, many of whom reside in the  Western highlands, 
a high migrant -sending region of the country . Guatemala’s  
tax-to-GDP ratio , which at 14.4% was the fourth lowest in 
Latin America in 2022 —severely limit s the funds available 
for public services and investments.  
Guatemala is also home to one of the youngest populations 
in Latin America,  with more than 60% of citizens under 29 Guatemala at a Glance  
Area:  42,000 square miles, about the size of Tennessee  
Population:  18.1 million (2024, IMF est.)  
Ethnic Composition:  Mestizo (mixed Amerindian -Spanish; 
Ladino  in local Spanish) 62.8%, Maya 34.9%, Xinka (Indigenous, 
non-Maya) 2.1%, Garifuna 0.1%, foreign 0.1% (2018 est., INE)  
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)/Per Capita GDP: 
$112. 4 billion/$6,300 (2024, cur rent prices, IMF)  
Key Import Partners: United States (29.1%), China 
(19.7%), Mexico (10.2%), El Salvador (3.32%) (2024, TDM)  
Key Export Partners: United States (31.9%), El Salvador 
(13.4%), Honduras (11.5%), Nicaragua (7.27%) (2023, TDM)  
Sources: Internati onal Monetary Fund (IMF); National 
Statistics Institute of Guatemala (INE); Trade Data Monitor 
(TDM).  
Guatemala: An Overview  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  years of age , according to Guatemala’s 2018 census. 
Although the country’s growing working -age population 
could boost economic growth, many youth face difficult 
circumstances and limited opportunities. According to the 
World Bank,  Guatemala’s child malnutrition rate  is among 
the 10 highest in the worl d, with long-term effects  on 
education and earnings prospects. About 71% of the 
population is employed in the informal economy, lacking 
job protections or benefits .  
U.S.-Guatemalan Relation s 
Over the past four years, U.S. policy in Guatemala  has 
focuse d on dismantling local and regional transnational 
criminal organizations and gangs ; combating the flow of 
illicit drugs to the United States ; strengthening border and 
citizen security in Guatemala and the region ; fighting 
corruption ; building democratic ins titutions ; and addressing 
the root causes of migration, among other priorities.   
The Biden Administration initially sought to increase 
engagement with the administration of President Alejandro 
Giammattei (2019 -2024) to curb  migration and drug 
trafficking . U.S. concerns about antidemocratic and corrupt 
practices by Guatemalan officials  strained relations, 
however , particularly during the 2023 elections. After  
President Arévalo’s inauguration, the Biden Administration  
sought  to revitalize the U.S .-Guatemala r elationship , 
inclu ding through new initiatives  to address migration, 
governance, and security challenges.   
In January 2025, Marco Rubio visited Guatemala as part of 
his first trip abroad as Secretary of State . He discussed  
cooperation with Guatemala on migration, drug trafficking, 
and economic issues , among other  topics . 
Migration  
The U.S. Customs and Border Protection  (CBP) 
encountered  more than 2 04,252 Guatemalans at the 
southwest border during FY202 4. As of January 2025,  CBP 
had encountered 29,318  Guatemalans  in FY2025 , roughly a 
72% decrease from the same period last year . The U.S. 
Agency for International Development  (USAID)  had 
identified  the lack of economic opportunities, extortion, 
crime and violence, and corruption as the top drivers of 
irregular migration from Guatemala.  
Congr ess may assess bilateral cooperation on migration 
issues and options for enhancing such efforts. Guatemala 
expels irregular migrants from its territory; maintains a 
U.S.-trained border task force, with support from the U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security and the U.S. Department 
of Defense; and has sought to cooperate with the Trump 
Administration on migration policy.  In January 2025, the 
Arévalo administration reportedly said it could 
accommodate up to 20 U.S. deportation flights a week , up 
from 14 weekly under the Biden Administr ation. In 
February 2025, during a joint press conference  with 
Secretary Rubio, President Arévalo offered to increa se the 
number of flights of Guatemalan deportees and to receive 
deportees of other nationalities.  Democracy and Governance  
The Biden Administration took various actions intended to 
stem Guatemala’s backsliding on corruption and the rule of 
law. The U.S. St ate Department has imposed visa sanctions 
on Attorney General Porras  and her family, among other 
Guatemalan officials and economic elites, pursuant to the 
United States -Northern Triangle Enhanced Engagement Act 
(P.L. 11 6-260, Division FF, Subtitle F) and Section 7031(c) 
of annual Department of State, Foreign Operations, and 
Related Programs (SFOPS) Appropriations Act s. In 
January 2024, the State Department designated former 
President Giammattei  and three of his children as generally 
ineligible for entry into the United States, pursuant to 
Section 7031(c). To date, the Trump Administrat ion has not 
designated new sanctions on Guatemalan nationals.  
U.S. Assistance  
For FY2023, the United States allocated an estimated 
$121.4 million  in U.S. bilateral foreign assistance to 
Guatemala, including $80.9 million in Development 
Assistance (DA), $40. 2 million in Global Health Programs 
(GHP) funding, and $320,000 in International Military and 
Education Training (IMET)  aid. FY2024 a llocations are not 
yet publicly available. For FY2025, the Biden 
Administration ha d requested $115.8 million  for 
Guatemala —$90.0  million in DA ; $25.0 million in GHP ; 
and $800,000 in IMET. Guatemala typically receive d 
additional assistance through the Central America Regional 
Security Initiative  and other regional programs.   
The FY2024 SFOPS legislation ( P.L. 118 -47, Division F ) 
requires the State Department to withhold 60% of 
Economic Support Fund and security assistance to the 
Guatemalan government until the Secretary of State 
certifies the Guatemalan  government has met conditions 
related to corruption and public integrity, human rights, and 
migration, among other issues. The State Department has 
not yet issued such a certification . P.L. 118 -47 also 
prohibits Foreign Military Financing (FMF) to Guatemala . 
For FY2025, Congress has passed two continuing 
resolutions  (P.L. 118 -83 and P.L. 118 -158) that fund 
foreign assistance program s in Guatemala under the same 
conditions as FY2024 from October 1, 2024 , until March 
14, 2025 . 
Secretary Rubio has  announced  the cancellation of  
thousands of foreign assi stance contracts. The full scope of 
the cancellations  remains  unclear, though they reportedly 
include  some USAID -managed agriculture, education , 
environment, democracy and governance, humanitarian 
assistance, and rule -of-law activities in Guatemala . During 
a February 2025 visi t to Guatemala, Secretary  Rubio 
commended  Guatemala’s cooperation on anti -drug efforts 
and described  U.S. support for such efforts as “the kind of 
foreign aid America wants to be involved in.”  
Karla I. Rios , Analyst in Latin American Affairs    
IF12340
  
Guatemala: An Overview  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  | IF12340  · VERSION 13 · UPDATED   
 
Disclaimer  
This document was  prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of 
Congress. Information in a CRS Report should n ot be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of 
information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS 
Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not subject to copyr ight protection in the United States. Any CRS 
Report may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may 
include copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if 
you wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.  
 
