 
 
  
 Science and Technology Issues for the 119th 
Congress  
April 3, 2025  
Congressional Research Service  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  
R48482  
 
Congressional Research Service   
SUMMARY  
 
Science and Technology Issues for th e 119th 
Congress  
Science and technology (S&T) underlie  a wide range of issues confronting the nation. The 
advancement of S&T drives  economic growth, help s address national priorities, and improve s 
health and quality of life. The ubiquity and constantly changing nature of S&T  frequently create 
public policy issues of congressional interest.  
The federal government supports the advancement of S&T. Financial support of research and 
development (R&D) ha s led to scientific breakthroughs and new technologies, ranging from jet 
aircraft and the internet to  communications satellites and defenses against disease.  Federal 
policies, some of which may indirectly support or limit the innovative capacity of the pub lic and 
private sectors, govern many aspects of S&T activities.  
This report spotlights some of the key S&T policy issues before the 119th Congress. Examples 
include cross -cutting subjects that affect S&T progress across a range of fields and disciplines as  well as the capacity of the 
United States to innovate and maintain global competitiveness. The report also highlights new or rapidly developing areas of 
S&T that have the potential to transform current capabilities. Congress may assess the adequacy of exi sting policy 
frameworks or consider creating new ones to address these S&T issue areas, which are described briefly below.  
Biotechnology and Biomedical Research  
Recent advances in biotechnology and biomedical research hold the promise of longer , healthier lives and more productive 
industries, but they also  raise policy challenges. Issues that the 119th Congress may face include laboratory biosafety and 
biosecurity, federal regulation of laboratory -developed diagnostic devices, the federal response  to emerging pathogens such 
as H5N1 avian influenza, and the regulation of agricultural biotechnologies.  
Climate Science  
S&T considerations permeate deliberations on topics related to climate change and mitigation approaches. Issues before the 
119th Congr ess may include understanding the causes of extreme heat and addressing associated risks, assessing the concept 
of “net -zero emissions” and related policies, and evaluating ocean -based strategies for carbon dioxide removal.  
Earth and Environmental Sciences  
Earth - and environmental -science -related issues before the 119th Congress include the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration’s (NOAA’s) R&D activities, which are aimed at improving extreme weather forecasting, addressing plastic 
pollution, assess ing the potential for seabed deposits to serve as a source of critical minerals, and understanding technologies 
proposed to curb illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing.  
Federal R&D  
The federal government provide s billions of R&D dollars annually  to institutions of higher education, federal laboratories, 
and the private sector . The 11 9th Congress may consider issues related to federally funded R&D, including support for 
agricultural research, research security, potential reform of the National Institu tes of Health, S&T cooperation with the 
People’s Republic of China, and potential reauthorization of the Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business 
Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) programs.  
Information Technology and Social Media  
Rapid advanceme nts in information technologies present several issues for the 119th Congress , such as the accessibility of 
various types of data by consumers, companies, and law enforcement entities (among others); cybersecurity ; legal and policy 
considerations related t o the ownership and use of social media  platforms;  and the potential impact of certain digital 
advertising and internet media strategies on traditional newspaper publishers and journalists.  R48482  
April 3, 2025  
Emily G. Blevins, 
Coordinator  
Analyst in Science and 
Technology Policy  
  
Marcy E. Gallo, 
Coordinator  
Analyst in Science and 
Technology Policy  
  
 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service  Innovation and Competition  
The state of America ’s innovation ecosy stem —the constellation of people, institutions, and enterprises engaged in research 
and the development of new products and services —is of concern for the long -term economic and national security of the 
United States. Selected innovation - and competition -related issues that the 119th Congress may face include  overseeing 
advances and new commercial applications of artificial intelligence, advancing innovation at the Department of Defense, 
overseeing the implementation of regional innovation strategies, considering the role of patents in promoting innovation and  
competition, and examining the role of immigration in the U.S. S&T workforce.  
Telecommunications  
Telecommunications technologies present several issues for policymakers, including over-the-air radio broadcast 
transmissions (such as access to transmission s and the impact of broadcasting technologies on copyright), policies governing 
federal and nonfederal radio spectrum management and use, and the  security and resiliency of telecommunication networks.  
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service  Contents  
Introduction  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 1 
Biotechnology and Biomedical Research  ................................ ................................ ........................  1 
Congressional Oversight of Laboratory Biosafety and Biosecurity  ................................ ..........  1 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Regulation of Laboratory -Developed Tests 
(LDTs)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 2 
Federal Government’s Role and Response to H5N1 Avian Influenza and Other 
Emerging Pathogens  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  3 
Regulation of Agricultural Biotechnology  ................................ ................................ ................  4 
Climate Science  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............................  4 
Climate Change and the Chal lenge of Addressing Extreme Heat  ................................ .............  4 
The Net -Zero Concept and Policy Considerations  ................................ ................................ .... 5 
Marine Carbon Dioxide Removal (mCDR)  ................................ ................................ ..............  6 
Earth and Environmental Sciences  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 6 
Improving Extreme Wea ther Forecasting  ................................ ................................ ..................  7 
Addressing Plastic Pollution  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 7 
Seabed Deposits as a Potential Source of Critical Minerals  ................................ .....................  8 
Technologies Propos ed to Curb Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing  .............  9 
Federal R&D  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 10 
Agricultural Research Funding  ................................ ................................ ...............................  10 
Implementation of Research Security Policies  ................................ ................................ .........  11 
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Potential Agency Reform  ................................ .. 11 
Oversight of the U.S. -China Science and Technology Cooperation Agreement (STA)  ..........  12 
Reauthorization of the Small Business Innovation Research and Small Business 
Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) Programs  ................................ ................................ ..... 13 
Informati on Technology (IT) and Social Media  ................................ ................................ ............  14 
Access to Motor Vehicle Software and Data  ................................ ................................ ...........  14 
Cybersecurity of Information and Communications Technology  (ICT)  ................................ . 14 
Evolving Technology and the Debate over “Lawful Access” to Data  ................................ ..... 15 
Issues Related to Social Media Platforms  ................................ ................................ ...............  16 
Innovation and Competition  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  17 
Artificial Intelligence (AI)  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 17 
Oversight of Advances in AI ................................ ................................ .............................  17 
The Regulation of AI in Health Care  ................................ ................................ ................  18 
Intellectual Property Issues Regarding AI  ................................ ................................ ........  19 
Advancing Innovation at DOD  ................................ ................................ ...............................  19 
Issues for the Implementation of Regional Innovation Strategies  (RISs)  ...............................  20 
The Role of Immigration in the U.S. S&T Workforce  ................................ ............................  21 
The Role of Patents in Promoting Innovation  ................................ ................................ .........  22 
The Role of Patents in Pharmaceutical Innovation and Comp etition ................................ ...... 22 
Telecommunications  ................................ ................................ ................................ ......................  24 
AM Broadcast Radio in Motor Vehicles  ................................ ................................ .................  24 
Copyright Laws and Broadcasting Policies  ................................ ................................ ............  24 
Radio Spectru m Policy  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  25 
Security and Resiliency of Telecommunications Networks  ................................ ....................  26 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   
Contacts  
Author Information  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........................  28 
 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   1 Introduction  
The federal science and technology (S&T) policymaking enterprise consists of an extensive and 
diverse  set of stakeholders in the executive, legislative, and judicial branches. The enterprise 
fosters, among other things, the advancement of scientific and technical knowledge; science, 
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education; the applicatio n of S&T to achieve 
economic, national security, and other societal benefits; and the use of S&T to improve federal 
decisionmaking.  
Federal responsibilities for S&T policymaking are highly decentralized. Many House and Senate 
committees have jurisdiction o ver important elements of S&T policy. Congressional 
appropriations committees, for example, provide funding for federal agency S&T programs. 
Congress also enacts laws to establish, refine, and eliminate federal agencies, programs, policies, 
regulations, an d regulatory processes that affect science, technology, and engineering research 
and development (R&D) or rely on S&T data and analysis. In addition, dozens of informal 
congressional caucuses exist in areas of S&T policy such as R&D, specific S&T disciplin es, and 
STEM education.  
The President formulates annual budgets, policies, and programs for consideration by Congress; 
issues executive orders (E.O.s) and directives; and directs the executive branch departments and 
agencies responsible for implementing S& T policies and programs. The Office of Science and 
Technology Policy (OSTP), in the Executive Office of the President, advises the President and 
other Administration officials on S&T issues.  
Executive agency S&T responsibilities are diffuse. Some agencies,  such as the National Science 
Foundation (NSF), have broad S&T responsibilities. Others use S&T to meet a specific federal 
mission (e.g., defense, energy, health, space). Regulatory agencies have S&T responsibilities in 
areas such as nuclear energy, food a nd drug safety, and environmental protection.  
Federal court cases and decisions often affect U.S. S&T policy. Decisions can have an impact on 
the development of S&T (e.g., decisions regarding the U.S. patent system), S&T -intensive 
industries (e.g., the breakup of AT&T in the 1980s), and the admissibility of S&T -related 
evidence (e.g., DNA samples) in court.  
CRS experts have identified the issues highlighted below as particularly relevant to the 119th 
Congress. Each section serves as a brief introduction to the topic and identifies other CRS 
products and the appropriate CRS experts to contact for further information and analysis.  
Biotechnology and Biomedical Research  
Recent advances in biotechnology and biomedical research hold the promise of longer, heal thier 
lives and more productive industries, but they also raise policy challenges. This section discusses 
issues that the 119th Congress may face in this area, including laboratory biosafety and 
biosecurity, federal regulation of laboratory -developed diagn ostic devices, the federal response to 
emerging pathogens such as H5N1 influenza, and the regulation of agricultural biotechnologies.  
Congressional Oversight of Laboratory Biosafety and Biosecurity  
In the United States, oversight of the life sciences, part icularly laboratory biosafety and 
biosecurity, is exercised pursuant to a mixture of federal law, federal guidance, and self -
governance . It is also dependent on the types of experiments and biological agents being used. 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   2 There currently is no overarching fe deral law that provides oversight of laboratory biosafety and 
biosecurity with enforceable  standards and  legal penalties beyond those in the Federal Select 
Agent Program, which covers only certain types of biological agents and toxins. Privately funded 
research is generally not covered by federal policy or agency guidance. In May 2024, OSTP 
released the United States Government Policy for Oversight of Dual Use Research of Concern 
and Pathogens with Enhanced Pandemic Potential  (2024 policy). The 2024 policy addresses 
oversight of research on biological agents and toxins that, when enhanced, may pose risks to 
public health, agriculture, food security, economic security, or national security. The 2024 policy 
is scheduled to go into effect on May 6, 2025.  
During  the 118th Congress, multiple bills were introduced related to laboratory biosafety and 
biosecurity, pandemic prevention and preparedness, and other mechanisms to control materials 
and technologies related to biotechnology and other life sciences. The 119th Congress may 
consider several issues related to the safety and security of certain biological research. For 
example, Congress may consider whether or how the implementation of the 2024 policy 
addresses biosafety and biosecurity concerns about certain typ es of research or whether additional 
oversight mechanisms or approval processes are needed. The 119th Congress may also consider its 
current oversight role, including weighing whether certain types of research should be supported 
with federal investments a nd, if so, at what level.  
For Further Information  
Todd Kuiken, Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12883, Mirror Life: Biosafety/Biosecurity Oversight Considerations   
CRS Report R4711 4, Oversight of Gain -of-Function Research with Pathogens: Issues for 
Congress   
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Regulation of Laboratory -
Developed Tests  (LDTs)  
Debate over regulation of LDTs has been on going for three decades, underscored most recently 
by the development of tests during the COVID -19 pandemic. The FDA defines LDTs as a class of 
in vitro diagnostic (IVD) device s that are designed, manufactured, and used within a single 
laboratory. These tests are often developed and used in the context of evolving scientific 
knowledge and increasingly integrate complex technology. The FDA maintains that it has 
regulatory authority over LD Ts but has traditionally not exercised that discretion broadly, so most 
LDTs have not been subject to premarket review or other regulatory requirements. However, the 
FDA has asserted authority over tests it considers higher risk, for example, direct -to-consumer 
tests or tests intended for emergencies. The FDA published draft guidance to regulate LDTs in 
2014, but the guidance was not finalized. Many stakeholders suggested at the time that the FDA 
should proceed instead through notice -and-comment rulemaking,  and others suggested that the 
agency should defer to Congress to pass legislation regulating these tests.  
The Verifying Accurate, Leading -Edge, IVCT Development (V ALID) Act of 2023 ( H.R. 2369 ), 
introduced in the 118th Congress, proposed a comprehensive risk -based regulatory framework for 
“in vitro clinical tests,” defined to include IVDs and LDTs, that would be distinct from the current 
regulatory framework for medical devices. Howe ver, no action beyond introduction was taken in 
the 118th Congress.  
In the absence of congressional action, the FDA published a final rule in May 2024 to phase out 
its general enforcement discretion approach for LDTs. The 119th Congress may be interested in 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   3 revisiting the V ALID Act or similar legislati ve proposals  in light of the FDA’s final rule, or it may 
consider oversight or other action to modify the rule’s implementation.  
For Further Information  
Amanda K. Sarata, Specialist in Health Policy  
CRS In Fo cus IF11389, FDA Regulation of Laboratory -Developed Tests (LDTs)  
Federal Government’s Role and Response to H5N1 Avian Influenza 
and Other Emerging Pathogens  
Avian influenza viruses are classified as eith er low or highly pathogenic depending on the 
severity of the disease they cause in poultry and other bird species. H5N1 is a subtype of highly 
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus. HPAI H5N1 was first detected in 1996 in the 
Guangdong Province of the Pe ople’s Republic of China (PRC, or China) and has been responsible 
for several outbreaks around the world since then. Wild birds, mainly waterfowl, have introduced 
the virus to new regions, where it has spread to other birds and mammals, such as dairy cattl e. 
Several cases of humans infected with H5N1 were reported in 2024 and 2025. Most of these 
cases were associated with dairy and poultry workers who contracted the disease from infected 
animals, although a few human cases have no known connection with the dairy and poultry 
industry. H5N1 influenza cannot efficiently spread among humans, but its continued spread 
among animal populations raises the risk that a strain with human pandemic potential could 
emerge.  
Debates surrounding the origins and the governmen t response to COVID -19—along with the 
recent emergence of a new H5N1 strain and its spread to dairy farms and humans —raises 
questions about U.S. and global pandemic prevention and preparedness strategies. The 119th 
Congress may consider its role in and ove rsight responsibilities toward the nation’s biothreat 
response policies and programs, which include disease surveillance (e.g., of wildlife, farms, 
and/or people). Congress may also consider weighing the risks and benefits of certain research 
programs aime d at identifying and understanding pathogens, and the development and availability 
of medical countermeasures.  
For Further Information  
Lia Biondo, Analyst in Agricultural Policy  
Todd Kuiken, Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
Kavya Sekar, Analyst in Health Policy  
Hassan Z. Sheikh, Analyst in Health Policy  
Pervaze A. Sheikh, Specialist in Natural Resources Policy  
CRS Report R47114, Oversight of Gain -of-Function Research with Pathogens: Issues for 
Congress   
CRS In Focus IF12895, H5N1 Avian Influenza: The Human Health Response   
CRS In Focus IF12837, H5N1 HP AI Continues to Spread in Dairy Herds  
CRS Report R48361, Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza —H5N1 Virus: CRS Experts and Points 
of Contact   
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   4 Regulation of Agricultural Biotechnology  
New biotechnology tools, such as gene editing, and rece nt regulatory developments highlight 
ongoing debates over innovation, oversight, and agency coordination. In 2016, Congress required 
a national standard for labeling foods with bioengineered or genetically engineered ingredients. 
The U.S. Department of Agr iculture (USDA) finalized its regulations in 2018, with mandatory 
compliance beginning in January 2022. However, in September 2022, a U.S. district court 
remanded two provisions to USDA that allowed QR code labeling and text message disclosure 
without addi tional on -package labeling (7 C.F.R. §§66.106 and 66.108). USDA is expected to 
revise those provisions while broader labeling requirements remain in effect.  
In 2020, USDA finalized the SECURE Rule (7 C.F.R. Part 340) under the Plant Protection Act (7 
U.S.C . §§7701 et seq.), which exempts certain engineered plants from regulation because of low 
pest risk. In November 2024, USDA updated the SECURE Rule, expanding regulatory 
exemptions. In December 2024, the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of Cal ifornia 
vacated the rule, prompting USDA to revert to the pre -May 2020 framework and reestablish the 
“Am I Regulated?” process under the 2019 version of 7 C.F.R. Part 340.  
USDA has proposed transferring regulation of genetically engineered agricultural ani mals from 
the FDA. In 2021, the agencies signed a memorandum outlining collaborative frameworks for 
premarket evaluations and post -market monitoring. In 2024, USDA, the FDA, and the 
Environmental Protection Agency released a plan for regulatory reform unde r the Coordinated 
Framework for Biotechnology, focusing on modified plants, animals, and microorganisms; human 
drugs; and broader issues. The plan aims to clarify oversight and includes biannual reviews.  
The December 2024 court decision invalidating USDA’s  SECURE Rule and USDA’s reversion to 
the pre -May 2020 framework may prompt Congress to assess the implications for innovation and 
oversight in plant biotechnology regulation. Congress may also examine how these regulatory 
changes impact efforts to advance the U.S. bioeconomy, including agency coordination and 
biotechnology commercialization. Additionally, Congress may evaluate how these shifts affect 
goals such as balancing regulatory clarity, consumer safety, and market development in the 
biotechnology sec tor. 
For Further Information  
Eleni G. Bickell, Analyst in Agricultural Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12618, Gene -Edited Plants: Regulation and Issues for Congress  
Climate Science  
S&T considerations permeate deli berations on topics related to climate change and mitigation 
approaches. This section discusses issues before the 119th Congress, which may include 
understanding the causes of extreme heat and addressing associated risks, assessing the concept 
of “net -zero emissions” and related policies, and evaluating ocean -based strategies for carbon 
dioxide removal.  
Climate Change and the Challenge of Addressing Extreme Heat  
According to the U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP), human -caused greenhouse 
gas (GHG)  emissions are warming the planet, and in recent years, scientists have observed 
record -breaking temperatures and heat waves.  
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   5 Extreme heat can have a range of serious consequences on U.S. communities. It can cause heat -
related deaths and an increase in hea t-related medical conditions. Extreme heat affects the health, 
safety, and productivity of workers. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
extreme heat puts personnel at increasing risk of workplace injuries. Extreme heat also strains  the 
electrical power grid  because it creates high demand for cooling, among other reasons . It has been 
estimated that during the summer of 2023, about two -thirds of North America faced the potential 
for insufficient operating reserves of electricity from extreme heat. Extreme heat may accelerate 
the degradation of roads, bridges, and railroad tracks. According to the Department of Defense 
(DOD), extreme heat may degrade aircraft performance by reducing lift capacity, which may 
require payload reductions an d longer takeoff distances. In addition, extreme heat puts stress on 
plants, livestock, and poultry, reducing agricultural yields.  
Studies have examined the influence of human -caused climate change on individual extreme heat 
events. While not every extreme  heat event is caused by climate change, some studies have found 
that human -caused climate change has increased the risk of certain extreme heat events in the 
United States. Modeling results from the Fifth National Climate Assessment of the USGCRP 
indicate  that “it is very likely  that heatwaves will increase in frequency, severity, and duration as 
warming continues.”  
Congress has oversight across a range of federal activities that can address extreme heat risks and 
events, including activities involving res earch, preparation, response, and mitigation. In addition 
to oversight, the 119th Congress may consider the level of funding for federal activities regarding 
extreme heat.  
For Further Information  
Jonathan D. Haskett, Analyst in Environmental Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12733, Extreme Heat and Climate Change  
The Net-Zero Concept and Policy Considerations  
There is a scientific consensus that human -caused GHG emissions increase the levels of GHGs in 
the atmosphere . Higher levels of GHGs result in increases in global average temperature and a 
corresponding increase in global net negative climate change effects. Global temperatures are 
generally not expected to stabilize  until after GHG emissions reach net zero.  
Net-zero emissions  refers to a situation in which human -caused GHG emissions, from sources 
such as fossil fuel combustion and deforestation, are fully balanced by removal of carbon dioxide 
from the atmosphere. Methods of removal include natural absorption and storage in forests and 
other ecosystems as well as technological removal and storage.  
The net -zero concept appears in both enacted legislation and executive branch actions. Provisions 
in recent legislation funded emissions reduction activities, in some cas es citing the goal of 
achieving net -zero GHG emissions. For example, in 2022, Congress enacted P.L. 117 -169, 
commonly known as the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), which incl uded appropriations of 
approximately $5.8 billion in financial assistance to industrial or manufacturing facilities to help 
them adopt “advanced industrial technology at an eligible facility.” In this context, the IRA 
defines “advanced industrial technolog y” as being “designed to accelerate [GHG] emissions 
reduction progress to net -zero.” One of the priorities for receiving the assistance is the level of 
emissions reductions from an industrial or manufacturing facility.  
The Paris Agreement, which the United  States had previously joined, is an international pact for 
cooperation to address climate change and its impacts. Article 4 of the agreement includes a goal 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   6 of achieving a balance between GHG emissions and removals (i.e., reaching net -zero emissions) 
by the second half of this century. On January 20, 2025, President Trump issued an E.O. directing 
the withdrawal of the United States from the Paris Agreement . The 119th Congress may examine 
policies and programs that seek to implement a net -zero concept.  
For Further Information  
Jonathan D. Haskett, Analyst in Environmental Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12753, Climate Change: What Are Net -Zero Emissions?  
Marine Carbon Dioxide Removal  (mCDR)  
Scientists have investigated how mCDR, including artificial upwelling/downwelling, direct ocean 
removal, macroalgal (seawee d) cultivation, ocean alkalinity enhancement, and ocean fertilization 
may augment the ocean’s natural ability to absorb atmospheric carbon dioxide and to store carbon 
for extended periods. Various stakeholders have proposed the use of mCDR as a policy opti on to 
mitigate rising atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. The efficacy, cost, co -benefits, and risks of 
full-scale deployment of mCDR approaches are still uncertain. While some stakeholders propose 
controlled field experiments to investigate these uncertain ties, permitting and high costs for 
conducting such experiments may present challenges for researchers.  
Policy options, such as a federal regulatory framework to facilitate controlled field experiments, 
may elucidate some uncertainties associated with mCDR . Some stakeholders contend that a 
robust system for monitoring, reporting, and verifying carbon sequestration is needed to ensure 
transparent and effective management of mCDR projects. Such a system may use existing federal 
assets or new technologies supp orted by federal agencies to monitor the marine environment in 
areas where projects take place. Congress may consider how improved federal coordination on 
mCDR research and permitting may help identify promising approaches for carbon dioxide 
mitigation and  other co -benefits to marine environments (e.g., ocean acidification mitigation) as 
well as limits to unintended side effects, including potential environmental impacts  (e.g., deep -sea 
anoxia ). 
For Further Information  
Caitlin Keating -Bitonti, Specialist in  Natural Resources Policy  
Eva Lipiec, Specialist in Natural Resource Policy  
Laura Gatz, Specialist in Environmental Policy  
Claire M. Jordan, Senior Research Librarian  
Anthony R. Marshak, Analyst in Natural Resources Policy  
CRS Report R48159, Selected Potential Considerations with Respect to Marine Carbon Dioxide 
Removal: In Brief  
Earth and Environmental Sciences  
Earth - and environmental -science -related issues before the 119th Congress include the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA’s) R&D activities, which are aimed at 
improving extreme weather forecasting, addressing plastic pollution, assessing the potential for 
seabed deposits to serve as a source of critical minerals, and understandi ng technologies proposed 
to curb illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing.  
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   7 Improving Extreme Weather Forecasting  
Weather - and climate -related disasters impact millions of people in the United States each year 
and can cost billions of dollars. For example, in 2024, the United States experienced 27 weather - 
and climate -related events that each caused more than $1 billion in losses , according to NOAA, 
the primary U.S. civilian weather forecasting agency. In the United States, weather information is 
developed by a mix of academia, the public sector, and the private sector (e.g., commercial 
weather forecast providers). The public sector includes several federal agencies that engage in 
weather -related activities or research, have a major need for weathe r services, or set policy and 
direction for such services and research.  
Congress has indicated its interest in improving aspects of weather forecasting, most recently 
passing the Weather Research and Forecasting Innovation Act of 2017 (commonly known as th e 
Weather Act; P.L. 115 -25). The act directed NOAA to prioritize weather research and forecasting, 
subseasonal and seasonal forecasting, weather satellites and data, and fed eral coordination of 
weather activities.  
Since 2017, various stakeholders and practitioners have recommended additional improvements 
to the weather enterprise and weather research to better protect U.S. lives and property. For 
example, in 2022, NOAA’s Scie nce Advisory Board, a federal committee charged with advising 
the NOAA Administrator, recommended actions to further improve NOAA’s weather -related 
observations, data use, forecasting, information delivery, and scien tific activities , among other 
topics. NO AA has implemented some of these recommendations. Some Members of Congress 
have shown interest in improving the understanding and prediction of climate and weather -related 
phenomena since the passing of the Weather Act. The 119th Congress may consider prev iously 
introduced policy options, such as improvements to observations and forecasting of specific types 
of events (e.g., atmospheric rivers) and new authorities for weather - and climate -prediction -
related activities more broadly at federal agencies. Some Members may also choose to 
reintroduce bills (e.g., H.R. 6093 , 118th Congress) that would reauthorize or change activities 
authorized in the 2017 Weather Act.  
For Further Information  
Eva Lipiec, Specialist in Natural Resources Policy  
Nicole T. Carter, Specialist in Natural Resources Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12695, Tornadoes: Background and Forecasting  
CRS In Focus IF12698, Weather Research and Forecasting Innovation Reauthorization Act of 
2023 (H.R. 6093)  
CRS In Focus IF12 872, Atmospheric Rivers: Background and Forecasting  
CRS Report R48212, Hurricane Rapid Intensification: In Brief  
Addressing Plastic Pollution  
Global and domestic plastic production has increased substantially since the mid -20th century —
doubling in the last two decades alone. The durability, moldability, and versatility of plastic have 
led to its ubiquitous use, benefiting many aspects of society , including the food, medical, 
technology, textile, and transportation industries. As plastic production and use have grown, so 
have concerns about the impacts of plastic on the environment, including increasing rates of 
plastic waste generation, insuffici ent management of plastic waste, and pollution from plastic 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   8 waste. The potential environmental and human health effects of the chemicals used to produce 
plastics and the air emissions generated across the plastic life cycle have also raised concerns.  
The r isks from plastic pollution arise from the physical plastic particles (e.g., ingestion and 
entanglement by wildlife), the potential toxicity of the chemicals from which the plastics are 
made, and the pollutants that adhere to plastics in the environment. O ther environmental impacts 
include air emissions generated across the plastic life cycle —including during production and for 
certain post -use disposal practices —which may contribute to climate change and air quality 
concerns. Gaps remain in understanding t he magnitude and scope of these impacts and the extent 
to which various sources of plastic contribute to them. Observers have highlighted the importance 
of further research to better understand the plastic life cycle, as well as the fate, transport, and 
effect of plastic pollution in the environment, to inform the adoption of effective policies.  
Congress has passed legislation, introduced bills, and held hearings to investigate and address 
various plastic -pollution -related concerns. The 119th Congress may c onsider adopting policy 
options and tools focusing on the entire life cycle of plastic or just on specific aspects of that life 
cycle. Many of these tools could be applied with varying levels of stringency or scope. Congress 
may also consider its position and options with regard to U.S. involvement in existing 
international agreements and ongoing negotiations related to plastic pollution.  
For Further Information  
Laura Gatz, Specialist in Environmental Policy  
Clare Y . Cho, Specialist in Industrial Organizat ion and Business Policy  
Omar M. Hammad, Analyst in Environmental Policy  
Jonathan D. Haskett, Analyst in Environmental Policy  
Kristen Hite, Legislative Attorney  
Angela C. Jones, Analyst in Environmental Policy  
Claire M. Jordan, Senior Research Librarian  
Eva Lipiec, Specialist in Natural Resource Policy  
Jerry H. Yen, Analyst in Environmental Policy  
CRS Report R48293, Plastic Pollution and Policy Considerations: Frequently Asked Questions  
CRS In Focus IF12690 , International Agreement on Plastic Pollution: Negotiations  
CRS In Focus IF10967, Marine Debris: NOAA’ s Role  
Seabed Deposits as a Potential Source of Critical Minerals  
Demand for critical minerals for emerging technologies across multiple sectors has driven U.S. 
interest in securing a domestic critical mineral supply. Some stakeholders have proposed seabed 
mining as one option to strengthen U. S. critical mineral supply chains, because certain minerals, 
such as cobalt and manganese, are estimated to be more abundant in seafloor deposits than in land 
deposits. Tension exists, however, between the technological challenge of extracting these 
resour ces from remote, deepwater locations and the potential environmental impacts of seabed 
mining techniques.  
Commercial -scale seabed mining for critical minerals has yet to occur in areas beyond national 
jurisdiction or on the U.S. outer continental shelf (OC S); however, the development of new 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   9 technologies could enable the successful extraction of minerals and may help to elucidate the 
relative risks and benefits of commercial -scale seabed mining. For example, new deep -sea 
sensing technologies may provide info rmation about sediment disturbance and redistribution, 
among other environmental concerns associated with seabed mining. Seabed mineral collection 
equipment and machinery could be designed to minimize environmental impacts.  The 
Department of Energy’s Advan ced Research Projects Agency -Energy (ARPA -E) supports 
transformational energy technology research projects and has funded several related to seabed 
mining. Congress may consider funding levels for certain federal agencies (e.g., ARPA -E) that 
support R&D re lated to seabed mining technologies, as well as funding levels for agencies, such 
as the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM), NOAA, and the U.S. Geological Survey 
(USGS), that work to identify the locations and characteristics of mineral deposits on t he OCS. In 
addition, BOEM, NOAA, and the USGS have been collaborating to study the long -term 
environmental impacts and ecosystem recovery of an area of the OCS (Blake Plateau) disturbed 
during a 1970s seabed mining pilot project.  
For Further Information  
Caitlin Keating -Bitonti, Specialist in Natural Resources Policy  
Laura B. Comay, Specialist in Natural Resources Policy  
CRS Report R47324, Seabed Mining in Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction: Issues for Congre ss 
CRS In Focus IF12608, U.S. Interest in Seabed Mining in Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction: 
Brief Background and Recent Developments  
CRS Report R48302, Critical Minerals on the U.S. Outer Continental Shelf: The Bureau of 
Ocean Energy Management’ s Role and Issues for Congress   
Technologies Proposed to Curb Illegal, Unreported, and 
Unregulated (IUU) Fishing  
Earth’s vast ocean area enables some fishing fleets to conduct IUU fishing activities undetected, 
which presents law -enforcement challenges for the United States and other coastal nations aiming 
to curb these practices. IUU fishing undermines fisheries man agement because it skews data on 
fishery populations, inhibits stock assessments, and can exacerbate overfishing. Congress 
continues to express interest in applying newer technologies to address IUU fishing. Widely used 
technologies, including the Vessel M onitoring System (VMS) and Automatic Identification 
System (AIS), monitor vessel location and movement, which can help identify vessels suspected 
of IUU fishing. Some nations and international organizations require VMS and AIS on fishing 
vessels of a certa in size. SeaVision, developed by the U.S. Department of Transportation and U.S. 
Navy, uses nonclassified AIS data to display vessel movement as a web -based encrypted sharing 
network of maritime domain awareness information.  The Navy applied machine learnin g 
technologies, a subset of artificial intelligence (AI), to SeaVision to detect anomalous vessel 
movement behavior (e.g., turning off a VMS, straddling the boundary of a marine protected area). 
These applications may improve targeted enforcement against v essels suspected of IUU fishing. 
Some federal agencies also have proposed applying AI to satellite -based synthetic aperture radar 
data—technology that can penetrate clouds and be used at night —to detect the location and 
movement of vessels that have turned  off their VMSs and/or AISs. While Congress has given 
broad authority to several federal agencies to counter IUU fishing domestically and globally, 
some Members continue to pursue legislative options that would direct federal agencies to 
provide intelligen ce, equipment, and funding to partner nations particularly vulnerable to IUU 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   10 fishing. Congress may further consider how these resources may be integrated with fisheries 
management and enforcement approaches to address IUU fishing.  
For Further Information  
Caitlin Keating -Bitonti, Specialist in Natural Resources Policy  
Anthony R. Marshak, Analyst in Natural Resources Policy  
CRS Report R48215, Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing: Frequently Asked  
Questions  
Federal R&D  
The federal government provides billions of R&D dollars annually to institutions of higher 
education, federal laboratories, and the private sector. This section discusses issues the 119th 
Congress may consider that are related to f ederally funded R&D, including support for 
agricultural research, research security, potential reform of the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), S&T cooperation with China, and the potential reauthorization of the Small Business 
Innovation Research and Sm all Business Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) programs.  
Agricultural Research Funding  
The USDA’s Research, Education, and Economics (REE) mission area comprises four agencies: 
the Agricultural Research Service (ARS), the Economic Research Service (ERS), th e National 
Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), and the National Institute of Food and Agriculture 
(NIFA). In addition, the REE Office of the Chief Scientist provides leadership and coordination 
for research initiatives and activities across the departm ent, ensuring alignment with USDA 
priorities and scientific advancements.  
REE holds the primary federal responsibility for advancing and disseminating scientific 
knowledge related to agriculture, food systems, and natural resources. Its work spans a range of 
disciplines, including the biological, physical, and social sciences, to address challenges in 
agriculture and food security, sustainability, and rural development. USDA funds research and 
extension activities through its extramural research agency, NIF A, which distributes funding via 
two primary mechanisms: capacity grants, allocated to states using statutory formulas, and 
competitive grants, awarded through a peer -review process. USDA conducts intramural research 
through ARS, which focuses on high -priority agricultural challenges; NASS, which provides 
essential data on agriculture; and ERS, which delivers economic analysis to inform policy and 
decisionmaking.  
Congress provided the REE mission area programs and activities with approximately $3.9 billion 
in FY2024 discretionary appropriations through the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 ( P.L. 
118-42), and authorized approximately $130 million of mandatory funding per ye ar through the 
Agriculture Improvement Act of 2018 , commonly referred to as the 2018 farm bill  (P.L. 115 -334). 
USDA directs nearly half of this federal funding to states and local partners, primarily through 
grants.  
While the 119th Congress is considering a new multiyear farm bill reauthorization, it may also 
consider establishing new REE programs or initiatives, revising existing efforts, or eliminating 
some progra ms. Without reauthorization or additional extensions, mandatory funding could 
expire for certain programs, such as the Organic Research and Extension Initiative and others 
without baseline funding.  
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   11 For Further Information  
Eleni G. Bickell, Analyst in Agric ultural Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12023, Farm Bill Primer: Agricultural Research and Extension   
CRS Report R48307, Federal Research and Development (R&D) Fun ding: FY2025  
Implementation of Research Security Policies  
In general, U.S. policy for federally funded basic and applied research is to encourage openness, 
collaboration, and information sharing. Recently, U.S. officials and others have raised concerns 
about various efforts of foreign governments —most notably the PRC —to influence and exploit 
the openness of the U.S. research ecosystem. They warn that the ability of foreign strategic 
competitors to acquire U.S. advances in S&T, intellectual property, and t alent may pose a risk to 
U.S. national defense and global economic competitiveness.  
In response, Congress and the executive branch have taken several actions intended to maintain 
the benefits of an open research ecosystem while protecting it from external threats. For example, 
in 2019, Congress established an interagency working group to, among other tasks, develop 
descriptions of known and potential threats to federally funded R&D ( P.L. 116 -92, §1746). In 
2021, President Trump issued National Security Presidential Memorandum 33 (NSPM -33), which 
directed federal agencies to take specific actions “to strengthen protections of United States 
Government -supported [R&D] against for eign government interference and exploitation.” And in 
2022, the Biden Administration issued guidance to federal agencies on the implementation of 
NSPM -33. 
Together, these actions have amended existing policies and instituted new requirements in a 
number o f areas, including (1) prohibiting certain federally funded researchers from participating 
in malign foreign talent recruitment programs, (2) establishing research security training and 
program requirements to increase threat awareness among U.S. academic researchers, (3) 
standardizing and strengthening requirements for U.S. researchers to disclose specified types of 
connections to foreign researchers and institutions, and (4) enhancing the ability of federal R&D 
funding agencies to share information and as sess R&D funding decisions for potential security 
risks.  
The 119th Congress may continue to monitor threats to the security of U.S. R&D, oversee  the 
progress of ongoing efforts to address those threats, and consider additional measures that may 
enhance the  ability of the United States to protect the results of federally funded R&D.  
For Further Information  
Emily G. Blevins, Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
Marcy E. Gallo, Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12589, Research Security Policies: An Overview  
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Potential Agency 
Reform  
NIH is the leading biomedical and health research agency of the federal government. With its 
over $47 billion b udget in FY2024, NIH is the world’s largest public health research funder and 
therefore has considerable influence on S&T globally. NIH comprises 27 different 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   12 semiautonomous institutes and centers (ICs), most of which oversee research programs related to 
specific diseases or other health and scientific topics.  
In the 118th Congress, some committee leaders in both the House and Senate published reports on 
potential NIH reform. These reports highlighted several concerns, including that (1) NIH’s peer -
review process for selecting and funding research proposals may favor establ ished scientific 
approaches over innovation; (2) NIH lost public trust during the COVID -19 pandemic with its 
associated public communication; (3) NIH lacks adequate oversight over grantees and their policy 
compliance, creating some security concerns; and ( 4) NIH’s large and decentralized structure 
creates opportunities for research overlap and inefficiencies. To address the last concern, the  chair 
of the  House Committee on Energy and Commerce proposed restructuring and reducing NIH’s 27 
ICs to 15, and the H ouse Committee on Appropriations reflected the proposed restructure in an 
FY2025 appropriations bill.  
The House NIH reorganization proposal generated mixed reactions among stakeholders. Some 
agreed with the proposed changes or with the underlying intention  to reform NIH. Others voiced 
concerns, particularly with including the new structure in the committee -reported FY2025 
appropriations bill. Several stakeholder organizations argued that any proposed change to NIH’s 
structure should be subject to an open an d transparent public process. The 119th Congress also 
faces policy questions related to NIH’s overall research priorities, how to balance NIH -supported 
research with private sector research, and the oversight and security of NIH -funded research. 
Congress m ay also respond to the Administration’s recent policy changes, such as modifications 
to the amount of indirect costs NIH will support.  
For Further Information  
Kavya Sekar, Analyst in Health Policy  
CRS Report R41705, The National Institutes of Health (NIH): Background and Congressional 
Issues  
CRS Insight IN12516, NIH Indirect Costs Policy for Research Grants: Recent Developments   
Oversight of the U.S. -China Science and Technology Cooperation 
Agreement  (STA)  
The first major agreement between the United States and the PRC, the U.S. -China STA, has 
facilitated joint R&D activities between the two nations since it was signed in 1979. At the time, 
the STA was pa rt of a U.S. strategy to build ties with China to counter the influence of the Soviet 
Union. Since then, U.S. views and strategy toward China have been shifting to protect and 
advance U.S. interests vis -à-vis China as a strategic competitor.  
On December 13 , 2024, the Department of State announced that the United States and China had 
signed a protocol to amend and extend the STA for five years. The STA was last extended in 
September 2018, when it was amended to address U.S. concerns about China’s approach to  
technology, innovation, and practices of concern (e.g., intellectual property theft, lax intellectual 
property enforcement, and forced technology transfer). Like other U.S. STAs, the U.S. -China 
STA is an umbrella agreement. It governs U.S. government S&T work with China through an 
estimated 30 agency -level protocols and 40 sub -agreements. Stated STA objectives include 
providing opportunities for cooperation in S&T fields of mutual interest “on the basis of equality, 
reciprocity and mutual benefit.”  
Advocat es say the STA guides U.S. S&T work with China without mandating activity; provides 
access and protections for U.S. scientists in China, including in the social sciences (where access 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   13 has been more restricted); and benefits U.S. researchers by providing ac cess to large pools of 
research subjects and longitudinal health studies. Opponents say China has cooperated 
inconsistently, restricted access to U.S. researchers, imposed data restrictions, and withheld 
scientific results. Opponents also caution that S&T ties with the United States have helped China 
develop research, technological, and industrial competencies. The STA has also provided the 
framework for PRC students and scholars to study in the United States, which has been central to 
China’s S&T advances.  
The STA is not a treaty requiring Senate ratification but is subject to congressional oversight. 
Such oversight could include (1) reconstituting reporting requirements, (2) requiring the 
Department of State to provide all sub -agreements and notify Congres s of any future sub -
agreements, (3) requiring an assessment of U.S. research work with China performed under the 
STA, and (4) determining whether the U.S. -China STA should be extended at the end of the 
current five -year term and, if so, according to what t erms.  
For Further Information  
Karen M. Sutter, Specialist in Asian Trade and Finance  
Emily G. Blevins, Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12510, U.S.-China Science and Technology Cooperation Agreement  
Reauthorization of the Small Business Innovation Research and 
Small Business Technology Transfer (SBIR/STTR) Programs  
Congress has a long -standing in terest in federal programs that provide assistance and support for 
small businesses because of their perceived importance to the economy —creating jobs, 
improving productivity, and advancing innovation. The SBIR and STTR programs provide early -
stage R&D fun ding to small businesses with the intent of stimulating innovation, expanding the 
use of these businesses to help meet federal R&D needs, and increasing private sector 
commercialization of innovations resulting from federally funded R&D, among other goals.  
Execution of the SBIR and STTR programs is decentralized. Both the SBIR and STTR statutes 
(15 U.S.C. §638) require that federal agencies with extramural R&D budgets in excess of 
specified amounts set aside a percentage of such funds to conduct their own S BIR and STTR 
programs. Currently, 11 federal departments and agencies operate SBIR programs, and 6 operate 
STTR programs. According to the most recent SBIR/STTR annual report, in FY202 2, federal 
agencies awarded $ 4.1 billion to small businesses through the  SBIR program and $ 618.3  million 
through the STTR program.  
The SBIR and STTR programs have been extended and reauthorized several times since their 
initial enactments —1982 and 1992, respectively. On September 30, 2025, the authority for these 
programs, inc luding existing pilot programs, expires. If the 119th Congress debates the 
reauthorization of the programs, it may consider a number of issues, including the required 
amount of funding an agency sets aside for the programs, the effectiveness of efforts to improve 
commercialization outcomes and to mitigate foreign influence and risk, and the eligibility of 
certain small businesses to participate in the program.  
For Further Information  
Marcy E. Gallo, Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12 874, Small Business Research Programs: Overview and Issues for 
Reauthorization in the 119th Congress   
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   14 Information Technology (IT) and Social Media  
Rapid advancements in IT present several issues for the 119th Congress, such as the accessibility 
of various types of data by consumers, companies, and law enforcement entities (among others); 
cybersecurity; legal and policy considerations related to the ownership and use of social media 
platforms; and the pote ntial impact of certain digital advertising and internet media strategies on 
traditional newspaper publishers and journalists.  
Access to Motor Vehicle Software and Data  
Motor vehicles’ software supports many functions, including telematics , that is, the wi reless 
transmission of data to and from vehicles and data centers hosted by vehicle original equipment 
manufacturers (OEMs). Access to motor vehicles’ telematics data has become a focal point of 
policy debate around laws stipulating consumers’ ability to s elect who repairs and services their 
motor vehicles.  
Some industry participants and consumers contend that the growing prevalence of software and 
sensors within motor vehicles has enabled OEMs to limit competition in the marketplace of goods 
and services a fter the initial sale of vehicles. OEMs and motor vehicle dealerships counter that 
laws guaranteeing third -party access to vehicle data —whether for repair or other purposes —are 
unnecessary and could compromise consumer safety.  
Copyright laws, typically enforced by courts, penalize consumers and third parties that violate 
copyright holders’ exclusive rights in creative works, including software. Pursuant to a 
congressionally mandated triennial rulemaking, the Librarian of Congress may grant temp orary 
three -year exemptions from certain copyright laws to allow third parties and consumers to access, 
store, and share vehicle operational data for repair or other purposes.  
The Right to Equitable and Professional Auto Industry Repair Act (REPAIR Act; H.R. 906 ) was 
introduced in the 118th Congress but never made it out of committee. The REPAIR Act would 
have given the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) the authority to adopt a rule requ iring OEMs to 
provide consumers and third parties with access to motor vehicles for the purpose of repair. It also 
would have permitted the FTC, in consultation with the National Highway Traffic Safety 
Administration (NHTSA), to require OEMs to enable thir d-party access to data unrelated to 
repair. As an alternative to enacting legislation, Members could monitor actions by states, courts, 
and industry participants and/or increase oversight activities of federal government agencies.  
For Further Information  
Dana A. Scherer, Specialist in Telecommunications Policy  
CRS Report R48131, Access to Motor Vehicle Software and Data  
Cybersecurity  of Information and Communications 
Technology  (ICT)  
Policymakers and systems administrators may continue developing new cybersecurity reforms 
during the 119th Congress. One concern many have is the uptick of attacks on key ICT companies 
and products.  Accor ding to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), ICT 
“encompasses the capture, storage, retrieval, processing, display, representation, presentation, 
organization, management, security, transfer, and interchange of data and information.” 
Following are some recent, high -profile ICT cybersecurity incidents:  
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   15 • the 2020 SolarWinds attack , in which a Russia Federation –linked attacker 
compromised an IT management company in order to steal data from that 
company’s clients,  
• the 2021 Log4Shell exploi tation , in which Islamic Republic of Iran –linked 
actors took advantage of a common vulnerability in widely used software to 
access sensitive information on many web servers,  
• the 2024 global IT outage , linked to a flawed update of cybersecurity software, 
and 
• the 2024 Salt Typhoon attack , in which PRC attackers compromised 
telecommunications companies in order to spy on Americans.  
The U.S. government has investigated these incidents  and, i n some cases, has made public claims 
of attribution and imposed sanctio ns on malicious actors.  The compromises of IT and ICT 
products are concerning because they violate the chain of trust that users must have in order for 
these types of products to work and because a compromise of one of these technologies can 
provide an att acker with broad access to a large number of potential victims.  
The 119th Congress may choose to overs ee federal agency activities and develop legislation 
regarding cybersecurity requirements for trusted IT and ICT companies.  
For Further Information  
Chris Jaikaran, Specialist in Cybersecurity Policy  
CRS In Focus IF10559, Cybersecurity: A Primer  
CRS In Focus IF12798, Salt Typhoon Hacks of Telecommunication s Companies and Federal 
Response Implications  
CRS Insight IN12392, The July 19th Global IT Outages  
Evolving Technology and the Debate over “Lawful Access” to Data  
Technological advances present both op portunities and challenges for U.S. law enforcement. 
Some developments have increased the quantity and availability of digital content and 
information for investigators and analysts. Other advances have presented new hurdles for law 
enforcement. For exampl e, while some observers believe that law enforcement now has access to 
more information than ever before, others express concern that law enforcement’s investigative 
capabilities may be outpaced by the speed of technological change, preventing investigator s from 
accessing certain information they may otherwise be authorized to obtain. Specifically, law 
enforcement officials cite strong, end -to-end encryption, or warrant -proof  encryption , as 
preventing lawful access to certain data. Companies employing such strong encryption have 
stressed that they do not hold encryption keys. This means they may not be readily able to unlock, 
or decrypt , the devices or communications —even for law enforce ment presenting an authorized 
search warrant or wiretap order.  
The tension between law enforcement capabilities and technological change —including 
sometimes competing pressures for technology companies to provide data to law enforcement as 
well as to secur e customer privacy —has received congressional attention for several decades. For 
instance, during the 1 990s  crypto wars , proposals to build vulnerabilities, or back doors , into 
certain encrypted communications devices as well as to restrict the export of s trong encryption 
code  were introduced . In 1994, Congress passed the Communications Assistance for Law 
Enforcement Act (CALEA; P.L. 103 -414) to help law enforcement agencies  maintain their ability 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   16 to execute authorized electronic surveillance as telecommunications providers turned to digital 
and wireless technology. More recently, there have been questions about whether CALEA should 
be amended to apply to a broader range of e ntities that provide communications services.  
The debate over lawful access to information originally focused on data in motion , or law 
enforcement’s ability to intercept real -time communications. More recent technology advances 
have affected law enforceme nt’s capacity to access not only real -time communications but also 
stored content, or data at rest . Some officials have urged the technology community to develop a 
means to assist law enforcement in lawfully accessing certain data. At the same time, law 
enforcement entities have taken their own steps to bolster their technological capabilities. Other 
stakeholders have urged technology companies to maintain strong encryption to protect privacy. 
The 119th Congress may consider legislation to address law enfor cement’s concerns and customer 
privacy issues involving access to communications and data.  
For Further Information  
Kristin Finklea, Specialist in Domestic Security  
CRS In Focus IF11769, Law Enforcement and  Technology: The “Lawful Access” Debate   
Issues Related to Social Media Platforms  
Some Members of Congress have expressed interest in various aspects of social media platforms, 
such as Facebook, Instagram, TikTok, and YouTube. These interests include the  spread of 
misinformation and content that may be harmful, particularly for minors; censorship of lawful 
content; use of algorithms to amplify or restrict content; and national security, data privacy, and 
foreign influence risks posed by TikTok, a social m edia platform owned by the Chinese company 
ByteDance.  
Congress has enacted legislation related to social media platforms. For example, in the 117th 
Congress, a law was enacted banning TikTok from certain government devices ( P.L. 117 -328) and 
directing NSF to support research on the impact of social media platforms on human trafficking 
(P.L. 117 -348). In the 118th Congress, legislation was enacted to prohibit app stores and internet 
hosting services from distributing, maintaining, or upd ating TikTok and other “foreign adversary 
controlled applications” ( P.L. 118 -50). Some states have also enacted legislation related to social 
media. Challenges to the validity of some of these laws are being litigated in federal courts.  
Members of the 118th Congress held hearings and introduced multiple bills on social media 
platforms (e.g., H.R. 57 3, H.R. 7891 , S. 147 , S. 483 ). Some  of these bills would have amended 
Section 230 of the Communications Act of 1934, enacted as part of the Telecommunications Act 
of 1996. Section 230 protects interactive computer service providers and their users from liability 
for publishing —and, in some instances, restricting access to or availability of —another user’s 
content. Other bills would have implemented various requirements for social media platforms, 
such as providing information about their content moderation practices and implementing 
requirem ents related to their use of algorithms. Members of the 119th Congress might consider 
whether to introduce or enact similar bills related to social media platforms.  
For Further Information  
Clare Y . Cho, Specialist in Industrial Organization and Business Po licy 
Ling Zhu, Analyst in Telecommunications Policy  
Peter J. Benson, Legislative Attorney  
Valerie C. Brannon, Legislative Attorney  
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   17 Michael D. Sutherland, Analyst in International Trade and Finance  
Karen M. Sutter, Specialist in Asian Trade and Finance  
CRS Report R46662, Social Media: Content Dissemination and Moderation Practices   
CRS Legal Sidebar LSB11224, Moody v. NetChoice, LLC: The Supreme Court Addr esses Facial 
Challenges to State Social Media Laws   
CRS Report R48023, TikTok: Frequently Asked Questions and Issues for Congress   
CRS In Focus IF12640, TikTok and China’ s Digital Platforms: Issues for Congress   
CRS Legal Sidebar LSB11261, TikTok Inc. v. Garland: Supreme Court Rejects Challenge to 
TikTok Divestiture Law   
CRS Legal Sidebar LSB11166, Montana’ s TikTok Ban Goes Before the Ninth Circuit   
CRS Legal Sidebar LSB11266, Technology Regulation: CRS Legal Products for the 119th 
Congress , coordinated by Valerie C. Brannon   
Innovation and Competition  
The state of America’s innovation ecosystem —the constellation of people, institutions, and 
enterprises engaged in R&D of new products and services —affects the long -term economic and  
national security of the United States. This section discusses issues that may impact the overall 
capacity of the United States to innovate and compete globally.  
Artificial Intelligence (AI)  
The ability for U.S. firms and institutions to outpace competit or nations in advancing the 
capabilities and deployment of AI technologies —including machine learning, generative AI, and 
facial recognition technologies —is widely recognized as a key component of U.S. economic and 
national security. Selected innovation an d competition issues specific to AI are discussed below.  
Oversight of Advances in AI  
Interest in AI —including from the public, industry, the executive branch, and Congress —has 
grown alongside recent advances and widespread use of applications such as facia l recognition 
technologies and generative AI models. As the beneficial uses of these and other AI technologies 
expand, so too do recognition of potential harms and calls for congressional action. Congressional 
activities focused on AI increased substantial ly in the 117th and 118th Congresses in both the 
House and Senate, including committee hearings, working groups creating AI policy road maps, 
the introduction of numerous AI -focused bills, and the passage of AI provisions in legislation. 
Enacted legislatio n includes the National Artificial Intelligence Initiative Act of 2020 ( P.L. 116 -
283, Division E); the AI in Government Act of 2020 ( P.L. 116 -260, Division U, Title I); 
provisions focused on AI activities at NSF, the Department of Energy, and NIST within the 
CHIPS and Science Act ( P.L. 117 -167); the AI Training Act ( P.L. 117 -207); and the Advancing 
American AI Act ( P.L. 117 -263, §§7221 -7228).  
AI holds potential benefits and opportunities, such as through augmenting human decisionmaking 
and optimizing performance for complex tasks. It also presents challenges and pitfalls, such as 
perpetuating or a mplifying bias and failing in unexpected ways. The complexity of AI systems, 
the pace of advancement in AI technologies, and the wide range of applications across sectors 
create policy issues of potential interest to the 119th Congress. These include quest ions regarding  
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   18 • the balance of federal and private sector funding for AI;  
• whether and, if so, how to increase access to federal resources (e.g., training 
datasets, computing power, and educational materials) for use in the public and 
private sectors, includ ing academic research and start -up businesses;  
• the impact of AI and AI -driven automation on the workforce, including potential 
job losses and the need for worker retraining;  
• the challenges of educating students in AI, from teaching foundational concepts 
at the K -12 level to supporting doctoral -level training to meet increasing demand 
for AI expertise;  
• the need for and effectiveness of federal and international coordination efforts in 
AI, as well as concerns over international competition in AI R& D and 
deployment;  
• the incorporation of ethics, privacy, security, transparency, and accountability 
considerations in AI systems; and  
• whether and, if so, how Congress might approach regulation of AI technologies.  
For Further Information  
Laurie Harris, Anal yst in Science and Technology Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12426, Generative Artificial Intelligence: Overview, Issues, and Considerations 
for Congress   
CRS Report R48262, Artificial Intelligence: CRS Experts and Points of Contact  
CRS Insight IN12458, Artificial Intelligence: CRS Products  
The Regulation of AI in Health Care  
The use of AI in health care broadly falls within three categories: diagnosis and treatment ; patient 
engagement and adherence with treatment plans ; and administrative applications. Many of these 
applications have been well received by stakeholders. Nevert heless, the use of AI in health care 
may introduce challenges in areas such as (1) data access, (2) bias, (3) lack of transparency, (4) 
privacy, (5) scaling and integration, and (6) uncertainty over liability.  
Though the quantity  of available health data has recently proliferated, it may be difficult for 
developers to access the large volumes of high -quality data needed to create effective AI tools. 
Such data may be limited or biased, reducing the safety of such AI tools and their efficacy for 
different pa tient populations. AI tools may lack transparency, making it difficult for health care 
providers to evaluate whether an AI tool is appropriate for a specific application. As AI tools are 
developed and used, increasingly large quantities of data will likely  be accessible to more parties, 
adding to privacy risks. AI tools can be challenging to scale up and integrate into new settings 
because of differences among institutions and patient populations. The number of parties involved 
in developing and deploying A I tools has made it difficult to determine legal liability associated 
with these technologies. Multiple Department of Health and Human Services entities have 
pursued regulatory actions regarding AI. These agency efforts are nascent and somewhat 
fragmented,  though there is a focus on unifying regulatory approaches.  
The 119th Congress may consider measures that increase health data access among appropriate 
parties and strengthen the quality of health research initiatives, among other things. Congress may 
build on existing initiatives or support agencies and industry stakeholders in continuing to 
develop others, such as guardrails to protect access to health data.  
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   19 For Further Information  
Nora Wells, Analyst in Health Policy  
CRS Report R48319, Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Health Care  
Intellectual Property Issues Regarding AI  
The 119th Congress, along with the executive branch and courts, may continue to confront novel 
policy and legal questions regarding how intellectual property law should apply to AI.  
In the field of copyright law, courts to date have held that only works of human authorship are 
protected by copyright, precluding copyright for works created solely by AI. The U.S. Copyright 
Office has denied copyright registrations for artworks created by inputting text prompts into 
generative AI programs, and it has issued guidance stating that human authors must exercise 
“creative control” for their work to be copyrighted. Besides authorship issues, AI raise s the 
possibility of copyright infringement, both when existing works are used to train AI systems and 
when those systems generate outputs that are similar to existing works. Dozens of pending 
lawsuits challenge AI companies’ unauthorized use of existing w orks to train AI systems, while 
AI companies largely contend that this is a fair -use practice for which they are not legally 
required to obtain permission from the copyright owners. Various bills were introduced in the 
118th Congress concerning copyright a nd AI (e.g., H.R. 6881 , H.R. 7913 ). 
Regarding patent law, federal courts have held that inventions must ha ve a human inventor to be 
patented, so inventions made autonomously by AI are not patentable. The U.S. Patent and 
Trademark Office (USPTO) issued guidance in 2024 addressing when inventions made by 
humans using AI assistance may be patentable. USPTO also r eleased separate guidance in 2024 
on when inventions involving AI technologies themselves may be patented, in light of U.S. 
Supreme Court decisions that narrowed the scope of patentable subject matter (see “ The Role of 
Patents in Promoting Innovation ”). Stakeholders have debated how USPTO’s guidance on AI and 
patent law will affect technological innovation and economic competition.  
The potential for AI to replicate real people’s voices and likenesses (including “deepfakes”) also 
raises policy questions regarding the right of publicity  (ROP), or the legal right to prevent certain 
unauthorized uses of one’s name, image, li keness, and/or voice. ROP is mainly protected by state 
laws, although federal trademark law provides some overlapping protection. Some stakeholders 
have called for Congress to supplement or replace state ROP laws with federal legislation in light 
of concer ns raised by AI. Some bills introduced in the 118th Congress, for example , would have 
created a federal cause of action for victims of deepfakes or other digital depictions created by AI 
(e.g., H.R. 3106 , H.R. 5586 , H.R. 6943 , H.R. 7569 , H.R. 9551 , S. 3696 , S. 4875 ). 
For Further Information  
Kevin J. Hickey, Legislative Attorney  
Christopher T. Zirpoli, Legislative Attorney  
Emily G. Blevins, Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
CRS Legal Sidebar LSB11251, Artificial Intelligence and Patent Law  
Advancing Innovation at DOD  
A wide range of authorities, programs, and organizations across the U.S. government support and 
manage technological aspects of national defense. In particular, such efforts seek to preserve or 
expand the defense innovation ecosystem —the set of organizations, activities, functions, and 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   20 processes that develop, produce, and field new or improved technologies and capabilities for 
military use.  
As the U.S. federal governme nt’s share of global R&D support fell from 45% in 1960 to about 
6% in 2020, some stakeholders have become concerned about the ability of the federal 
government and DOD, in particular, to direct the development of leading technologies. Today, 
commercial com panies in the United States and elsewhere in the world are leading development 
of groundbreaking , dual -use technologies in AI, autonomous vehicles and systems, and advanced 
robotics. DOD’s ability to maintain a technology edge for U.S. forces may increasin gly depend 
on these external sources of innovation.  
Congress and DOD have taken a number of actions to improve the defense innovation ecosystem, 
including providing policy direction and establishing new innovation -related positions, 
organizations, and prog rams within DOD (e.g., the Defense Innovation Unit and the Office of 
Strategic Capital). Despite such efforts, many defense experts and other stakeholders remain 
concerned that DOD is not adopting and transitioning innovative technologies to warfighters at  
the speed and scale necessary to deter strategic competition from the PRC and to address other 
threats.  
Challenges remain in building the institutional mechanisms and culture within DOD that are 
needed to effectively access dual -use technologies from priv ate sector companies that have not 
traditionally served as defense contractors. The 119th Congress may consider several issues, 
including improved planning, coordination, and execution across DOD components, especially 
innovation -related organizations; add itional reforms to DOD processes (e.g., modifications to 
DOD’s planning, programming, budgeting, and execution process); and efforts to incentivize 
innovation.  
For Further Information  
Marcy E. Gallo, Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
CRS In Focus IF 12869, The Defense Innovation Ecosystem  
CRS In Focus IF10834, Defense Primer: Under Secretary of Defense for Research and 
Engineering  
CRS In Focus IF1 0553, Defense Primer: Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation  
Issues for the Implementation of Regional Innovation 
Strategies  (RISs)  
Federal assistance for RISs is generally intended to help state an d local stakeholders develop links 
between organizations so they may expand innovation, increase jobs, attract investment, and 
otherwise support regional economic development goals. As place -based initiatives, RIS 
programs, such as the Small Business Admin istration’s Regional Innovation Clusters program, 
generally focus on addressing conditions in a specific location. Some RIS programs also seek to 
improve the development and commercialization of key technology focus areas and support U.S. 
innovation capaci ty broadly. In recent years, Congress authorized new programs and provided 
initial funding for certain RIS programs, including the Economic Development Administration’s 
Regional Technology and Innovation Hubs (Tech Hubs) and NSF’s Regional Innovation Engin es 
programs.  
The 119th Congress may consider appropriations for both new and existing RIS programs. 
Funding for the Tech Hubs program in FY2023 and FY2024, for instance, totaled $541 million —
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   21 an amount that is approximately 5% of the funding authorized to b e appropriated for the FY2023 -
FY2027 period. If additional funding is provided, Congress may opt to provide instructions for 
how individual agencies allocate it (e.g., expanding the geographic diversity of awards, funding 
new and/or existing awardees) and whether or how various agencies coordinate awards and select 
the technology focus areas.  
Congress may also seek to evaluate initial outcomes and review implementation milestones. 
Implementation issues that may impact RIS programs in the 119th Congress cent er on aspects of 
sustainability, including the availability of federal and nonfederal funding and the availability of 
training resources for workers as regional innovation systems develop. Outside groups suggest 
that while federal funding may serve as an i nitial catalyst, additional contributions from state and 
private sector partners may be important for sustaining the growth of regional ecosystems.  
For Further Information  
Julie M. Lawhorn, Analyst in Economic Development Policy  
Adam G. Levin, Analyst in E conomic Development Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12712, Place -Based Visas: Overview and Issues for Congress  
CRS In Focus IF12793, Federal Assistance for State and Local Entrepreneurship Development 
Policies and Recent Legislation  
CRS In Focus IF12794, The Role of Business Incubators and Accelerators in Entrepreneurship 
Support  
The Role of Immigration in the U.S. S&T Workforce  
Congress has a long -standing interest in how immigration contributes to U.S. economic growth 
and technological innovation through the employment of foreign workers in S&T occupations. 
The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA; part of Tit le 8 of the U.S. Code ) contains provisions 
permitting skilled foreign workers (i.e., having at least a four -year bachelor’s degree) to 
immigrate temporarily or permanently to the United States.  
The employment -based provisions of the INA were most recently amended in 1990. The INA 
limits the number of immigrants who receive lawful permanent resident status (i.e., green cards) 
for skilled and other types of employment to 140,000 annually. The INA also allows for several 
categories of skilled temporary nonimmigrants to be admitted to the United States for a specific 
purpose and a limited period. These include the H -1B visa for specialty occupation workers and 
the L -1 visa for intracompany transferees. Many of these workers are employed in S&T 
occupations. In addition, foreign students on F -1 visas may obtain authorization to work for one 
year (or up to three years for STEM majors) in fields related to their degree through optional 
practical training (OPT), which is not numerically limited. Nonim migrant workers are often 
sponsored by their U.S. employers for employment -based green cards.  
The annual statutory numerical limits for permanent, employment -based immigrants have not 
changed since 1990. In contrast, the annual number of foreign workers re ceiving H -1B visas, L -1 
visas, and OPT —the latter two of which are not subject to statutory caps —has increased 
substantially. Observers favoring increased permanent, employment -based immigration contend 
that current limits are outdated. They note that U.S.  gross domestic product has doubled since the 
INA was last amended in 1990, technological innovation has expanded enormously, and labor 
market expansion in recent decades has relied primarily on immigration. Other observers favoring 
stable or lower immigra tion levels contend that the increasing use of nonimmigrant temporary 
worker categories by U.S. employers subverts the permanent, employment -based immigration 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   22 limits established by Congress and harms the wages, working conditions, and opportunities of 
U.S. workers and students.  
For Further Information  
William A. Kandel, Specialist in Immigration Policy  
Jill H. Wilson, Analyst in Immigration Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12912, The H -1B Visa for Specialty Occupation Workers   
CRS Report R47164, U.S. Employment -Based Immigration Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12712, Place -Based Visas: Overview and Issues for Congress  
The Role of Patents in Promoting Innovation  
The U.S. patent system is designed to encourage innovation and economic growth by offering a 
limited -time monopoly on an invention  in exchange for its public disclosure. Areas of patent 
policy that the 119th Congress may choose to address include patent -eligible subject matter and 
the Patent Trial and Appeal Board (PTAB).  
Patent -eligible subject matter  refers to the types of inventio ns that may be patented. After a series 
of U.S. Supreme Court decisions in the 2010s restricted patent eligibility, stakeholders have 
debated the effects of these decisions and possible uncertainty in patent eligibility on incentives 
for innovation, especi ally in industries such as biotechnology, AI, and computer software. USPTO 
issued guidance in 2019 and 2024 to clarify how its patent examiners should apply subject matter 
eligibility standards. Bills introduced in the 118th Congress ( H.R. 8134 , H.R. 9474 , S. 2140 ) 
would have abrogated th e Supreme Court’s patent eligibility decisions and broadened the scope 
of patent -eligible inventions.  
In 2011, Congress created PTAB, an administrative body within USPTO, to adjudicate challenges 
to the validity of granted patents. PTAB proceedings, such a s inter partes review generally 
provide a faster and less expensive forum to challenge the validity of issued patents as compared 
to litigation in federal court. While some stakeholders argue that PTAB offers an efficient means 
to invalidate low -quality pa tents, others contend that its proceedings are unfair to patent holders 
and unduly undermine patent rights. Bills introduced in the 118th Congress would have reformed 
PTAB proceedings in various ways (e.g., H.R. 4370 , S. 2220 ) or abolished PTAB ( H.R. 8134 ). 
Patent policy issues relating to AI are discussed separately in “ Intellectual Property Issues 
Regarding AI .” 
For Further Information  
Kevin J. Hickey, Legislative Attorney  
Christopher T. Zirpoli, Legislative Attorney  
Emily G. Blevins, Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12744, Patent Law: An Introduction and Issues for Congress  
CRS In Focus IF12563, Patent -Eligible Subject Matter Reform: An Overview  
The Role of Patents in Pharmaceuti cal Innovation and Competition  
Patents play a particularly important role in the pharmaceutical industry. A number of patent -
related issues may come before the 119th Congress given ongoing policy debates over how to 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   23 balance promoting the development of new  pharmaceuticals with ensuring patient access to 
affordable drug treatments. While some stakeholders argue that robust patent rights are necessary 
to support R&D for new drugs, others argue that strategic uses of patents can unduly delay or 
deter generic c ompetition and contribute to high drug prices. Should the 119th Congress seek to 
promote generic competition, legislative options might include limiting alleged pharmaceutical 
patenting practices known as “evergreening,” “product hopping,” “patent thickets ,” or “pay -for-
delay settlements.”  
Administrative actions during the Biden Administration focused attention on several specialized 
policy issues concerning pharmaceutical patents and drug pricing. In September 2023, the FTC 
issued a policy statement warni ng drug manufacturers that it intended to scrutinize patents listed 
in the FDA publication Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations , 
known as the “Orange Book.” Because inclusion of a patent in the Orange Book may affect when 
the FDA  may approve a generic version of a drug, FTC argued that improper patent listing could 
be a violation of competition and antitrust laws. FTC has subsequently challenged hundreds of 
patents as improperly listed by drug manufacturers in the Orange Book.  
In December 2023, NIST released draft guidance for federal agencies on “march -in rights” under 
P.L. 96 -517, commonly referred to as the Bayh -Dole Act, which allow the federal government to 
issue compulsory licenses to patents on inventions made with federal funding. NIST’s proposed 
guidance, which has not been finalized, would permit agencies to consider price  as one factor in 
determining whether to exercise march -in rights. Much of the debate about whether product 
pricing should factor into an agency’s march -in decision has centered on the affordability of 
pharmaceuticals. Some stakeholders advocate for marchi ng in on drug patents as a means of 
lowering prices on drugs developed with federal funding, while others argue that doing so could 
discourage public -private partnerships and investments required to make nascent technologies 
commercially viable.  
In Decembe r 2024, following objections from some stakeholders, USPTO withdrew a notice of 
proposed rulemaking that would have amended terminal disclaimer practice during the patent 
application process. Terminal disclaimers allow patent applicants to overcome certain  double -
patenting rejections of their applications by USPTO if they agree to shorten the term of any 
resulting patents. Critics of terminal disclaimers argue that this practice allows drug companies to 
amass a thicket of overlapping and duplicative patents  to protect their products from competition, 
while other stakeholders argue that terminal disclaimers make patent prosecution more efficient 
and do not harm innovation or economic competition.  
For Further Information  
Kevin J. Hickey, Legislative Attorney  
Christopher T. Zirpoli, Legislative Attorney  
Emily G. Blevins, Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12644, Patent Listing in FDA’ s Orange Book   
CRS In Focus IF12582, Pricing and March -In Rights Under the Bayh -Dole Act  
CRS In Focus IF12700, “Skinny Labels” for Generic Drugs Under Hatch -Waxman  
CRS Legal Sidebar LSB11209, Terminal Disclaimers of Patent Rights: Background and Issues 
for Congress   
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   24 Telecommunications  
Telecommunications technologies present several issues for policymakers. This section discusses 
selected telecommunications policy issues for the 119th Congress, including those related to over -
the-air radio broadcast transmissions (such as access to transmissions and the impact of 
broadcasting technologies on copyright), policies governing federal and nonfed eral radio 
spectrum management and use, and the security and resiliency of telecommunication networks.  
AM Broadcast Radio in Motor Vehicles  
More than 4,000 U.S. broadcast radio stations use amplitude modulation (AM) frequencies to 
transmit audio programs t o listeners. AM radio also supports national and local emergency 
alerting systems. Since 2014, several motor vehicle manufacturers have opted not to include 
broadcast AM radio in electric vehicles (EVs).  
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has stat utory jurisdiction over electronic 
equipment that can interfere with broadcast reception. In 1980, the agency chose to exempt motor 
vehicle equipment from its licensing requirements, stating that including it would require further 
study. The exemption rema ins in place. The U.S. Department of Transportation’s NHTSA 
establishes safety standards for, but does not preapprove, electronic equipment in vehicles.  
Several EV manufacturers assert that their vehicle models’ electronic equipment interferes with 
the rec eption of AM broadcast signals, thereby obstructing the consumer benefits of AM 
broadcast receivers. Broadcasters and seven former administrators of the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency  state that the lack of access to AM radio could impede the ability of drivers 
and passengers to receive national and local emergency alerts. AM radio stations serve two roles 
during emergency alerts: (1) they are initial points of contact for presidential and nonpresidential 
emergency alerts in the broadcast -based transmi ssion system regulated by the FCC, and (2) they 
provide one of several technology -based communications pathways for nonpresidential 
emergency alerts. Other pathways include communication by satellite transmissions and wireless 
transmission using cellular t echnology.  
If the 119th Congress chooses to address the issue of the availability of AM radio in motor 
vehicles, it may consider one or more options, some of which are included in S. 315 , the AM 
Radio for Every Vehicle Act of 2025, as introduced, and H.R. 979 , a bill “to require the Secretary 
of Transportation to issue a rule requiring access to AM broadcast stati ons in motor vehicles, and 
for other purposes.” Among other provisions, S. 315  would (1) increase the Department of 
Transportation ’s jurisdiction over motor vehicle equipment for a 10 -year period and (2) direct a 
study examining  the role of and alternatives to AM radio in the transmission of national and 
emergency alerts. Additional options include (1) increasing the FCC’s jurisdiction over motor 
vehicle equipment to reduce the risk of interference with broadcast radio stations and (2) 
monitoring industry developments while conducting oversight.  
For Further Information  
Dana A. Scherer, Specialist in Telecommunications Policy  
CRS Report R48315, AM Broadcast Radio in Motor Vehicles   
Copyright Laws and Broadcasting Policies  
A copyright grants the authors of a creative work certain exclusive rights in their creation. The 
scope of copyright in music depends on the type of work at issue and th e particular use that is 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   25 made of the work, including the type of technology that is used to disseminate a work. U.S. law 
has explicitly recognized copyright in musical works  (i.e., the compositions) and the public 
performance of those works, but current co pyright protections for sound recordings  (i.e., the 
recorded performances of a piece of music by musicians and singers) are more limited.  
Sound recordings have a limited exclusive right of public performance that applies only to digital 
audio transmissions . Because over -the-air transmission by broadcast radio stations falls outside 
the definition of “digital audio transmission,” radio stations do not need to pay royalties to the 
performers, record labels, or other owners of the sound -recording copyright. Th ough radio 
stations are not required to pay public performance royalties for over -the-air transmissions of a 
sound recording, they are required to pay for the right to transmit sound recordings via digital 
streaming platforms.  
Those who support extending p ublic performance rights to over -the-air broadcasts contend that 
doing so would create legal parity with streaming and other digital services, such as SiriusXM. 
Two pieces of legislation introduced in the 119th Congress focus on public performance rights f or 
sound recordings transmitted by broadcast radio. The first, a nonbinding resolution known as the 
Supporting the Local Radio Freedom Act ( H.Con.Res. 12  and S.Con.Res. 8 ), would effectively 
declare support for maintaining the status quo. The second, the American Music Fairness Act of 
2025 ( H.R. 861 ) and the American Music Fairness Act ( S. 326 ), would subject performances by 
radio stations to the stat utory license applicable to noninteractive digital services and place caps 
on royalties for broadcast stations with annual revenue under $1.5 million in the preceding year 
(unless owned by an entity with annual revenue over $10 million).  
For Further Inform ation  
Dana A. Scherer, Specialist in Telecommunications Policy  
Kevin J. Hickey, Legislative Attorney  
CRS Report R47642, On the Radio: Public Performance Rights in Sound Recordings  
Radio Spectrum Policy  
Radio spectrum (“spectrum”) is the continuum of frequencies allocated for radio transmissions. 
Private entities use spectrum to provide commercial services; government agencies use spectrum 
to carry out their missions. Access to spectrum is in high demand am ong companies seeking to 
provide wireless services, such as radio broadcasting, mobile communications, and satellite 
services, and is regulated by the U.S. government to enable access for all users and to avoid 
interference between users.  
Congress oversees  the activities of two entities —the FCC and the National Telecommunications 
and Information Administration (NTIA) —which work together to manage federal and nonfederal 
spectrum use. The FCC manages nonfederal use of radio frequencies in the United States, 
granting licenses to use specific radio frequencies for certain purposes and setting the terms and 
conditions of that use. NTIA manages federal spectrum use, assigns frequencies to federal 
agencies, presents the executive branch’s views on spectrum policy t o the FCC and Congress, and 
coordinates with the FCC to manage the nation’s spectrum (i.e., the range of radio frequencies 
used to facilitate wireless communications).  
Since much of the spectrum is already allocated for specific uses, finding spectrum for new 
technologies (e.g., 6G technologies) is challenging. The 119th Congress may continue to weigh 
policy approaches that make spectrum available for new technologies that could lead to economic 
growth, while also ensuring that agencies, including military and public safety agencies, have the 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   26 spectrum they need to carry out their missions. Potential options for the 119th Congress may 
include identifying spectrum for new uses, formalizing interagency coordination processes, 
facilitating the implementation of the National Spectrum Strategy, and investing in spectrum 
sharing R&D to increase spectrum availability.  
The 119th Congress may also focus on reinstating the FCC’s auction authority, which expired on 
March 9, 2023. When more than one nonfederal user is int erested in a spectrum band, the FCC 
may auction spectrum licenses, awarding them to the highest bidders. Since 1993, auctions have 
made spectrum available for a variety of uses (e.g., 5G services, satellite -based internet), and 
generated over $230 billion for the U.S. government. Though legislation to restore that authority 
was introduced during the 118th Congress, none was enacted.  
For Further Information  
Patricia Moloney Figliola, Specialist in Internet and Telecommunications Policy  
Jill C. Gallagher, Specialist in Telecommunications Policy  
Ling Zhu, Analyst in Telecommunications Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12766, 4.9 GHz Public Safety Band: Competing Views on Use  
Security and Resiliency of Telec ommunications Networks  
Congress has a long -standing interest in ensuring U.S. telecommunications networks are both 
secure and resilient in the face of natural disasters, cyberattacks, and other events. Disruptions in 
communications can affect national secu rity, public safety, and economic activity.  
Telecommunications networks are considered critical infrastructure and are typically privately 
owned, operated, and secured by the owner. Congress oversees the FCC, which regulates 
commercial communication servic es and providers, monitors commercial networks, and provides 
government officials and the public with information during and after natural disasters. For 
example, in September 2024, Hurricane Helene made landfall near Perry, Florida, disrupting 
cellular co mmunications across parts of the southeastern U.S. and impacting public safety. In 
response, the FCC monitored and provided status updates on outages and restoration efforts. 
Congress has taken steps to help ensure the security and resiliency of communicat ion networks. 
For example, Congress has restricted the use of untrusted equipment in U.S. networks and 
provided funding for the Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Reimbursement 
Program, which reimburses small telecommunication providers for costs t o rip and replace 
untrusted equipment from their networks, to reduce risks to national security. Congress has also 
convened briefings and oversight hearings to understand the cause, impact, and future mitigation 
approaches to incidents and outages, such as  when U.S. cybersecurity firm CrowdStrike released 
a faulty software update to their customers causing certain computer systems to crash and 
disrupting services across several industries, some government agencies (e.g., Department of 
Homeland Security), an d public safety systems (e.g., some 911 systems).  
The 119th Congress may continue to examine faults and vulnerabilities in communication 
networks, the effectiveness of federal government and commercial efforts to ensure continuity of 
service, and the feder al roles for improving communication security and resiliency. In addition to 
technical issues, Congress may also be interested in examining nontechnical issues affecting 
communications and response during disasters. For example, in January 2025, an erroneo us 
emergency alert issued during the wildfires in Los Angeles spurred questions related to alerting 
technologies and nontechnical issues, such as human errors in issuing alerts and the public’s 
response to alerts . 
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   27 For Further Information  
Jill C. Gallagher,  Specialist in Telecommunications Policy  
Colby Leigh Pechtol, Specialist in Telecommunications Policy  
Amanda H. Peskin, Analyst in Telecommunications Policy  
CRS In Focus IF12717, CrowdStrike IT Outage: Impacts to Public Safety Systems and 
Considerations for Congress  
CRS In Focus IF12779, Restoration of Cell Phone Services: Hurricane Helene  
CRS Insight IN11663, Secure and Trusted Communications Networks Reimbursement Program: 
Frequently Asked Questions  
CRS Report R48363, The Integrated Public Alert and Warning System (IP AWS): Primer and 
Issues  for Congress  
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service   28 Author Information  
 
Emily G. Blevins, Coordinator  
Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
     Laura B. Comay  
Specialist in Natural Resources Policy  
    
Marcy E. Gallo, Coordinator  
Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
     Karen M. Sutter  
Specialist in Asian Trade and Finance  
    
Todd Kuiken  
Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
     Dana A. Scherer  
Specialist in Telecommunications Policy  
    
Amanda K. Sarata  
Specialist in Health Policy  
     Chris Jaikaran  
Specialist in Cybersecurity Policy  
    
Lia Biondo  
Analyst in Agricultural Policy  
     Kristin Finklea  
Specialist in Domestic Security  
    
Kavya Sekar  
Analyst in Health Policy  
     Ling Zhu  
Analyst in Telecommunications Policy  
    
Hassan Z. Sheikh  
Analyst in Health Policy  
     Peter J. Benson  
Legislative Attorney  
    
Pervaze A. Sheikh  
Specialist in Natural Resources Policy  
     Valerie C. Brannon  
Legislative Attorney  
    
Eleni G. Bickell  
Analyst in Agricultural Policy  
     Michael D. Sutherland  
Analyst in International Trade and Finance  
    
Jonathan D. Haskett  
Analyst in Environmental Policy  
     Laurie Harris  
Analyst in Science and Technology Policy  
    
Caitlin Keating -Bitonti  
Specialist in Natural Resources Policy  
     Nora Wells  
Analyst in Health Policy  
    
Eva Lipiec  
Specialist in Natural Resource Policy  
     Kevin J. Hickey  
Legislative Attorney  
    
Laura Gatz  
Specialist in Environmental Policy  
     Christopher T. Zirpoli  
Legislative Attorney  
    
Claire M. Jordan  
Senior Research Librarian  
     Julie M. Lawhorn  
Analyst in Economic Development Policy  
    
Science and Technology Issues for the 119th Congress  
 
Congressional Research Service  R48482  · VERSION 2 · NEW  29 Anthony R. Marshak  
Analyst in Natural Resources Policy  
     Adam G. Levin  
Analyst in Economic Development Policy  
    
Nicole T. Carter  
Deputy Assistant Director and Specialist/RSI  
     William A. Kandel  
Specialist in Immigration Policy  
    
Clare Y. Cho  
Specialist in Industrial Organiz ation and Business 
Policy  
     Jill H. Wilson  
Analyst in Immigration Policy  
    
Omar M. Hammad  
Analyst in Environmental Policy  
     Patricia Moloney Figliola  
Specialist in Internet and Telecommunications 
Policy  
    
Kristen Hite  
Legislative Attorney  
     Jill C. Gallagher  
Specialist in Telecommunications Policy  
    
Angela C. Jones  
Analyst in Environmental Policy  
     Colby Leigh Pechtol  
Specialist in Telecommunications Policy  
    
Jerry H. Yen  
Analyst in Environmental Policy  
     Amanda H. Peskin  
Analyst in Telecommunications Policy  
    
 
 
Disclaimer  
This document was  prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan 
shared staff to congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and 
under the direction of Congress. Information in a CRS Report should n ot be relied upon for purposes other 
than public understanding of information that has been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in 
connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the United States Government, are not 
subject to copyr ight protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be reproduced and distributed in 
its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include copyrighted images or 
material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if you wish to 
copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.  
 
