 
https://crsreports.congress.gov  
 
Updated April 3, 2025
The Fed’s Balance Sheet and Quantitative Tighten ing
The size and composition of the Federal Reserve ’s (Fed’s) 
balance sheet  is a product of its monetary policy  and lender -
of-last-resort actions. The Fed has responded to  past crises 
by increasing its balance sheet , which peaked at 10 times its 
size before the 2008 financial crisis. As part of the post -
pandemic  normalization of monetary policy, the Fed began 
to reduce the size of its balance sheet in June 2022 —to 
date, by more than $ 2 trillion  from its peak size .  
Balance Sheet Primer  
The Fed’s balance sheet can be described in standard 
accounting terms. It earns income on its assets and pays 
interest and dividends on its liabilities and capital. Its assets 
are equal in val ue to its liabilities and capital  (see Table 1). 
Its net income (i.e., the difference between income and 
expenses) is comparable to a company’s profits  or losses . 
Table 1. Simplified Federal Reserve Balance Sheet  
March 26 , 2025, Trillions of $  
Assets   Liabilities and 
Capital   
Treasury Securities  $4.2 Currency  $2.3 
MBS $2.2 Bank Reserves  $3.5 
Loans/Emergency 
Facilities  <$0.1 TGA $0.3 
Repos  $0 Reverse Repos  $0.6 
Liquidity Swaps  <$0.1  Remittances Due to 
Treasury  -$0.2 
Other  $0.3 Other  $0.2 
  Total Liabilities  $6.7 
  Paid-In Capital  <$0.1  
  Surplus  <$0.1  
Total  $6.7 Total  $6.7 
Source: CRS calculations based on Federal Reserve data. 
Note:  Total for emergency facilities include Treasury capital 
investments.  Totals may not sum due to rounding.  
Assets  
Most assets on the Fed’s balance sheet are financial 
securities.  The Fed is permitted by law to buy or sell a 
narrow range of securities and must do so on the open 
market (referred to as open market operations ). In 
practice, it purchases mainly Treasury securities  and 
mortgage -backed securities  (MBS)  that are guaranteed by 
a federal agency or a government -sponsored enterprise 
(GSE). The open market requirement means that the Fed 
cannot purchase Treasury securities directly from the U.S. 
Treasury, instead transact ing with primary dealers , a set of large broker -dealers active in Treasury markets. When the 
Fed purchases securities from primary dealers, it increases 
bank reserves (discussed below), increasing the overall 
liquidity of the financial system.  
The Fed can also provide primary dealers , banks,  and 
foreign central banks with temporary liquidity through 
repurchase agreements  (repos ). In a repo, the Fed 
temporarily purchases a Treasury security or MBS with an 
agreement to reverse the sale in the near future. In 2021, the 
Fed made repo lending on demand permanently available 
by creating its Standing Repurchase Agreement Fac ility. 
In crises, the Fed lends to banks through its discount 
window  and creates emergency programs to stabilize 
financial markets. Through these programs, it makes or 
acquires loans and acquires private securities that are also 
held as assets on its balance sheet. These assets swell 
during crises and then shrink relatively quickly as financial 
conditions normalize. The Fed also lends dollars to foreign 
central banks in crises th rough foreign currency swaps . 
Liabilities  
Just as the Fed increases market liquidity through repos, it 
can reduce liquidity through reverse repos , in which the 
Fed temporarily sells securities to market participants and 
foreign central banks in exchange for cash. In 2014, the Fed 
institutionalized reverse repos by creating the Overnight 
Reverse Repurchase Agreement Facility . The Fed pays 
market participants an interest rate on reverse repos, which 
helps the Fed maintain its monetary policy rate targets.  
Banks hold reserves in accounts at the Fed to make and 
receive payments from other banks. These bank reserves  
are liabilities to the Fed. Similar to reverse repos, the Fed 
pays banks interest on reserves  that helps the Fed maintain 
its interest rate targets. Mechanically, when the Fed 
purchases a security or make s a loan, it finances it by 
creating new bank reserves. As a result, the asset and 
liability sides of the balance sheet increase by an identical 
amount so that assets always equal liabilities plus capital.  
The U.S. Treasury also holds its cash balances at  the Fed in 
the Treasury General Account  (TGA) . When the 
Treasury receives revenue, its balance increases , and when 
it makes payments, its balance decreases. The Fed issues 
paper currency  (cash), officially called Federal Reserve 
notes. A Federal Reserve note is an IOU from the Fed that 
pays no interest , making  it a liability on the balance sheet.  
Capital  
The Fed’s capital is equal in value to the difference between 
its assets and liabilities. It takes two forms. First, private 
banks that are membe rs of the Fed must purchase stock in 
the Fed, called paid -in capital . Membership is required for 
The Fed’s Balance Sheet and Quantitative Tightening  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  nationally chartered banks and optional for state -chartered 
banks. Unlike common stock in a private company, this 
stock does not confer ownership control and p ays a 
dividend  set by statute. However, it does provide the banks 
with seats on the boards of the 12 Fed regional banks. The 
dividend is a fixed 6% for banks with under $10 billion in 
assets and the lesser of 6% or the prevailing 10 -year 
Treasury yield for  banks with over $10 billion.  The other 
form of capital is the Fed’s surplus . It comes from retained 
earnings and is currently capped by statute at $6.825 
billion. Through a series of recent acts, Congress first 
capped the surplus and then reduced the cap as a “pay for” 
(budgetary offset) for unrelated legislation.  
Net Income and Remittances  
The Fed earns income on its loans, repos, and securities, 
along with fees it charges . These finance its expenses , 
which include operating expenses and the interest paid  on 
bank reserves and repos. The difference between income 
and expenses is called net income. Net income is used 
exclusively to (1) pay statutorily required dividends to 
shareholders , (2) increase the surplus when it is below its 
statutory cap , and (3) pay remittances  to Treasury, which  
are added to the federal government’s general revenues.  
From 2008  to 2022 , net income and remittances increased 
significantly. Since September 2022, its net income has 
been negative , because the interest rate s it pays on bank 
reserves and reverse repos became higher than the yield on 
the securities it h olds. As a result , its remittances to the 
Treasury  have fallen close to zero  for the first time since 
1934 . But unlike a private company, under the Fed’s 
accounting conventions , negative net income does not 
reduce its capital, cause it to become insolvent, or require a 
capital infusion to maintain solvency. Instead, it register s 
the losses as a deferred asset. Remittances will not resume 
until the deferred asset is drawn down  after net income 
becomes positive again , which will occur once the yield on 
its assets exceeds the interest rate on its liabilities .  
Quantitative Easing and Tightening  
Before the 2008 financial crisis, the Fed’s balance sheet 
grew mode stly over time. During that crisis, the Fed created 
a number of emergency lending programs that caused its 
balance sheet to balloon (see Table 2). In ad dition, the Fed 
wanted to provide more monetary stimulus after reducing 
interest rates to zero. For the first time, it made monthly 
large -scale asset purchases , popularly called quantitative 
easing (QE) , at a preannounced rate that also caused the 
balance sheet to increase rapidly. Under QE, t he Fed 
purchased Treasury securities and debt and MBS issued by 
government agencies and GSEs. The increase in assets was 
matched by an increase in liabilities —mainly bank reserves, 
which were kept at a minimum before t he financial crisis 
but after wards  topped $1 trillion. Since the crisis, the Fed 
has conducted monetary policy under an ample reserves  
framework , where it creates so many reserves that banks’ 
demand for reserves do es not influence market interest 
rates. In  the long run, the Fed decides how many securities 
to hold based on the reserves needed under this framew ork. 
QE occurred in three rounds between 2009 and 2014, as the 
recovery from the financial crisis was initially weak. From 
2014 to 2018, the Fed kept t he size of its balance sheet steady by rolling over  maturing assets (i.e., reinvesting the 
principal from assets that had matured). Beginning in 2018, 
the Fed gradually reduced its balance sheet by allowing 
maturing assets instead to roll off  the balance s heet up to a 
fixed amount (i.e., no longer reinvesting principal). In 2019, 
repo market volatility convinced the Fed that more bank 
reserves were needed to operate its ample reserves 
framework, so it began making repos and purchasing assets, 
again increasi ng the balance sheet. When the COVID -19 
pandemic began, the pace of repo lending and asset 
purchases increased and emergency facilities were 
reintroduced , causing faster balance sheet growth.  
Table 2. Federal Reserve Balance Sheet Trends  
Trillions of Dollars, 2008 -2022 
Event (Dates)  End Size  Change  
Financial Crisis (9/08 -12/08)  $2.2 +$1.3  
QE1 (3/09 -5/10)  $2.3 +$0.4  
QE2 (11/10 -7/11)  $2.9 +$0.6  
QE3 (10/12 -10/14)  $4.5 +$1.7  
Roll Off (9/17 -8/19) $3.8 -$0.7 
Repo Turmoil (9/19 -2/20) $4.2 +$0.4 
COVID -19 (3/20 -5/22)  $8.9 +$4.8 
Source: CRS calculations based on  Federal Reserve data. 
In November 2021, responding to high inflation, the Fed 
announced that it would taper  off its asset purchases (i.e., 
purchase fewer assets per month). In March 2022, it ended 
asset purchases, at which point the balance sheet had more 
than doubled from its pre-pandemic size. In this episode, 
both bank reserves and reverse repos grew rapidly on the 
liability side of the balance sheet. In June 2022, the Fed 
began to shrink its balance sheet, popularly called 
quantitative tightening  (QT) . Under QT, the Fed  had been  
allowing a capped amount of maturing Treasury securities 
and MBS to roll off the balance sheet each month. To date, 
Treasury redemptions have hit the cap, but MBS 
redemptions have  typically  been lower because households 
are holding on to low-rate mort gages. Since 2024, the Fed 
has been further tapering  the roll-off pace for Treasury 
securities , most recently  to up to $5 billion per month  in 
March 2025  while keeping MBS r oll-offs at up to $35 
billion . The Fed intends  to permanently maintain a large 
balance sheet and “intends to slow and then stop the decline 
in the size of the balance sheet when reserve balances are 
somewhat above the level  … consistent with ample 
reserves.” It has not yet indicated what it expects that level 
to be  or when QT will end .  
The goals of QE were to  stimulate the economy by  reduc ing 
long-term interest rates and to provide additional liquidity 
to the financial system. QE reduced long -term interest rates 
by driving down yields on the securities the Fed was 
purchasing, which led to lower interest rates throughout the 
economy. The reduction in yields on MBS translated to 
lower mortgage rates, stimulating housing demand. QE 
increased liquidity by increasing bank reserves . 
Marc Labonte , Specialist in Macroeconomic Policy   
The Fed’s Balance Sheet and Quantitative Tightening  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  | IF12147  · VERSION 5 · UPDATED   IF12147
 
 
Disclaimer  
This document was  prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should n ot be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyr ight protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.  
 
