 
https://crsreports.congress.gov  
Updated April 4, 2025
Venezuela: Political Crisis and U.S. Policy
Over the past several Congresses, M embers have expressed 
concerns  about authoritarian governance  under Venezuelan 
President Nicolás Ma duro (2013 -present ). Maduro took 
office after garnering a narrow electoral victory following 
the death of Hugo Chávez (in office 1999 -2013), founder of 
the United Socialist Party of Venezuela. Maduro  has 
remained  in power following elections in 2018  and 2024  
that were both considered  fraudulent  by international 
observers , the Uni ted States, and most U.S. -aligned 
democracies . After  the July 28, 2024 , election , Maduro 
claimed victory even though precinct -level vote tabulations  
comprising more than 80% of votes cast indicated  that 
opposition  candidate Edmundo González Urrutia  won with 
67% of the vote.   
On January 10, 2025, Madur o began a third term . Neither 
the economic pressure of the first Trump Administration 
nor limited sanctions relief and negotiation efforts by the 
Biden Administration facilitate d a return to democracy . 
Maduro  retain ed the support of Venezuelan se curity forces , 
illicit actors , and  allies such as  China, Cuba, Iran, and 
Russia .  
The 119th Congress may assess U.S. policies , including 
support for the Venezuelan  opposition and the efficacy of 
sanctions, while considering U.S. energy and migration 
control interests. Opposition leader Mar ía Corina Machado  
(who was barred from running in 2024)  has urged  President 
Trump  to end licenses that hav e allowed companies to 
operate in Venezuela ’s energy sector. The Department of 
the Treasury revoked  U.S. oil company Chevron’s license 
in early March  2025 ; Maduro then paused flights  of 
Venezuelan s removed from the United States . It is unclear 
how the Trump Administration’s  reported termination  of 
some humanitarian and democracy  assistance programs in 
Venezuela may affect the country’s population and 
democratic opposition . 
Political Situation   
Venezuela, which  the nongovernmental organization  
Freedom House ranked as “partly free” under President 
Chávez, has deteriorated to “ not free ” under Maduro . 
Chávez, a charismatic politician, benefi ted from high oil 
prices and w on most elections  by a large majority . In 
contrast, Maduro  has experienced narrow wins  and some 
electoral defeats  (including in the 2015 legislative elections , 
in which his party lost control for the first time since  1999 ). 
The opposition, once weak and divided, has remained 
united since 2022 as the Unitary Platform (PUD) .  
Maduro has relied on  securit y forces  and corrupt influence 
over the courts to quash dissent . He has allowed s ecurity 
forces to enrich  themselves  through  illicit gold mining , drug 
trafficking , and extortion . The International Criminal Court 
is investigating  alleged crimes against humanity  committed 
by Venezuelan security forces since at least 2017 .  Security  forces have  detained and reportedly abused  
Maduro’s opponents , including dissidents in the military, 
opposition politicians, and protesters , particularly since the 
2024 elections . As of  March  10, 2025, the government  held 
1,014 political prisoners , according to Venezuelan human 
rights group Foro Pena l. After Venezuela’s attorney 
general issued  an arrest war rant for  González , he fled into 
exile  in September  2024 . González visited several countries 
in January 2025  and met with then-President Biden in 
Washington , DC, but could not  return  to Venezuela. 
Machado , who remains in Venezuela,  led protests on 
January 9 but then returned to hiding.  
Economic and Humanitarian Crisis  
By most accounts, Maduro’s government  has mismanaged 
the economy and engaged in widespread  corruption . 
Between 2014 and 2021, Venezuela’s economy contracted 
by 80 %, according to estimates by the I nternational 
Monetary Fund  (IMF) , due to low global oil prices and the 
country’s declining oil product ion. According to a 2021 
Government Accountability Office  report , sanctions 
imposed by the United States from 2017  to 2019 , 
particularly those  targeting Venezuela’s oil industry, 
contributed to the country’s economic crisis. Hyperinflation  
declined  from 337% in 202 3 to 59.6% in 2024 , according to 
the IMF , but income levels remain  insufficient for most 
households to purchase  basic n ecessities . According to one 
national survey by a Venezuelan university, roughly 82.8% 
of the population of 26.5 million lived in income poverty in 
2023, particularly outside the capital of Caracas .  
In 202 4, an estimated 7.6 million  Venezuelans (28% of the 
population) require d humanitarian assistance , according to 
the United Nations . Many households lack reliable access 
to potable water , and interruptions in electrical service  and 
gas supplies persist.  Health indicators , particularly infant 
and materna l mortality rates, remain poor.  
As of December  2024, UN agencies estimate d there were 
some  7.9 million  Venezuelan  refugees and migrants 
globally . Some  6.7 million  of these  individuals  reside in  
other  Latin America n and Caribbean  countries . Venezuelan 
refugees and m igrants  reportedly  face obstacles to keeping  
jobs and accessing health  care; they may be vulnerable to 
human trafficking and other abuses . These  factors  have 
contributed to  secondary migration to the United States.  
U.S. Policy  
The U.S. government ceased recog nizing Maduro as 
Venezuela ’s legitimate president in January 2019  and 
recognize s the democratically  elected, opposition -
controlled 2015 National A ssembly as “ the only legitimate 
branch of the Government  of Venezuela ,” even though 
most of its members are in exile.  From January 2019 
through its dissolution in December 2022, the 2015 
National Assembly backed an interim government  led by its 
Venezuela: Political Crisis and U.S. Policy  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  former speaker, Juan Guaidó.  The Guaidó  government 
received recognition  from the United States and nearly 60 
governments but never exerted power  in Venezuela.  In 
November 2024, the U.S. government  recognized  Edmundo 
González as president -elect .  
Successive U.S. Administrations have employed  various 
strategies to address hum an rights abuses and autocra cy in 
Venezuela . The first Trump Administration sought to 
promote democracy in Venezuela through assistance  to the 
interim government , diplomacy, and a “ maximum pressure ” 
sanctions strategy to try to compel Maduro to cede power . 
The Biden Administration offered limited sanctions relief to 
try to incentivize Maduro to convene fairer elections in 
2024 , as per an agreement he si gned with the PUD.  After 
Maduro officials failed t o comply with that agreement, 
Treasury ended  most sanctions relief , except for specific 
licenses  allowing  certain companies  to work wit h 
Venezuela’s state -owned oil company, Petróleos de 
Venezuela  (PdVSA) . Since  the July 2024 elections, 
Treasury  has imposed  sanctions on 45 Maduro officials for 
electoral fraud and/or postelection repression , most recently 
on January 10, 2025 . 
The Trump Administration has yet to define a consistent 
policy toward Venezuela.  Secretary of State Marco Rubio 
has spoken  with González and referred to him as “the 
rightful president” of Venezuela. Nevertheless, a  Trump 
special envoy subsequently met with Maduro in Venezuela 
to negotiate the release of six detained Americans and to 
secure Maduro’s agreement to receive Venezuelans 
removed from  the United States. Maduro paused  those 
flights  after Treasury revoked Chevron’s license.  Secretary 
Rubio has threatened  to impose sanctions if the Maduro 
government does not regularly receive such flights.  
Sanction s. Sanctions  are a key part of U.S. policy toward 
Venezuela. They are based in various legislated authorities, 
including the Venezuela Defense of Human Rights and 
Civil Society Act of 2014  (P.L. 113 -278), and include  the 
following : 
• Individual s anctions  for terrorism,  drug trafficking,  
antidemocratic actions, human rights violations, or 
corruption (see Executive Order [E.O.] 13692;  P.L. 113 -
278; P.L. 114 -194) 
• Financial s anctions  restricting access to U.S. financial 
markets by the Maduro government and  PdVSA  (E.O. 
13808) ; prohibiting transactions using Maduro -issued 
cryptocurrency ( E.O. 13827) ; and prohibiting the 
purchas e of Venezuelan debt (E.O. 13835)  
• Sectoral s anctions blocking assets and prohibiting 
unlicensed transactions with PdVSA, Venezuela’s 
central bank, and the state go ld mining company , among 
other entities  (E.O. 13850)   
• Sanctions  on the Maduro g overnment  blocking assets 
in the United States and prohibit ing transactions with 
the Maduro  government  unless authorized as part of 
efforts to aid the Venezuelan people (E.O. 13884)  
Indictments.  In Ma rch 2020 , the Department of Justice  
indicted  Maduro and 14 top officials for narco -terrorism, 
drug trafficking, and other crimes .  Migration.  Since FY2022,  Venezuela has ranked among  
the top countr ies of origin for migrant enforcement 
encounters  at the Southwes t border. On January 10, 2025, 
the Biden Administration announced  an 18 -month 
extension of temporary protected status (TPS)  for 
Venezuelans , first announced in 2021. In February 2025, 
the Trump Administration terminated  TPS for certain 
Venezuelans in the United States . It also announced 
termination of a Biden -era parole program for Venezu elans  
effective March 25, 2025 . TPS holders and parolees who 
have not  obtained another immigration status once their 
current status expires could be subject to removal.  
On February 20 , 2025, Secretary Rubio designated  the Tren 
de Aragua (TdA), a prison gang that originated in 
Venezuela, as a Foreign Terrorist Organization. On March 
15, 2025, c iting the Alien Enemies Act , President Trump 
issued a proclamation  requiring the immediate detention 
and removal  from the United States  of certain Venezuelan s 
he alleges are members of TdA. The President’s action has 
been subject to legal challenge . 
U.S. Assistance.  From FY2017  to FY202 4, U.S. 
democracy, development, and health assistance for 
Venezuela totaled around $336.2 million. Over that perio d. 
the United States  provided over $3.5 billion  in humanitarian 
aid to Venezuela and countries sheltering Venezuelans .  
Congressional Action  
Congress has supported efforts aimed at  restor ing 
democracy in Venezuela through  foreign assistance  and 
targeted sanctions, but Members have disagreed on whether 
broad sanctions should have been imposed and under what 
circumstances sanctions relief should be granted . The last 
legislation guiding U.S. policy in Venezuela, the VERDAD 
Act of 2019 ( P.L. 116 -64), expired in December 2023 . 
Congress appropriated $50 million i n democracy assistance 
for Venezuela in FY2024 in ( P.L. 118 -47), with some funds 
conditioned on credible democratic elections . The Full -
Year Continuing Appropriations and Ex tensions Act ( P.L. 
119-4) provided $50 million in democracy assistance for 
Venezuela and remov ed the election -related conditions 
found in FY2024 appropriations.   
In January 2 025, Trump Administration officials began a 
review of nearly all U.S. foreign assistance . The 
Administration has since canceled  thousands of foreign 
assistance grants  and contracts  worldwide . The full  scope of 
the terminations remains unclear, though they reportedly 
include  some democracy, health, agriculture , and 
humanitarian assistance programs in Venezuela as well as  
programs serving Venezuelan  migrants and refugees  in 
other countries.  
The 119th Congress cou ld consider  legislation to  shape U.S. 
policy toward Venezuela  that could include sanctions  
guidelines , tools to address Maduro’s foreign allies and 
illicit activities , and authorizations for U.S. assistance.  
Oversight could examine  the degree to which  sanctions , 
terminations in foreign aid, and deportations  may affect 
U.S. policy  goals on Venezuela . See CRS In Focus 
IF10715, Venezuela: Overview of U.S. Sanctions Policy .  
Clare Ribando Seelke , Specialist in Lati n American 
Affairs   
Venezuela: Political Crisis and U.S. Policy  
https://crsreports.congress.gov  | IF10230  · VERSION 71 · UPDATED   IF10230
 
 
Disclaimer  
This document was  prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to 
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress. 
Information in a CRS Report should n ot be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has 
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the 
United States Government, are not subject to copyr ight protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be 
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include 
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permissio n of the copyright holder if you 
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.  
 
